                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             INSTITUTIONAL ALLOCATION IN INITIAL PUBLIC OFFERINGS:
                             EMPIRICAL EVIDENCE


                                          Reena Aggarwal
                                      Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala
                                            Manju Puri


                                          Working Paper 9070
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9070


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002




We are grateful to Rick Green (the editor) and an anonymous referee for very helpful comments. We also
thank Walid Busaba, Vojislav Maksimovic, Gordon Phillips, Bill Wilhelm, and seminar participants at
Tulane University and the 2001 Western Finance Association meetings for helpful comments. Aggarwal was
partially supported by a Steers Faculty Research Fellowship awarded by the McDonough School of Business
and by research assistance from the Capital Markets Research Center. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Reena Aggarwal, Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala and Manju Puri. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Institutional Allocation In Initial Public Offerings: Empirical Evidence
Reena Aggarwal, Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala and Manju Puri
NBER Working Paper No. 9070
July 2002
JEL No. G2, G3



                                            ABSTRACT

        We analyze institutional allocation in initial public offerings (IPOs) using a new dataset of US
offerings between 1997 and 1998. We document a positive relationship between institutional allocation
and day one IPO returns. This is partly explained by the practice of giving institutions more shares in
IPOs with strong pre-market demand, consistent with book-building theories. However, institutional
allocation also contains private information about first-day IPO returns not reflected in pre-market
demand and other public information. Our evidence supports book-building theories of IPO underpricing,
but suggests that institutional allocation in underpriced issues is in excess of that explained by book-
building alone.




Reena Aggarwal                      Nagpurnanand R. Prabhala            Manju Puri
School of Business                  Smith School of Business            Stanford University
Georgetown University               University of Maryland              Graduate School of Business
Washington, DC 20057                4427 Van Munching Hall              518 Memorial Way
aggarwal@georgetown.edu             College Park, MD 20742              Stanford, CA 94505
                                    nprabhal@rhsmith.umd.edu            and NBER
                                                                        mpuri@gsb.stanford.edu
       It is well known that initial public offerings (IPOs) are underpriced on average.

Underpricing is a robust phenomenon that extends across equity markets in several countries

and time periods (see, e.g., Loughran, Ritter, and Rydqvist (1994)). For example, in our

sample of IPOs offered during 1997-1998, the average day one return of issues is 19.25

percent.   In these offerings, the total money “left on the table” due to underpricing is a

substantial $3.5 billion.1 While the existence of these initial gains is widely known and has

been exhaustively documented, there is surprisingly little research on how these gains are

divided between different investors in IPOs.

       IPO underwriters play a central role in determining the division of first day gains between

different investors. Underwriters possess substantial information about issue demand as a result of

their information gathering activities during the book-building process, and in the U.S. market,

they have considerable latitude on how IPO shares are allocated. In principle, underwriters can

favor preferred investors by allocating them more shares in “hot” issues that are expected to trade

up strongly in the aftermarket. Whether underwriters do so is the subject of an active and ongoing

debate in the academic literature and the financial press, but formal empirical evidence on such

issues remains sparse.

       Articles in the recent press certainly suggest that underwriters extend favors to their

institutional clientele (see Smith and Pulliam (2001), Pulliam, Smith, and Gasparino (2000),

Pulliam and Smith (2000), and Smith and Pulliam (2000)). These articles also report that the U.S.

Attorney’s office, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the regulatory arm of the

National Association of Securities Dealers (NASDR) have initiated investigations into whether

investment banks allocate more shares in “hot” IPOs to favored institutional clientele, possibly in

exchange for unusually large trading commissions in subsequent trades, which could violate

NASDR rules requiring brokers and dealers to maintain standards of fair practice. Institutional


                                                1
investors may also be granted more shares in an issue in exchange for a commitment to buy

additional shares in the aftermarket, although tying of IPO allocations to aftermarket purchases

may violate securities laws and thus concerns regulators. In addition to the investigations and the

debate in the recent financial press, the theoretical IPO literature also suggests that underwriters

may favor their institutional customers. However, the quid pro quo for such favorable treatment is

the information on IPO demand provided by such investors to underwriters, rather than short-term

trading commissions or aftermarket purchases that are the focus of current SEC investigation. It

has been suggested that the complete IPO process, including allocations practices, need to be

studied and is “an area ripe for rule-making” by the SEC (Gasparino, Schroeder, and Kranhold

(2000)).

       While there has been much speculation about these aspects of the IPO process, the

available empirical evidence on these issues is limited and does little to inform the ongoing

debate. The primary obstacle to formal empirical research has been the lack of data. Regulations in

the U.S. do not mandate public disclosure of allocations followed by underwriters, and

consequently it remains a relatively opaque aspect of the IPO process. Our paper takes a step

towards filling in the gap. We contribute new empirical evidence using a new and unique dataset

of IPOs that includes information on the percentage of an issue allocated to institutional and retail

investors.

       We find, not surprisingly, that institutions dominate IPO allocations, accounting for a

median of about three-quarters of shares offered in an issue. We investigate the cross-sectional

variation of the institutional allocation in IPOs, focusing on two themes. The first part of our

analysis examines whether institutions concentrate more in the better performing IPOs, while our

subsequent analysis evaluates alternative explanations for why there is a positive relationship

between institutional allocation and underpricing. We find that institutions do tend to earn greater


                                                 2
profits on their IPO investments compared to retail investors. Part of the institutional-retail

differential can indeed be attributed to favorable allocation patterns followed by underwriters.

Underwriters tend to allocate more shares to institutions in IPOs priced at the upper end of the

filing range, which are ex-ante expected to appreciate more in the aftermarket. Conversely,

institutional allocation is significantly lower in lower-end issues that are less likely to appreciate in

the aftermarket. These findings are consistent with book-building models of IPO underpricing

(Benveniste and Spindt (1989), Cornelli and Goldreich (2001), and Maksimovic and Pichler,

2001)), in which underwriters allocate more shares to institutions in issues in which they obtain

more favorable pre-market demand information.             This information enables underwriters to

increase the offer price to the high end of the filing range. Hence, as per the book-building

models, we should see correlations between institutional allocation and issues priced in the high

end of the filing range, which is borne out in our results.

       However, book-building does not appear to completely explain the entire institutional-

retail differential. Institutional allocation also contains private information about day one returns

not reflected in other variables, such as the offer price relative to filing range, that predict an IPO’s

day one return. In particular, institutions appear to be adept at avoiding “lemons” in the IPO

market, as suggested by the Rock (1986) theory of IPO underpricing. Thus, our results on

institutional allocation patterns support both major paradigms underlying the theoretical literature

on IPO underpricing, i.e., the book-building model of Benveniste and Spindt (1989) and the

“lemons” model of Rock. We also provide an economic measure of the institutional-retail

differential by estimating the returns to the aggregate pool of institutional and retail capital

invested in our sample of IPOs.

       Our evidence adds to that in Hanley and Wilhelm (1995), the only published empirical

study on IPO allocations in the U.S. we are aware of.2 Hanley and Wilhelm (henceforth HW)


                                                   3
present a clinical study of institutional allocation patterns followed by one underwriter for 38 IPOs

offered between 1983 and 1988. We add to the HW evidence in terms of both scope and

substantive findings. Our sample is much larger, it is drawn from a more recent period of time,

and we have a cross-section of nine underwriters versus their one underwriter sample. Our

methodology is also different: We control for the endogeneity of institutional allocation and

explicitly distinguish between the effect of the endogenous and excess institutional allocation on

day one returns using two-stage estimates. Finally, we report new and different results. We find,

as do HW, that institutions get a greater percentage of shares in IPOs with strong pre-market

demand. However, while HW report that institutional allocations are similar in both strong and

weak-opening IPOs, we find that institutional allocation concentrates more in stronger opening

IPOs and less in IPOs with low day one returns. Additionally, we develop new evidence on

whether the positive relationship between underpricing and institutional allocation is beyond that

predicted by pre-market demand. We find that while book-building is important, institutional

allocation in underpriced issues is in excess of that explained by book-building alone.

       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section I describes our unique dataset and

some cross-sectional characteristics of our sample. Section II examines institutional allocations

and profits in IPOs. We analyze whether institutions obtain preferential allocations in more

underpriced issues and explore how the first day gains in IPOs are divided between institutional

and retail investors. Section III provides two-stage least squares estimates that control for the

endogeneity of institutional allocation. Section IV offers a summary and conclusions.



                         I. Dataset and Cross-sectional Characteristics

       We identify IPOs offered between May 1997 and June 1998 from the Securities Data

Company’s (SDC) New Issues database excluding American Depository Receipts, unit offerings,


                                                 4
closed-end funds, and real estate investment trusts (REITs). This time period is selected because

our SEC-collected allocation data come from this time period. These allocation records are not

submitted routinely to the regulators as part of any public disclosure requirements but are

maintained by the lead manager. For the purpose of this study, the information was requested

from nine investment banks for all issues in which they were a lead manager.3 Out of these nine

banks, five are among the ten largest banks based on market share during this time period, while

four do not belong to the top-ten category.

       For 164 IPOs, we know the aggregate allocation to institutional and retail investors for the

entire issue. If allocation for the entire issue is not available, we use the lead manager’s allocation

as a proxy, resulting in a total sample of 174 issues. The correlation between total institutional

allocation and the lead investment bank’s institutional allocation is 0.76. The median and mean

institutional allocation in the sample of 174 issues equals 74.26 percent and 72.77 percent,

respectively. Issue-specific data such as the filing range, number of shares offered, and offer price

are obtained from the New Issues database of SDC. This information is supplemented with daily

closing prices for each offering from Bloomberg and the Dow Jones. We classify underwriters

based on their reputation (e.g., Carter and Manaster (1990) and Megginson and Weiss (1991)).

Following Megginson and Weiss, the market share of underwriters is used as a basis for assigning

underwriter reputation. The reputation dummy variable for an IPO equals one if the IPO's lead

manager is ranked among the top ten in terms of dollar proceeds among all IPOs issued between

May 1997 and June 1998, and it is zero otherwise.

       Table I reports descriptive statistics for our sample as well as the population, which

comprises all firm commitment IPOs listed in the SDC New Issues database excluding ADRs,

units, closed-end funds, and REITs offered between May 1997 and June 1998. The sample of

IPOs has mean (median) proceeds of $132.2 million ($63.9 million) versus the population mean


                                                  5
(median) of $75.55 ($36.00) million. The mean (median) offer price for our sample is $15.09

($15) versus $12.37 ($12.00) for the population. Thus, the sample used in this study consists of

larger issues offered at higher prices compared to the population. Over two-thirds of our sample

clusters at a gross spread (statistics not reported in Table I) equal to seven percent, consistent with

Chen and Ritter (2000) and Hansen (2000).



                                 INSERT TABLE I ABOUT HERE



       Each IPO is classified based on whether the final offer price is above, within, or below the

initial filing range. The sample of IPOs shows some dispersion across this characteristic. About a

third of our sample issues are priced above the filing range, about a fifth are priced below the

range, while the vast majority, about 50 percent of our sample, is priced within the filing range.

The percentage difference between the midpoint of the filing range and the offer price, UPDATE,

has a median value of zero. The median IPO is priced at the mid-point of the filing range and

spends 69 days in the registration process. The mean and median underpricing in our sample

equals 19.25 percent and 12.80 percent, respectively, which exceed the population underpricing.



                         II. Institutional Allocations and Profits in IPOs

       A key question in IPO allocations is whether institutional capital concentrates in better

performing issues, while leaving weaker-performing issues to retail investors. If, as it turns out,

institutions perform better than retail investors, why this differential? Is it because institutions

receive more shares in IPOs with strong pre-market demand and predictably better day one

returns, a central implication of book-building theories of IPO underpricing? Alternatively, do




                                                  6
institutions concentrate in better IPOs beyond what can be explained by pre-market demand and

the book-building process? We bring to light new evidence to address these questions.

       Section A begins by developing some a priori evidence that institutions do perform better

than retail investors in IPOs. Sections B and C examine why institutions perform better. Section B

asks if underwriters favor institutions with more shares in IPOs with strong pre-market demand,

which are offered at the upper end of the filing range and have predictably greater day one returns.

We find evidence of such favorable treatment, consistent with the Benveniste and Spindt (1989)

theory of book-building in which underwriters favor investors in exchange for favorable demand

information.

       Section C asks if institutional allocation has information about IPO underpricing beyond

what can be attributed to pre-market demand. We find that this is the case. Thus, institutional

allocation reflects information about underpricing not fully captured in other variables that are

publicly known at the offering. This suggests that institutions may be privately informed about

IPO value, as in Rock (1986). Alternatively, underwriters may have private information and use it

to favor institutions for reasons beyond book-building, since our specification controls for pre-

market demand. We end Section II by characterizing the economic magnitude of the return

differential between institutional and retail capital in the aggregate.



A. Dollar Profits to Institutional and Retail Investors: Do Institutions Perform Better?

       Panel A of Table II reports the mean and median (the number in parentheses) dollar profit

per issue accruing to institutional and retail investors in IPOs. For each issue, we compute the total

first-day dollar gain as the product of the day one return and the issue proceeds. We multiply the

day one gain by the percentage allocated to institutional investors to obtain the portion of the day

one gain accruing to these investors. Likewise, the day one dollar gain of an issue is multiplied by


                                                   7
the percentage allocated to retail investors to obtain the dollar profits from the issue accruing to

retail investors.




                             INSERT TABLE II ABOUT HERE




        For the overall sample, the mean profit per issue accruing to institutional investors is

$14.79 million (median = $6.61 million), while retail institutions average $5.28 million (median =

$2.29 million), a third of the average profit per issue for institutions. While the dollar profits are

quite different between institutional and retail investors, the capital invested by the two classes of

investors also differs by a similar order of magnitude. We examine differences in the rates of

return subsequently in Section D. The differences in profit-per-issue between institutions and retail

investors accords well with the average institutional allocation of 72.77 percent (first column of

Panel D in Table II), also about three times the allocation to retail investors. The total money left

on the table in our sample can be computed by adding the average per issue profits of both

categories of investors and multiplying by the number of IPOs (174); doing so gives the figure of

$3.5 billion reported earlier.

        Panel A of Table II also reports returns and profits per issue classified by the size of the

day one return of the IPO. We divide IPOs into three categories: (1) overpriced IPOs, which have

a negative day one return, (2) moderately underpriced IPOs, which have positive returns of less

than 20 percent, and (3) highly underpriced IPOs, which have day one returns exceeding 20

percent. Zero return IPOs have zero returns and profits by definition, and these are excluded in

Table II.4 We find two interesting patterns in the dollar profits for IPOs.




                                                  8
       (1) Per issue profits on both moderately and highly underpriced issues outweigh the per

           issue losses on overpriced issues. For example, the average institutional profit on

           moderately underpriced IPOs (column 3) equals $11.31 mm versus the mean per issue

           loss on overpriced issues (column 2) of -$1.92 mm. The per issue loss in overpriced

           IPOs is lower because the negative returns on overpriced IPOs are less in absolute

           magnitude compared to positive day one returns, and also because negative return IPOs

           tend to have lower issue proceeds.

       (2) More interestingly, institutional-retail profit differentials are not constant across the

           three categories of IPOs. Differentials are more pronounced in the most underpriced

           issues and are less prominent in overpriced issues. In overpriced issues, institutions

           lose an average of $1.92 mm per issue, about 1.08 times the average loss per issue of

           $1.77 mm for retail investors. For moderately underpriced issues, institutions earn an

           average of $11.31 mm, about 2.69 times the average of $4.20 mm for retail investors.

           Finally, for the most underpriced issues, institutions earn an average of $27.32 mm per

           issue, 2.83 times what retail investors take away from these issues. Thus, per issue

           profit differentials are greater in the most underpriced and moderately underpriced

           issues than in the overpriced issues.

       The results provide some initial evidence that institutional capital in IPOs earns greater

profits in IPOs at the expense of retail investors because institutions earn a larger proportion on

the upside but share the downside in weaker issues more evenly with retail customers. The data on

institutional allocation (last row of Panel D, Table II) are consistent with this notion. The mean

(median) institutional allocation for overpriced issues is 59.73 percent (56.09 percent) versus

71.65 percent (72.87 percent) for moderately underpriced issues, and 76.69 percent (75.87

percent) for highly underpriced issues. Thus, institutions are allocated a lower proportion of shares


                                                   9
in overpriced issues compared to either group of underpriced issues or underpriced issues as a

whole (Wilcoxon z = 2.78, significant at one percent).

       We extend the Panel A findings in two directions. First, we reexamine the results for

longer holding periods because the results based on day one returns may be biased by a

combination of price support and limits on flipping.5 For example, losses on overpriced issues

may be greater without price support and restrictions on flipping may limit investors’ ability to

realize gains on underpriced issues. These biases suggest that the true profit differentials may be

somewhat greater than suggested in Panel A, and it may be useful to consider returns over not just

one day but longer horizons as well. The longer data also offers the advantage of incorporating

allocation data from the significant number of IPOs opening with zero return (22 issues) excluded

from Panel A.

       On the other hand, the longer horizon results may be less powerful. One reason is that at

longer horizons, there is greater likelihood of price movements unrelated to the initial IPO

uncertainty. Additionally, Ellis, Michaely, and O’Hara (2000) document a sharp decline in IPO

trading volume after the first two trading days, suggesting that investors mostly adjust their IPO

holdings within this initial period. A characterization of the true profitability of institutional and

retail investment in IPOs requires us to know when each type of investor sells in the aftermarket,

and the direct and indirect costs of selling (including diminished allocations in the future). While

this is an interesting avenue of research beyond our scope and data, it is certainly useful to

supplement the one-day analysis with some evidence from longer horizons.

       An empirical question is the length of time over which we should consider the longer

horizon analysis. We look to prior literature for some guidance. Ellis, Michaely, and O’Hara

(2000, p. 1062) find that underwriters have built up 80 percent of their peak aftermarket inventory

in the first five trading days, while the inventory starts to decline after 20 days. This suggests that


                                                  10
support is concentrated in the first week and is altogether complete a month after the IPO.

Aggarwal (2000) reports that in her sample, price support activities end within 10 days of the

offering date. The median stabilized IPO in her sample has zero stabilization after a week; most

short covering is concentrated in the first few days of trading when volume is at a peak. These

considerations suggest that we should incorporate horizons of five to 20 trading days after the IPO

offer date. Panel B reports the evidence based on ten-day returns (the return cutoffs in Panel B are

based on ten-day returns being below or exceeding zero or 20 percent). The Panel B patterns are

broadly similar to those in Panel A. The profit of institutional investors is 1.89, 2.95, and 2.72

times that of retail investors for overpriced, moderately underpriced, and highly underpriced

issues, respectively. Thus, differentials between institutions and retail customers are less

prominent in the overpriced issues relative to the others. Panel C reports similar evidence for 20

trading days after the IPO’s opening.

       A second extension of the evidence in Panel A of Table II is to consider return cutoffs

above 20 percent. One purpose of this analysis is to verify whether the patterns in Table II are

robust. In particular, popular accounts of underwriter favoritism often speculate that institutions

perform better because they get disproportionately more shares in the most highly underpriced

issues, while retail investors are essentially frozen out of participation in this segment of IPOs.

Using return cutoffs well above 20 percent allows us to evaluate this question. We experimented

with return cutoffs of 30 percent, 40 percent, and 50 percent, which approximately correspond to

the 80th, 85th, and 90th percentile of the day one returns. We find patterns essentially similar to

those in Panel A of Table II. The variation in IPO allocations within underpriced issues is modest

compared to the variation in allocation between underpriced and overpriced issues. For instance,

mean and median institutional allocation is 77.88 percent and 75.06 percent, respectively, for the

26 IPOs with initial returns greater than 40 percent versus 76.69 percent and 75.87 percent,


                                                11
respectively, for IPOs with returns greater than 20 percent (last column in Table II, Panel D). On

the other hand, overpriced IPOs have mean and median institutional allocation of 59.73 percent

and 56.09 percent, respectively. Thus, favoritism on the part of underwriters seems to occur

primarily via the mechanism of lower institutional allocation in overpriced issues rather than even

higher allocations in the best performing IPOs.

       Another interesting question relates to the variation in institutional allocation. Are

allocation schedules relatively flat, as might be suggested by a mechanical allocation rule of

giving fixed percentages to institutions, or is there some variation in allocation across or within

different return categories? The standard deviation of institutional allocation lies between 14

percent and 19 percent for all initial return categories except the highest return categories, where it

is significantly lower. For example, in the category of issues with initial return greater than 20

percent, the standard deviation of allocation is 7.97 percent, while it is 7.73 percent for issues with

return greater than 40 percent.

       Section A has documented that institutions appear to perform better than retail investors in

IPOs. The next two sections investigate why. Section B asks if institutions do better because they

routinely receive more (less) shares in IPOs with strong (weak) pre-market demand, a central

implication of Benveniste and Spindt (1989), the book-building paradigm for explaining IPO

underpricing. Section C analyzes if institutional allocation reflects additional private information

that is not captured by the pre-market demand, as is suggested by the Rock (1986) framework for

explaining IPO underpricing.



B. Allocation Versus Pre-Market Demand

       IPOs priced at the upper end of the filing range tend to have strong pre-market demand.

These IPOs have predictably higher day one returns compared to issues priced at the lower end of


                                                  12
the filing range. This well-known “partial adjustment’’ phenomenon (Hanley (1993)) is detailed

recently in Ritter (1998), who reports that virtually all IPOs priced above the filing range had

positive day one returns, while only about half of those priced below the filing range have positive

initial returns.6 In this section, we examine whether underwriters allocate more shares in IPOs to

institutions when the pre-market demand for an issue (and hence the likely day one appreciation

of the issue) is high.

        Our proxy for pre-market interest is the variable UPDATE, the percentage difference

between the midpoint of the filing range and the offer price.7 Model 1 in Table III reports results

from a univariate regression of the percentage institutional allocation on UPDATE, whereas Model

2 reports estimates of a multivariate specification that includes other variables potentially related

to institutional allocation. Among these controls is the size of the IPO, or the dollar proceeds of an

issue excluding the Green Shoe amount. Large issues may have lower institutional allocation

because institutions are less likely to be able to absorb the entire supply of shares in large issues.

Additionally, large issues may be less risky and retail investors may face less lemons problems in

such issues (Beatty and Ritter (1986)). Institutions may also be reluctant to take up more shares in

small issues because of the disclosure requirements triggered by additional purchases when stakes

are five percent or above (Section 13G of the 1934 Securities Act). We consider three proxies for

size: (1) issue proceeds, (2) assets of the issuer before the offer, or (3) the number of shares

offered in the IPO. While all three proxies give similar results, we report the estimates based on

the number of shares.8 Because the size variables are all skewed, we specify the regression using

the natural logarithm of the number of shares offered (in millions) as an independent variable. We

also include the number of days spent in the registration process as an explanatory variable. IPOs

that spend more time in the registration process may be weaker issues that are associated with

lower institutional allocation (see, e.g., Hanley (1993), p. 239). Alternatively, issues may spend


                                                 13
more time in registration in times of high issuance volume (and high underpricing) because of the

relatively fixed processing capacity at the SEC in hot periods. This suggests that the correlation

between underpricing and time spent in registration may be positive. The regression also includes

an underwriter reputation dummy equal to one if the lead underwriter is among the ten largest

investment banks based on market share during this time period, and zero otherwise. Finally, one-

digit SIC dummies (not reported here) for industry controls are incorporated into our

specifications.



                                   INSERT TABLE III ABOUT HERE



       In both the univariate and multivariate regressions, UPDATE has a positive and significant

coefficient. Thus, underwriters do favor the aggregate pool of institutional capital by allocating

more shares in IPOs with stronger pre-market indications of interest. A change in UPDATE from

its first quartile to third quartile, 93.3 percent to 109.1 percent, results in an increase in

institutional allocation of 5.5 percent, or about a third of the interquartile variation in institutional

allocation (16.49 percent). On a standalone basis, the variable also explains an economically

significant 9.27 percent of the variation in institutional allocation. Underwriter reputation has a

negative coefficient, suggesting that reputed underwriters give more shares to retail customers.

This result should be interpreted with caution because our sample has nine underwriters but not

the universe of all underwriters. The number of days spent in registration is not significant.

       The main result, a positive coefficient for UPDATE, is consistent with the book-building

explanation for IPO allocations. Benveniste and Spindt (1989) argue that underwriters give more

shares to institutions in issues with stronger pre-market interest as an incentive for institutional




                                                   14
investors to truthfully reveal their favorable information. Extraction of such information allows the

underwriter to set a higher offer price for the issue. This is what we observe empirically.



C. Institutional Allocation and Degree of Underpricing

       Section B documents that one source of superior profits to institutions is greater allocations

in IPOs with strong pre-market demand. In this section, we examine whether this is the sole

explanation for the better performance of institutions, or whether institutional allocation is related

to underpricing even after controlling for pre-market demand. If so, the better performance of

institutional investors in IPOs would reflect not merely allocations in “hotter’’ issues with better

pre-market demand, but would also reflect private information that is not captured by publicly

known variables at the time of the IPO.

       Panel A of Table IV reports estimates of a regression in which the dependent variable is

the day one return of an IPO and independent variables include institutional allocation along with

control variables. First among our controls is the variable UPDATE, the percentage difference

between the midpoint of the filing range and the offer price. This variable is an important control

as we are primarily interested in testing whether allocation is related to the degree of IPO

underpricing even after controlling for UPDATE. Among the other controls are variables that

might potentially explain IPO underpricing. Beatty and Ritter (1986) document that issue proceeds

are negatively related to the degree of underpricing of an issue. As before, we use the natural

logarithm of the number of shares offered in the empirical specification. We include the time spent

in registration and underwriter reputation as additional controls potentially related to IPO

underpricing. Finally, we include but do not report industry dummy variables based on one-digit

SIC codes.


                                  INSERT TABLE IV ABOUT HERE
                                                 15
       Panel A in Table IV reports the univariate and multivariate regression estimates. On a

standalone basis in the univariate specification, institutional allocation has a positive coefficient

and is statistically significant. Among the controls in the multivariate specification, log number of

shares has a negative coefficient and underwriter reputation has a positive coefficient. The variable

UPDATE has a significant and positive coefficient, indicating that IPOs offered at the top of the

filing range are indeed more likely to have higher day one returns. The time spent in registration is

not significant. Institutional allocation retains a positive coefficient even after including UPDATE

and the coefficient magnitude remains roughly equal to that in the univariate specification. The

coefficient for allocation is also economically significant. For instance, using the Panel A

estimates, a change in allocation from its first quartile to its third quartile, 64.95 percent to 81.44

percent, increases expected IPO underpricing by 5.12 percent.

       For robustness, Panel B also reports estimates of an ordered probit specification in which

the left-hand side dependent variable is an ordinal variable denoting whether an IPO was

overpriced, moderately underpriced, or highly underpriced. The lowest category consists of

overpriced issues that have negative or zero first day returns. The next category consists of

moderately underpriced issues that have returns between zero and 20 percent, and the last category

of IPOs includes highly underpriced issues that have day one returns in excess of 20 percent.

Allocation remains significantly positively related to initial IPO returns even after including other

controls potentially related to IPO underpricing.

       The sign and significance of institutional allocations in the multivariate regressions

suggests that it is not merely a proxy for publicly available information at the time of the offering.

Institutional money appears to contain private information about future IPO returns. Such private

information may well reflect superior information held by institutional investors, which allows

them to minimize participation in the “lemons” in the IPO market, consistent with the Rock (1986)


                                                    16
model of IPO underpricing and the empirical literature supporting these theories (e.g., Beatty and

Ritter (1986); Carter and Manaster (1990); Michaely and Shaw (1994); Jegadeesh, Weinstein and

Welch (1993)). As this literature suggests, if institutions have private information, the aggregate

demand flow from institutions is greater in more underpriced issues, and underwriters may

allocate them a greater number of shares in these issues. In contrast, institutional demand and

participation are lower in the “lemons.” Alternatively, private information may be held by

underwriters rather than by institutional investors, and underwriters may use this information to

ensure that institutions get less of the worse performing shares.



D. The Economic Magnitude of Return Differences

        Next, we provide an economic characterization of the institutional-retail differential in

IPOs. To this end, we examine whether each dollar invested by an institutional investor earns the

same as each dollar invested by a retail investor. We define the return on each dollar invested by

each type of investor, say πt, where t is the investor type, institutional (t # 1) or retail (t # 2), as,

                                         n

                                       ∑x           it   * pi * ri
                                πt =    i =1
                                               n
                                                                                                            (1)
                                             ∑x
                                             i =1
                                                         it   * pi



where, i indexes the issue, xit denotes the percentage of issue i allocated to investor of type t, pi,

denotes the proceeds, and ri is the first-day return for issue i.

        Equation (1) provides a simple metric for judging the performance of institutional versus

retail capital: The returns to each type of dollar invested in IPOs. If allocation xit = xjt ∀ i, or more

generally, if IPO allocation is independent of ex-post issue returns ri, then π1 = π2 and both types of

capital will experience the same returns on investment. On the other hand, if institutional



                                                                     17
allocation tends to be high for more underpriced issues, i.e., ∂x1/∂r1 > 0, then π1       >   π2. In our

sample, the total amount invested by institutions is $16.4 billion and the total amount earned by

institutions equals $2.57 billion, so the return to one institutional dollar is 15.69 percent. On the

other hand, retail investors earn only 13.92 percent, investing a total of $6.59 billion for a first-day

profit of $918 million. Therefore, an institutional dollar earns about 1.77 percent more than a

retail dollar for the IPOs in our sample based on day one returns of IPOs.

         The first-day return difference of 1.77 percent is somewhat modest. Why is it so narrow?

Differences in returns are certainly likely to be lower than the differences in dollar profits reported

in Table II, because capital invested by retail investors is only about a third of that invested by

institutional investors. The allocation data from Table II provide additional pointers. From the

allocation statistics, the major variation in institutional allocation across IPOs comes from the fact

that institutions have fewer shares in IPOs that are overpriced ex-post. While there is some

variation in institutional allocation within the universe of underpriced issues, it is small in relation

to the variation between all underpriced and overpriced IPOs. Thus, the contribution of returns

from underpriced issues to an institutional-retail return differential is economically small, and the

difference is driven by variation due to overpriced issues. This component is small due to two

reasons. First, IPOs are underpriced rather than overpriced on average. Additionally, overpriced

issues tend to have lower dollar proceeds and therefore contribute less to the overall dollars

invested in IPOs.9 Hence, the cumulative impact of overpriced issues on the overall returns is also

small.

         As discussed earlier in Section A, the existence of price support biases estimates of day

one returns upwards. Losses on overpriced issues may be greater without price support.

Additionally, profit and return differentials based on day one returns exclude the sample of 22

IPOs that have zero first-day returns. Therefore, we also compute return differentials based on the


                                                  18
longer horizons of 10 and 20 trading days, following Panels B and C of Table II. As expected,

return differentials between institutions and retail customers widen when considering these longer

horizons. Over 10 trading days, institutions earn 15.10 percent while retail investors earn 13

percent on their invested capital, giving a return differential of 2.10 percent. Over the 20 trading-

day horizon, the differentials widen somewhat to 2.39 percent, as institutions earn a return on

capital invested of 15.87 percent while retail investors earn 13.48 percent.

       We have provided evidence on whether institutional capital performs better in IPOs

compared to retail investors and why. We find that institutions do tend to earn more than retail

investors in IPOs. Part of the explanation is the positive correlation between pre-market demand

and allocation, consistent with the book-building hypothesis of Benveniste and Spindt (1989).

However, institutional allocation also appears to reflect private information not in pre-market

demand, suggesting that either institutions are privately informed investors (Rock (1986)) or that

underwriters use their private information to favor institutions for reasons beyond book-building.



                                     III. Two-Stage Estimates

       The results in Table IV indicate that the day one return of an IPO is positively related to

institutional allocation. This positive relationship may reflect one or both of two explanations.

First, institutional allocation may contain private information about day one returns not reflected

in the price update and other explanatory variables related to day one returns. Alternatively, this

positive relationship may be driven by the endogeneity of institutional allocation. We know from

Hanley (1993) that initial returns and UPDATE are positively related, and from Table III that

institutional allocation is positively related to UPDATE because underwriters give more shares to

institutions when pre-market demand is high. Thus, the allocation-return relationship may reflect

the endogenous nature of institutional allocation rather than any private information about returns


                                                 19
it contains. We consider two-stage estimates to explicitly separate out the effect of the

endogenously determined portion of the institutional allocation on the initial IPO returns.

       To model the endogenous nature of institutional allocation, rewrite the models estimated in

Tables III to IV as



                                    E (RETURN) = β XRETURN + θ INST                                 (2)

                                        E (INST ) = α XINST                                         (3)



where INST and RETURN denote institutional allocation and day one returns, respectively and the

X’s denote the regressors associated with the two equations. The key issue is whether the

significance of institutional allocation INST in Eq. (2) is merely because INST is an endogenous

function of the variable XINST .

       We can test if there is an endogeneity bias by entering the endogenous portion of

institutional allocation INST rather than INST itself as a regressor to explain day one IPO returns.

Equivalently, rewrite Eq. (2) as



                                   E (RETURN) = β XRETURN + θ1 [α XINST ]                           (4)



       If the endogeneity hypothesis is correct, we would expect that θ1 is positive and

significant in Eq. (4). The specification can be estimated by two-stage least squares (2SLS)

methods. In the first step, institutional allocation is regressed on UPDATE and other regressors

in XINST. Fitted values from this regression [α XINST] are then entered into the return equation

instead of institutional allocation INST and the specification is estimated. Standard errors need

adjustments because we use generated regressors in the second step of the two-step procedure


                                                  20
(see, e.g., Murphy and Topel (1985) or Maddala (1983), Chapter 8). In addition, if institutional

allocation has private information not reflected in other public variables, excess allocation

should itself explain day one returns. This suggests generalizing Eq. (4) to incorporate excess

allocation, i.e., estimating

                       E (RETURN) = β XRETURN + θ1 [α XINST]+ θ2 [INST – α XINST]                  (5)



        A positive and significant θ2 would support the private information hypothesis while a

positive and significant θ1 would reflect the existence of an endogeneity bias.10

        Estimating the two equation system (3)-(5) requires us to specify regressors that enter

either equation. If, as in Tables III to IV, the same regressors enter the returns and allocation

equations, i.e., XRETURN = XINST, the equation-by-equation OLS coefficient θ for institutional

allocation INST in Eq. (4) is the same as regression coefficient θ2 for excess institutional

allocation. Thus, the significance of the coefficient for INST in the ordinary least square results

reported in Table IV, where XRETURN = XINST, can be interpreted as evidence that institutional

allocation has private information about day one returns. The same results obtain if XINST were to

be a subset of XRETURN rather than being identical to XRETURN. Thus, non-OLS structural estimates

of Eqs. (3) to (4) are only needed when there is at least one variable in the allocation equation (3)

that does not enter into the returns equation (4).11

        We can specify an extra variable in the allocation equation by arbitrarily excluding one or

more regressors from the return equation (5) but including these variables in the allocation equation

(4). However, our strategy is to look outside the set of variables in Tables (3)-(4) to avoid biases

induced by specification searches (e.g., Lo and MacKinlay (1990)). We include the size of the

underwriting syndicate (NSYNDICATE), the field NUMAMGR in the SDC New Issues database,

as a potential determinant of the fraction of the issue allocated to institutions. We conjecture that

                                                  21
there exists a negative relationship between the institutional component of an issue and the

syndicate size. The reasoning is that retail investors are more likely to have relationships and

accounts with one or very few firms, while institutions are likely to have ongoing relationships with

multiple underwriters. Thus, issues with a more significant retail component require more extensive

distribution efforts in order to involve more retail customers and would probably involve more

underwriters being included in the syndicate, a view also borne out by informal conversations with

underwriters. This suggests a negative relationship between the syndicate size and the institutional

allocation of an issue. The correlation between the two variables is -0.46.

       Table V presents the two-stage estimates. As before in Table IV, we present estimates when

the day one return is specified as a continuous variable, and also a specification in which it is an

ordinal variable. Panel A reports estimates of the allocation equation (3). As expected, the syndicate

size has a negative and significant coefficient, suggesting that issues with more retail (less

institutional) allocation have a greater number of managers. Panels B and C of Table V reports the

second stage estimates of return equation (4) based on an ordered probit model and OLS, as before.

In both specifications, fitted institutional allocation is not significant, suggesting that the

endogenous portion of institutional allocation is not significantly related to day one returns. Thus,

the positive relationship between institutional allocation and day one IPO returns does not reflect

the fact that allocation itself is related to other publicly available information. Allocation appears to

have private information about day one returns, consistent with which the coefficient for excess

allocation is positive and significant. Unusually high institutional allocation in IPOs is associated

with positive day one returns.


                                 INSERT TABLE V ABOUT HERE




                                                  22
                                 IV. Summary and Conclusions

        The fact that IPOs are underpriced is widely known and extensively documented.

However, there is little empirical evidence on how the day one gains in IPOs are allocated

between institutional and retail investors. The question of whether IPO allocation practices

systematically favor institutions over retail investors is also a subject of much debate and ongoing

regulatory investigations. Using a new dataset, we examine patterns of institutional allocation in

IPOs.

        Our analysis consists of two parts. The first part of the analysis investigates the cross-

sectional variation of institutional allocation in IPOs, and examines whether institutions do in fact

have higher allocation in the more underpriced issues. We find this is indeed the case, and

document that there is a positive relationship between institutional allocation and underpricing.

        The next part of our analysis examines alternate explanations for why institutional

allocation is greater in underpriced issues. One explanation for this result comes from the book-

building theories of IPO underpricing, which suggest that underwriters attempt to extract favorable

pre-market demand information to help partially adjust the offer price upwards to the high end of

the filing range. In such theories, underwriters allocate more shares in issues with strong pre-

market demand, which are also more likely to have higher first day returns, as a quid pro quo for

obtaining favorable pre-market demand information. A second explanation is that institutional

allocation is positively related to IPO underpricing because of private information. Such

information can be held by institutions, so that they participate less in lemons, or by underwriters

who use this information to ensure that institutions get less of the worse performing issues. We

find support for both explanations.

        Our results have implications for the ongoing debate regarding allocation practices

followed by U.S. underwriters. A key question in this debate is whether institutions are favored in


                                                 23
the IPO allocation process. Our evidence is certainly consistent with this view. We find that

institutions do tend to concentrate more in better performing IPOs. Part of this result is because

institutions get favorable allocations in IPOs with strong pre-market demand, which may be

economically justified from a firm’s viewpoint as quid pro quo to institutions for information that

allows underwriters to set higher prices for the IPO. However, we find that institutional allocation

is related to IPO underpricing beyond what can be explained by pre-market demand.              This

suggests that there is private information, either with institutions or with underwriters, that

benefits institutional investors in IPOs. Thus, while book-building is important, institutional

allocation in underpriced IPOs is in excess of that explained by book-building alone.




                                                24
                                          REFERENCES

Aggarwal, Reena, 2000, Stabilization activities by underwriters after new offerings, Journal of
      Finance 55, 1075-1104.

Aggarwal, Reena, 2001, Allocation of initial public offerings and flipping activity, Journal of
      Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Beatty, Randolph, and Jay Ritter, 1986, Investment banking, reputation, and the underpricing
        of initial public offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 15, 213-232.

Benveniste, Lawrence M., and Paul A. Spindt, 1989, How investment banks determine the
      offer price and allocation of new issues, Journal of Financial Economics 24, 343-362.

Carter, Richard, and Steven Manaster, 1990, Initial public offerings and underwriter
        reputation, Journal of Finance 45, 1045-1067.

Chen, Hsuan-Chi, and Jay Ritter, 2000, The seven percent solution, Journal of Finance 55,
       1105-1132.

Cornelli, Francesca, and David Goldreich, 2001, Book-building and strategic allocation,
       Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Ellis, Katrina, Roni Michaely, and Maureen O’Hara, 2000, When the underwriter is the
        market maker: An examination of trading in the IPO aftermarket, Journal of Finance 55,
        1039-1074.

Gasparino, C., Schroeder, M., and Kranhold, K., 2000, SEC targets IPO process with probes,
       Wall Street Journal, December 19, C1.

Habib, Michel A., and Alexander P. Ljungqvist, 1998, Underpricing and IPO proceeds: A
       Note, Economics Letters 61, 381-383.

Habib, Michel A., and Alexander P. Ljungqvist, 2001, Underpricing and entrepreneurial
       wealth losses in IPOs: Theory and evidence, Review of Financial Studies 14, 433-458.

Hanley, Kathleen W., 1993, The underpricing of initial public offerings and the partial
      adjustment phenomenon, Journal of Financial Economics 34, 231-250.

Hanley, Kathleen W., and William J. Wilhelm, 1995, Evidence on the strategic allocation of
      initial public offerings, Journal of Financial Economics 37, 239-257.

Hansen, Robert, 2000, Do investment banks compete in IPOs?: The advent of the ‘7% plus
      contract’, Journal of Financial Economics 59, 313-346.

Jegadeesh, Narasimhan, Mark Weinstein, and Ivo Welch, 1993, IPO signaling and subsequent
       equity offerings: An empirical investigation, Journal of Financial Economics 34, 153-176.


                                                25
Ljungqvist, Alexander, and William J. Wilhelm, 2001, IPO allocations: Discriminatory or
      discretionary?, Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming

Lo, Andrew, and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1990, Data snooping biases in tests of asset pricing
      models, Review of Financial Studies 3, 431-467.

Loughran, Tim, Jay Ritter, and Kristian Rydqvist, 1994, Initial public offerings: International
      insights, Pacific-Basin Finance Journal 2, 165-199.

Loughran, Tim, and Jay Ritter, 2001, Why don’t issuers get upset about leaving money on the
      table in IPOs? forthcoming, Review of Financial Studies.

Lowry, Michelle, and G. William Schwert, 2001, IPO market cycles: bubbles or sequential
      learning? forthcoming, Journal of Finance.

Maddala, G., 1983, Limited Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics (Cambridge
      University Press, New York, NY).

Maksimovic, Vojislav, and Pegaret Pichler, 2001, Private versus public offerings: optimal
      selling mechanisms, working paper, University of Maryland.

Megginson, William, and Kathleen A. Weiss, 1991, Venture capitalist certification in initial
      public offerings, Journal of Finance 46, 879-903.

Michaely, Roni, and Wayne H. Shaw, 1994, The pricing of initial public offerings: Tests of
      adverse selection and signaling theories, Review of Financial Studies 7, 279-319.

Murphy, K., and R. Topel, 1985, Estimation and inference in two step econometric models,
      Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 3, 370-379

Pulliam, S., R. Smith, and C. Gasparino, 2000, SEC intensifies inquiry into commissions for
       hot IPOs, Wall Street Journal, December 13, C1.

Pulliam, S., and R. Smith, 2000, Linux deal is focus of IPO commission probe, Wall Street
       Journal, December 12, C1.

Ritter, Jay, 1998, Initial public offerings, Contemporary Finance Digest 2, 5-30.

Rock, Kevin, 1986, Why new issues are underpriced, Journal of Financial Economics 15,
       187-212.

Smith, R., and S. Pulliam, 2000, U.S. probes inflated commissions for hot IPOs, Wall Street
       Journal, December 7, C1.

Smith, R., and S. Pulliam, 2001, CSFB and employees may face NASD charges over IPO sales,
       Wall Street Journal, May 2, C1.



                                                 26
White, Halbert, 1980, A heteroskedasticity-consistent covariance matrix estimator and a direct test
       for heteroskedasticity, Econometrica 48, 817-838.




                                                27
                                                    Table I
                                      Descriptive Statistics for Sample

The table reports the mean and median of several characteristics of IPOs offered between May 1997 and
June 1998. Columns 2 and 3 report sample characteristics of 174 IPOs managed by nine underwriters for
which institutional allocation is available. Columns 4 and 5 report characteristics of the population of 617
IPOs offered during this time period, which includes all firm-commitment IPOs in the SDC database except
for American Depositary Receipts, unit offerings, closed-end funds and real estate investment trusts.
Proceeds represent the amount raised (in $ million); assets denote the value of the issuer’s assets before the
offer (in $ million); shares offered are in millions; the offer price is the price at which the issue if offered;
UPDATE is the percentage difference between the midpoint of the filing range and the offer price; Days in
registration denotes the number of days between the prospectus filing with SEC and the final offer;
Syndicate size denotes the number of members in the underwriting syndicate (variable NUMAMGR in the
SDC New Issues database); and % Reputed managers denotes the percentage of IPOs offered by
underwriters in the top ten in the period. Initial return is the percentage return on the IPO from the offer
price to the IPO’s closing price on the first day it is traded. Institutional allocation is the percentage of the
IPO issue allocated to institutional investors. Allocation data were reported by the IPO book manager.

                                         Sample (N = 174)                      Population (N = 617)
   Characteristic
                                      Mean            Median                  Mean           Median

   Proceeds (in $ million)            $132.2                $63.9           $75.55              $36.00

   Assets                             $75.95             $1,030             $31.6               $435.7

   Shares offered                      7.47                 4.50             6.07                3.13

   Offer price                        $15.09             $15.00             $12.37              $12.00

   UPDATE                             1.10%              0.00%              0.09%               0.00%

   Days in registration               78.72                 69.00           96.50               74.50

   Syndicate size                     16.01                  16             15.25                 16

   % Reputed managers                  65%                    -              43%                   -

   Initial return                    19.25%             12.80%             14.27%               8.98%

   Institutional allocation          72.77%             74.26%                 -                   -




                                                       28
                                                       Table II
                             Allocations and Profits of Institutional and Retail Investors

The table reports mean and median (in parentheses) initial returns, proceeds in millions of dollars, and
percentage of an IPO allocated to institutional investors. We also report the hypothetical profits to
institutional and retail investors from investing in the issue at the offer price and selling it on trading day
one, trading day 10, and trading day 20 after the offer date. We report the data for three sets of IPOs:
returns less than zero, returns between 0% and 20%, and returns exceeding 20%, as well as aggregate data
for all IPOs. We do not report the profitability numbers for IPOs with zero returns (22 on day one and 1 on
day 10) because profits for these IPOs are mechanically equal to zero by definition. Profit numbers are in
millions of dollars. The data consist of 174 IPOs offered between May 1997 and June 1998 for which
institutional allocation is available.



Variable                            All IPOs           Return < 0%         0 < Return < 20%       Return >20%

                    Panel A: Profits based on returns from offer to close of trading day one

Sample Size                              174                8                      84                  60

                                       $14.79             -$1.92                 $11.31              $27.32
Profits per issue – Institutional
                                       ($6.61)           (-$1.30)                ($4.59)            ($18.37)
                                        $5.28             -$1.77                  $4.20               $9.66
Profits per issue – Retail
                                       ($2.29)           (-$0.82)                ($1.95)             ($6.09)

                           Panel B: Profits based on returns from offer to trading day 10

Sample Size                              174                30                     78                  65

                                       $14.24             -$5.34                 $11.63              $26.63
Profits per issue – Institutional
                                       ($6.84)           (-$2.33)                ($4.24)            ($18.64)
                                        $4.93             -$2.82                  $3.94               $9.78
Profits per issue – Retail
                                       ($2.52)           (- $1.03)               ($1.22)             ($6.77)

                           Panel C: Profits based on returns from offer to trading day 20

Sample Size                              174                48                     49                  77

                                       $14.96             -$6.81                  $8.73              $32.48
Profits per issue – Institutional
                                       ($7.04)           (- $2.99)               ($4.73)            ($19.11)
                                        $5.11             -$3.37                  $3.30              $11.54
Profits per issue – Retail
                                       ($1.89)           (-$0.94)                ($1.51)             ($6.86)

                                               Panel D: Descriptive Statistics
                                       19.25%              -5.78%                 9.28%             $43.61
Day one Returns
                                      (12.80%)             -5.96%                (9.00%)           ($32.24)
                                      $132.20              $57.78                $162.10           $106.90
Proceeds (in millions)
                                      ($63.90)            ($39.95)               ($71.22)          ($63.27)
                                       72.77%              59.73%                 71.65%            76.69%
Institutional Allocation
                                      (74.26%)            (56.09%)               (72.87%)          (75.87%)



                                                           29
                                                 Table III
                       Institutional Allocation & Pre-Market Demand Indications

The table reports estimates of a univariate and a multivariate regression for 174 IPOs offered between May
1997 and June 1998 for which institutional allocation is available. The dependent variable is the percentage
of the IPO allocated to institutional investors. Independent variables include the percentage difference
between the midpoint of the filing range and the offer price (UPDATE), the natural logarithm of the
number of shares offered in millions (LOGSHARES), a reputation dummy which is 1 if the underwriter is
among the top ten in terms of market share and zero otherwise (REPUTED), and the days spent in the
registration process (DAYS). Industry dummies based on one-digit SIC codes are included as control
variables but not reported in the table. t-statistics based on White (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent
standard errors are in parentheses.

                       Dependent Variable: Percentage of IPO Allocated to Institutions
                                             Model 1                       Model 2
                                              71.88*                        75.30*
               Intercept
                                              (21.58)                       (3.39)
                                               0.16*                         0.35*
               UPDATE
                                              (2.02)                        (4.64)
                                                                             0.17
               LOGSHARES
                                                                            (0.12)
                                                                           -13.03*
               REPUTED
                                                                            (-6.32)
                                                                             0.01
               DAYS
                                                                            (0.42)
               Adjusted R-squared                9.22%                          27.01%


                * significant at the 5 percent level using a two-tailed test.




                                                          30
                                                     Table IV
                                      Institutional Allocation & Underpricing

The table reports OLS and ordered probit estimates for a sample of 174 IPOs offered between May 1997
and June 1998 for which institutional allocation is available. In OLS, the dependent variable is R, where R
is the day one return of the IPO. In the ordered probit, the dependent variable is 0 if R < 0, 1 if 0 < R <
20%, 2 if R > 20%, where R is the day one return for the IPO. Independent variables include the percentage
of the IPO allocated to institutional investors (INST), the natural logarithm of the number of shares offered
(LOGSHARES), the percentage difference between the midpoint of the filing range and the offer price
(UPDATE), a reputation dummy, which is 1 if the underwriter is among the top ten in terms of market
share and zero otherwise (REPUTED), and the days spent in the registration process (DAYS). Industry
dummies based on one-digit SIC codes are included in the regression but not reported in the table. t-
statistics, based on White (1980) heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors for OLS and Maddala (1983,
Chapter 2) for the ordered probit model, are in parentheses.

                   Panel A: Ordinary Least Squares                             Panel B: Ordered Probit
                   Dependent Variable: Day one Return                Dependent Variable: 0 if R < 0%, 1 if 0< R <
                                                                                         20%, 2 if R > 20%
                                Model 1                 Model 2          Model 3                 Model 4
                                  -1.69                  108.97*           -0.27                    2.06
Intercept
                                 (-0.19)                  (2.91)          (-1.72)                  (0.74)
                                  0.30*                    0.31*           0.02*                   0.02*
INST
                                 (3.05)                   (2.62)          (2.46)                   (2.46)
                                                          -7.54*                                   -0.16
LOGSHARES
                                                         (-3.06)                                  (-0.90)
                                                           0.75*                                   0.05*
UPDATE
                                                          (4.45)                                   (6.37)
                                                          12.09*                                   0.57*
REPUTED
                                                          (3.09)                                   (2.08)
                                                           0.01                                    0.003
DAYS
                                                          (0.02)                                   (0.10)
pseudo R2 (Ordered
Probit) or Adj. R2 (OLS)           6.53%                  30.13%          5.21%                   20.51%

* significant at the 5 percent level using a two-tailed test.




                                                                31
                                                  Table V
                       Institutional Allocation & Underpricing: Two-Stage Estimates

The table reports estimates of two-equation systems for a sample of 174 IPOs offered between May 1997
and June 1998 for which institutional allocation is available. In each system, equation A consists of the
regression of institutional allocation on several variables x including the natural logarithm of the number of
shares offered (LOGSHARES), the percentage difference between the midpoint of the filing range and the
offer price (UPDATE), a reputation dummy which is 1 if the underwriter is among the top ten in terms of
market share and zero otherwise (REPUTED), the days spent in the registration process (DAYS) and the
number of underwriters in the syndicate (NSYNDICATE). In equation B, the dependent variable is either
the day one return of the IPO (R) for OLS estimates, or it equals 0 if R < 0, 1 if 0 < R ≤ 20%, 2 if R >
20%. The independent variables include the fitted value and residuals from equation A and other firm-
specific variables. Industry dummies based on one-digit SIC codes are included in the regression but not
reported in the table. t-statistics are in parentheses.


                             Equation A                          Equation B

                                                          Ordinary Least Squares     Ordered Probit
                      Dependent Variable:                 Dependent Variable:        Dependent Variable:
                      Institutional Allocation (%)        Day one Return (%)         0 if R < 0, 1 if 0< R < 20%,
                                                                                     2 if R > 20%
Intercept                           69.95*                        -75.63*                       2.60*
                                    (19.71)                       (-2.83)                       (0.69)
Fitted Allocation                                                  0.63                           0.02
                                                                  (1.53)                        (0.44)
Excess Allocation                                                  0.28*                        0.02*
                                                                 (2.35)                         (2.38)
LOGSHARES                              0.93                       -7.59*                         -0.15
                                      (0.73)                     (-2.92)                       (-0.84)
UPDATE                                0.34*                       0.64*                         0.05*
                                     (4.48)                      (3.28)                         (3.78)
REPUTED                              -11.70*                      16.26*                          0.44
                                     (-5.40)                      (2.37)                        (0.83)
DAYS                                   0.01                       -0.002                        0.002
                                     (0.44)                      (-0.09)                        (0.09)
NSYNDICATE                            -0.38*
                                     (-3.52)
pseudo R2 (Ordered Probit)
                                     32.52%                      29.85%                        24.51%
or Adjusted R2 (for OLS)

* significant at the 5 percent level using a two-tailed test.




                                                                32
Endnotes

1. See Habib and Ljunqvist (2001) and Loughran and Ritter (2001) for detailed analyses of money

left on the table.



2. Ljungqvist and Wilhelm (2001) analyze institutional allocation focusing on issues offered in

France, Germany, and the U.K. Their dataset also includes a small sample of 30 Goldman Sachs

managed IPOs offered between March 1993 and July 1995.



3. We are unable to disclose the names of the investment banks but our empirical analysis does

use a reputation variable.



4. The 22 IPOs with zero returns on day one, which are excluded from Table II, have mean and

median institutional allocations of 71.12 percent and 73.54 percent, respectively. The difference in

institutional allocation between overpriced and underpriced IPOs continues to be significant

(Wilcoxon z (p) = -2.09 (0.04)) even when the zero return IPOs are included in the overpriced

group.



5. See Aggarwal (2001) for evidence on flipping.


6. See also Loughran and Ritter (2001) and Lowry and Schwert (2001) for other evidence on

partial adjustment.



7. We check for an asymmetric component in UPDATE by adding a variable UPDATE+, equal to

1 if the offer price is above the filing range, and zero otherwise. UPDATE+ itself was insignificant

and did not change the other coefficients.

                                                33
8. With regard to issue proceeds, Habib and Ljungqvist (1998) argue that there is a mechanical

relationship between underpricing and issue proceeds even after controlling for uncertainty. On

the other hand, imposing the requirement that pre-IPO assets be available results in our losing

about a quarter of our sample.



9. Negative return IPOs tend to issue fewer shares and have lower offer prices compared to other

IPOs. These issues have mean (median) number of shares offered of 4.36 mm (3.19 mm) versus

7.47 mm (4.50 mm) for the full sample, while their mean and median offer price equal $12.50

($12.50) versus $15.09 ($15) for the full sample.



10. Eq. (5) has more information than 2SLS, i.e., Eq. (4), due to the extra term (INST – α XINST).

However, this term is orthogonal to other included variables (it is a regression error), and does not

affect other coefficient estimates.



11. When such a variable identifies the structural system, OLS is biased. The nature of such a bias

can be characterized analytically. These results are not reported here but are available upon

request.




                                                 34
