NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

OPTIMAL CURRENCY AREAS

Alberto Alesina
Robert J. Barro
Silvana Tenreyro

Working Paper 9072
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9072

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Alberto Alesina, Robert J. Barro and Silvana Tenreyro. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Optimal Currency Areas
Alberto Alesina, Robert J. Barro and Silvana Tenreyro
NBER Working Paper No. 9072
July 2002

ABSTRACT
As the number of independent countries increases and their economies become more integrated,
we would expect to observe more multi-country currency unions. This paper explores the pros and cons
for different countries to adopt as an anchor the dollar, the euro, or the yen. Although there appear to be
reasonably well-defined euro and dollar areas, there does not seem to be a yen area. We also address the
question of how trade and co-movements of outputs and prices would respond to the formation of a
currency union. This response is important because the decision of a country to join a union would
depend on how the union affects trade and co-movements.

Alberto Alesina
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
aalesina@harvard.edu

Robert J. Barro
Department of Economics
Littauer Center 218
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
rbarro@harvard.edu

Silvana Tenreyro
Harvard University

Optimal Currency Areas∗
Alberto Alesina

Robert J. Barro

Silvana Tenreyro

Harvard University

Harvard University

Harvard University

March 2002;
Revised June 2002

Abstract
As the number of independent countries increases and their economies become more integrated, we
would expect to observe more multi-country currency unions. This paper explores the pros and cons for
diﬀerent countries to adopt as an anchor the dollar, the euro, or the yen. Although there appear to be
reasonably well-defined euro and dollar areas, there does not seem to be a yen area. We also address
the question of how trade and co-movements of outputs and prices would respond to the formation of
a currency union. This response is important because the decision of a country to join a union would
depend on how the union aﬀects trade and co-movements.

1

Introduction

Is a country by definition an optimal currency area? If the optimal number of currencies is less than the
number of existing countries, which countries should form currency areas?
This question, analyzed in the pioneering work of Mundell (1961) and extended in Alesina and Barro
(2002), has jumped to the center stage of the current policy debate for several reasons.

First, the large

increase in the number of independent countries in the world led, until recently, to a roughly one-for-one
increase in the number of currencies. This proliferation of currencies occurred despite the growing integration
∗ We

are grateful to Rudi Dornbusch, Mark Gertler, Kenneth Rogoﬀ, Andy Rose, Jeﬀrey Wurgler, and several conference

participants for very useful comments. Gustavo Suarez provided excellent research assistance. We thank the NSF for financial
support through a grant with the National Bureau of Economic Research.

1

of the world economy. On its own, the growth of international trade in goods and assets should have raised
the transactions benefits from common currencies and led, thereby, to a decline in the number of independent
moneys. Second, the memory of the inflationary decades of the seventies and eighties encouraged inflation
control, thereby generating consideration of irrevocably fixed exchange rates as a possible instrument to
achieve price stability. Adopting another country’s currency or maintaining a currency board were seen as
more credible commitment devices than a simple fixing of the exchange rate. Third, recent episodes of
financial turbulence have promoted discussions about “new financial architectures.” Although this dialogue
is often vague and inconclusive, one of its interesting facets is the question of whether the one country/one
currency dogma is still adequate.1
Looking around the world, one sees many examples of movement toward multinational currencies: twelve
countries in Europe have adopted a single currency; dollarization is being implemented in Ecuador and El
Salvador; and dollarization is under active consideration in many other Latin American countries, including
Mexico, Guatemala, and Peru. Six West African states have agreed to create a new common currency for
the region by 2003, and eleven members of the Southern African Development Community are debating
whether to adopt the dollar or to create an independent monetary union possibly anchored to the South
African rand. Six oil-producing countries (Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, Oman, Qatar, and
Kuwait) have declared their intention to form a currency union by 2010. In addition, several countries have
maintained currency boards with either the U.S. dollar or the euro as the anchor. Currency boards are, in
a sense, mid-way between a system of fixed rates and currency adoption, and the recent adverse experience
of Argentina will likely discourage the use of this mid-way approach.
Currency unions typically take one of two forms. In one, which is most common, client countries (which
are usually small) adopt the currency of a large anchor country. In the other case, a group of countries
creates a new currency and a new joint central bank. The second arrangement applies to the euro zone.2
The Eastern Caribbean Currency Area (ECCA) and the CFA zone in Africa are intermediate between the
two types of unions. In both cases, the countries have a joint currency and a joint central bank.3 However,
1 In

principle, an optimal currency area could also be smaller that a country, that is, more than one currency could circulate

within a country. However, we have not observed a tendency in this direction.
2 Some may argue that the European Monetary Union is, in practice, a German mark area, but this interpretation is
questionable. Although the European central bank may be particularly sensitive to German preferences, the composition of the
board and the observed polices in its first few years of existence do not show a German bias. See Alesina et al (2001).
3 There are actually two regional central banks in the CFA zone. One is the BCEAO, grouping Benin, Burkina Faso, Ivory
Coast, Guinea-Bissau, Mali, Niger, Senegal, and Togo, where the common currency is the franc de la Communaute Financiere

2

the ECCA currency (Caribbean dollar) has been linked since 1976 to the U.S. dollar (and, before that, to
the British pound), and the CFA franc has been tied (except for one devaluation) to the French franc.
The purpose of this paper is to evaluate whether natural currency areas emerge from an empirical
investigation. As a theoretical background, we use the framework developed by Alesina and Barro (2002),
which discusses the trade-oﬀ between the costs and benefits of currency unions. Based on historical patterns
of international trade and of co-movements of prices and outputs, we find that there seem to exist reasonably
well-defined dollar and euro areas but no clear yen area. However, a country’s decision to join a monetary
area should consider not just the situation that applies ex ante, that is, under monetary autonomy, but also
the conditions that would apply ex post, that is, allowing for the economic eﬀects of currency union. The
eﬀects on international trade have been discussed in a lively recent literature prompted by the findings of
Rose (2000). We review this literature and provide new results. We also find that currency unions tend to
increase the co-movement of prices but are not systematically related to the co-movement of outputs.
We should emphasize that we do not address other issues that are important for currency adoption, such
as those related to financial markets, financial flows, and borrower/lender relationships.4 We proceed this
way not because we think that these questions are unimportant, but rather because the focus of the present
inquiry is on diﬀerent issues.
The paper is organized as follows.

Section 2 discusses the broad evolution of country sizes, numbers

of currencies, and currency areas in the post-World War II period. Section 3 reviews the implications of
the theoretical model of Alesina and Barro (2002), which we use as a guide for our empirical investigation.
Section 4 presents our data set. Section 5 uses the historical patterns in international trade flows, inflation
rates, and the co-movements of prices and outputs to attempt to identify optimal currency areas. Section 6
considers how the formation of a currency union would change bilateral trade flows and the co-movements
of prices and outputs. The last section concludes.
de l’Afrique or CFA franc. The othere is the BEAC, grouping Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Republic of Congo,
Equatorial Guinea, and Gabon, with the common currency called the franc de la Cooperation Financiere Africaine, also known
as the CFA franc. The two CFA francs are legal tender only in their respective regions, but the two currencies have maintained
a fixed parity. Comoros issues its own form of CFA franc but has maintained a fixed parity with the other two.
4 For a recent theoretical discussion of these issues, see Gale and Vives (2002).

3

2

Countries and Currencies

In 1947 there were 76 independent countries in the world, whereas today there are 193. Many of today’s
countries are small: in 1995, 87 countries had a population less than 5 million. Figure 1, which is taken
from Alesina, Spolaore, and Wacziarg (2000), depicts the number of countries created and eliminated in the
last 150 years.5 In the period between World Wars I and II, international trade collapsed, and international
borders were virtually frozen. In contrast, after the end of World War II, the number of countries almost
tripled, and the volume of international trade and financial transactions expanded dramatically. We view
these two developments as interrelated. First, small countries are economically viable when their market is
the world, in a relatively free-trade environment. Second, small countries have an interest in maintaining
open borders. Therefore, one should expect an inverse correlation between average country size and the
degree of trade openness and financial integration.
Figure 2, also taken from Alesina, Spolaore, and Wacziarg (2000), shows a strong positive correlation over
the last 150 years between the detrended number of countries in the world and a detrended measure of the
volume of international trade. These authors show that this correlation does not just reflect the relabeling
of interregional trade as international trade when countries split. In fact, a similar pattern of correlation
holds if one measures world trade integration by the volume of international trade among countries that did
not change their borders. Alesina and Spolaore (2002) discuss these issues in detail and present current and
historical evidence on the relationship between country formation and international trade.
The number of independent currencies has increased substantially, until recently almost at the same pace
as the number of independent countries. In 1947, there were 65 currencies in circulation, whereas in 2001
there were 169. Between 1947 and 2001, the ratio of the number of currencies to the number of countries
remained roughly constant at about 85 per cent. Twelve of these currencies, in Europe, have now been
replaced by the euro, so we now have 158 currencies.
The increase in the number of countries and the deepening of economic integration should generate a
tendency to create multi-country currency areas, unless one believes that a country always defines the optimal
currency area. One implication of Mundell’s analysis is that political borders and currency boundaries should
not always coincide. In fact, as discussed in Alesina and Spolaore (2002), small countries can prosper in
a world of free trade and open financial markets. Nevertheless, these small countries may lack the size
needed to provide eﬀectively some public goods that are subject to large economies of scale or to substantial
5 The

initial negative bar in 1870 represents the unification of Germany.

4

externalities. A currency may be one of these goods: a small country may be too small for an independent
money to be eﬃcient. To put it diﬀerently, various ethnic, linguistic, or culturally diﬀerent groups can enjoy
political independence by creating their own country. At the same time, this separate country can avoid
part of the costs of being economically small by using other countries to provide some public goods, such as
a currency.
A country constitutes, by definition, an optimal currency area only if one views a national money as
a critical symbol of national pride and identity. However, sometimes forms of nationalistic pride have led
countries into disastrous courses of action.

Therefore, the argument that a national currency satisfies

nationalistic pride does not make an independent money economically or politically desirable. In fact,
why a nation would take pride in a currency escapes us; it is probably much more relevant to be proud
of an Olympic team. As for national identity, language and culture seem much more important than a
currency, yet many countries have willingly retained the language of their former colonizers. Moreover,
many countries undergoing extreme inflation, such as in South America, tended to change the names of their
moneys frequently, so even a sentimental attachment to the name “peso” or “dollar” seems not to be so
important.
In any event, as already mentioned, one can detect a recent tendency toward formation of multi-country
monetary areas. In the next decade, the ratio of currencies to independent countries may decrease substantially, beginning with the adoption of the euro in 2002.

3

The costs and benefits of currency unions

We view this analysis from the perspective of a potential client country that is considering the adoption of
another country’s money as a nominal anchor.

3.1

Trade benefits

Country borders matter for trade flows: two regions of the same country trade much more with each other
than they would if an international border were to separate them. McCallum (1995) looked at U.S.-Canadian
trade in 1988 and suggested that this eﬀect was extremely large: trade between Canadian provinces was
estimated to be a staggering 2200% larger than that between otherwise comparable provinces and states.
More recent work by Anderson and van Wincoop (2001) argues that this eﬀect from the U.S.-Canada border

5

was vastly exaggerated but is still substantial: the presence of an international border is estimated to reduce
trade among industrialized countries by 30% and between the United States and Canada by 44%. The
question is what explains why national borders matter so much for trade even when there are no explicit trade
restrictions in place. Among other things, country borders tend to be associated with diﬀerent currencies.
Therefore, given that border eﬀects are so large, the elimination of one source of border costs–the change
of currencies–might have a large eﬀect on trade.6
Alesina and Barro (2002) investigate the relationship between currency unions and trade flows. They
model the adoption of a common currency as a reduction of “iceberg” trading costs between two countries.
They find that, under reasonable assumptions about elasticities of substitution between goods, countries
that trade more with each other benefit more from adopting the same currency.7
Thus, countries that trade more with each other stand to gain more from adopting the same currency.
Also, smaller countries should, ceteris paribus, be more inclined to give up their currencies. Hence, as the
number of countries increases (and their average size shrinks), the number of currencies in the world should
increase less than proportionately.8

3.2

The benefits of commitment

If an inflation prone country adopts the currency of a credible anchor, it eliminates the inflation-bias problem
pointed out by Barro and Gordon (1983). This bias may stem from two non-mutually exclusive sources: an
attempt to overstimulate the economy in a cyclical context and the incentive to monetize budget deficits and
debts.
A fixed exchange rate system, if totally credible, could achieve the same commitment benefit as a currency
union. However, the recent world history shows that fixed rates are not irrevocably fixed; thus, they lack
6 Obstfeld

and Rogoﬀ (2000) argue that these border eﬀects on trade may have profound eﬀects on a host of financial markets

and may explain a lot of anomalies in international financial transactions.
7 The intuition for why this result does not hold unambiguously is the following. If two countries do not trade much with
each other initially, the likely reason is that the trading costs are high. Hence, the trade that does occur must have a high
marginal value. Specifically, if the trade occurs in intermediate inputs, then the marginal product of these inputs must be
high, because the trade occurs only if the marginal product is at least as high as the marginal cost. In this case, the reduction
of border costs due to the implementation of a currency union would expand trade in the intermediate goods that have an
especially high marginal product. Hence, it is possible that the marginal gain from the introduction of a currency union would
be greater when the existing volume of international trade is low.
8 Alesina and Barro (2002) show that, under certain conditions, an even stronger result holds: as the number of countries
increases, the equilibrium number of currencies decreases.

6

full credibility. Consequently, fixed exchange rates can create instability in financial markets. To the extent
that a currency union is more costly to break than a promise to maintain a fixed exchange rate, the currency
adoption is more credible. In fact, once a country has a adopted a new currency, the costs of turning back are
quite high, certainly much higher than simply changing a fixed parity to a new one. The ongoing situation
in Argentina demonstrates that the government really had created high costs for breaking a commitment
associated with a currency board and widespread dollarization of the economy. However, the costs were
apparently not high enough to deter eventual reneging on the commitment.
A country that abandons its currency receives the inflation rate of the anchor plus the change (positive
or negative) in its price level relative to that of the anchor. In other words, if the inflation rate in the United
States is two percent, then in Panama it will be two percent plus the change in relative prices between
Panama and the United States. Therefore, even if the anchor maintains domestic price stability, linkage to
the anchor does not guarantee full price stability for a client country.
The most likely anchors are large relative to the clients. In theory, a small but very committed country
could be a perfectly good anchor. However, ex post, a small anchor may be subject to political pressure
from the large client to abandon the committed policy.

From an ex ante perspective, this consideration

disqualifies the small country as a credible anchor.
In summary: The countries that stand to gain the most from giving up their currencies are those that have
a history of high and volatile inflation. This kind of history is a symptom of a lack of internal discipline for
monetary policy. Hence, to the extent that this lack of discipline tends to persist, such countries would benefit
the most from the introduction of external discipline. Linkage to another currency is also more attractive if,
under the linked system, relative price levels between the countries would be relatively stable.

3.3

Stabilization policies

The abandonment of a separate currency implies the loss of an independent monetary policy. To the extent
that monetary policy would have contributed to business-cycle stabilization, the loss of monetary independence implies costs in the form of wider cyclical fluctuations of output.
The costs of giving up monetary independence are lower the higher the association of shocks between
the client and the anchor. The more the shocks are related the more the policy selected by the anchor will
be appropriate for the client as well. What turns out to matter is not the correlation of shocks, per se,
but rather the variance of the client country’s output expressed as a ratio to the anchor country’s output.

7

This variance depends partly on the correlation of output (and, hence, of underlying shocks) and partly on
the individual variances of outputs. For example, a small country’s output may be highly correlated with
that in the United States. But, if the small country’s variance of output is much greater than that of the
United States, then the U.S. monetary policy will still be inappropriate for the client. In particular, the
magnitude of countercyclical monetary policy chosen by the United States will be too small from the client’s
perspective.
The costs implied by the loss of an independent money depend also on the explicit or implicit contract
that can be arranged between the anchor and its clients. We can think of two cases. In one, the anchor does
not change its monetary policy regardless of the composition and experience of its clients. Thus, clients that
have more shocks in common with the anchor stand to lose less from abandoning their independent policy
but have no influence on the monetary policy chosen by the anchor country. In the other case, the clients
can compensate the anchor to motivate the selection of a policy that takes into account the clients’ interests,
which will reflect the shocks that they experience. The ability to enter into such contracts makes currency
unions more attractive. However, even when these agreements are feasible, the greater the association of
shocks between clients and anchor, the easier it is to form a currency union. Specifically, it is cheaper for a
client to buy accommodation from an anchor that faces shocks that are similar to those faced by the clients.9
The allocation of seignorage arising from the client’s use of the anchor’s currency can be made part of the
compensation schemes.
The European Monetary Union is similar to this arrangement with compensation, because the monetary
policy of the union is not targeted to a specific country (say Germany) but, rather, to a weighted average of
each country’s shocks, that is, to aggregate euro-area shocks. In the discussion leading up to the formation
of the European Monetary Union, concerns about the degree of association among business cycles across
potential members were critical. In practice, the institutional arrangements within the European Union are
much more complex that a compensation scheme, but the point is that the ECB does not target the shocks
of any particular country but, rather, the average European shocks.10
In the case of developing countries, the costs of abandoning an independent monetary policy may not be
9 Note

that, in theory, a small country could be an ideal anchor because it is cheaper to compensate such an anchor for the

provision of monetary services that are tailored to the interests of clients. However, as discussed before, a small anchor may
lack credibility.
1 0 The European Union also has specific prescriptions about the allocation of seignorage. The amounts are divided according
to the share of GDP of the various member countries. For a discussion of the European Central Bank policy objectives and
how this policy relates to individual country shocks, see Alesina et al (2001)

8

that high because stabilization polices are typically not well used when exchange rates are flexible. Recent
work by Calvo and Reinhart (2002) and Hausmann, Panizza, and Stein (1999) suggests that developing
countries tend to follow procyclical monetary policies, specifically, they tend to raise interest rates in times
of distress to defend the value of their currency.11 To the extent that monetary policy is not properly used
as a stabilization device, the loss of monetary independence is not a substantial cost (and may actually be a
benefit) for developing countries. However, recent work by Broda (2001) shows that countries with floating
exchange rate systems show superior performance in the face of terms-of-trade shocks. This pattern may
reflect the benefits from independent monetary policies.
To summarize, the countries that have the largest co-movements of outputs and prices with potential
anchors are those with the lowest costs of abandoning monetary independence.

3.4

Trade, geography, and co-movements

Countries that trade more can benefit more from currency unions for the reasons already discussed. Increased
trade may also raise the co-movements of outputs and prices. In this case, there is a second reason why
countries that trade more would have a greater net benefit from adopting a currency union.
An established literature on the “gravity model” of trade shows that bilateral trade volumes are well
explained by a set of geographical and economic variables, such as the distance between the countries and
the sizes and incomes of the countries. Note that the term “distance” has to be interpreted broadly to
include not only literal geographical distance, but also whether the countries share a common language,
legal system, and so on. In addition, some geographical variables may influence co-movements of outputs
and prices beyond their eﬀects through trade. For example, locational proximity and weather patterns may
relate to the nature of underlying shocks, which in turn influence the co-movements.
Whether more trade always means more co-movements of outputs and prices is not a settled issue. On
the theoretical side, the answer depends largely on whether trade is inter-industry or intra-industry. In the
latter case, more trade likely leads to more co-movements. However, in the former case, increased trade
may stimulate sectoral specialization across countries. This heightened specialization likely lowers the comovements of outputs and prices, because industry specific shocks would become country specific shocks.12
11 A

literature on Latin America, prompted mostly by a paper by Gavin and Perotti (1997), has also shown that fiscal policy

has the “wrong” cyclical properties. That is, surpluses tend to appear during recessions and deficits during expansions.
1 2 See Frankel and Rose (1998) for the argument that more trade favors more correlated business cycles. See Krugman (1993)
for the opposite argument. For an extensive theoretical and empirical discussion of these issues, see Ozcan, Sorensen, and Yosha

9

The type of trade between two countries is also likely influenced by the levels of per capita GDP, for example,
intra-industry trade tends to be much more important for rich countries.
In summary, geographical or gravity variables aﬀect bilateral trade and, as a result, the costs and benefits
of currency unions. Some geographical variables may have an aﬀect on the attractiveness of currency unions
beyond those operating through the trade channel.

4

Data and methodology

4.1

Data description and sources

Data on outputs and prices come from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI) and Penn
World Tables 5.6. Combining both sources, we form a panel of countries with yearly data on outputs and
prices from 1960 to 1997 (or, in some cases, for shorter periods). For output, we use real per capita GDP
expressed in 1995 U.S. dollars. To compute relative prices, we use a form of real exchange rate relating to the
price level for gross domestic products. The measure is the purchasing-power-parity (PPP) for GDP divided
by the U.S. dollar exchange rate.13 In the first instance, this measure gives us the price level in country
i relative to that in the United States, Pi,t /PU S,t . We then compute relative prices between countries i
and j by dividing the value for country i by that for country j. Inflation is computed as the continuously
compounded (log-diﬀerence) growth rate of the GDP deflator, coming from World Development Indicators.
Bilateral trade information comes from Glick and Rose (2001), which in turn is extracted from the
International Monetary Fund’s Direction of Trade Statistics. These data are expressed in real U.S. dollars.14
To compute bilateral distances, we use the great-circle-distance algorithm provided by Gray (2001).
Data on location, as well as contiguity, access to water, language, and colonial relationships come from
the CIA World Fact Book 2001. Data on free-trade agreements come from Glick and Rose (2000) and are
complemented with data from the World Trade Organization web page.
(2001, 2002) and Imbs (2000).
13 P
i

=

P P P o f GDPi
Ex.ra te

measures how many units of U.S. output can be purchased with one unit of country i0 s output, that is,

it measures the relative price of country i0 s output with respect to that of the United States. By definition, this price is always
one when i is the United States.
1 4 Glick and Rose (2001) deflated the original nominal values of trade by the U.S. consumer price index, with 1982-84=100.
We use the same index to express trade values in 1995 U.S. dollars.

10

4.2

The computation of co-movements

We pair all countries and calculate bilateral relative prices, Pit /Pjt . (This ratio measures the value of one
unit of country i’s output relative to one unit of country j’s output.) This procedure generates 21,321
(207·206/2) country-pairs for each year. For every pair of countries, (i, j), we use the annual time series
n
ot=1997
it
ln PPjt
to compute the second-order autoregression:15
t=1960

ln

Pit
Pi,t−1
Pi,t−2
= b0 + b1 · ln
+ b2 · ln
+ εtij .
Pjt
Pj,t−1
Pj,t−2

The estimated residual, ε̂t,i,j , measures the relative price that would not be predictable from the two prior
values of relative prices. We then use as a measure of (lack of) co-movement of relative prices the root-meansquared error:
v
u
u
V Pij ≡ t

T

1 X 2
ε̂ .
T − 3 t=1 tij

The lower V Pij , the greater the co-movement of prices between countries i and j.
We proceed analogously to compute a measure of output co-movement. The value V Yij comes from the
estimated residuals from the second-order autoregression on annual data for relative per capita GDP:

ln

Yit
Yi,t−1
Yi,t−2
= c0 + c1 · ln
+ c2 · ln
+ utij .
Yjt
Yj,t−1
Yj,t−2

The estimated residual, ûtij , measures the relative output that would not be predictable from the two
prior values of relative output. We then use as a measure of (lack of) co-movement of relative outputs the
root-mean-squared error:
v
u
u
V Yij ≡ t

T

1 X
ûtij .
T − 3 t=1

The lower V Yij , the greater the co-movement of outputs between countries i and j.
For most countries all of the data are available. However, we exclude from the computation of co-movements
1 5 We

use fewer observations when the full time series from 1960 to 1997 is unavailable. However, we drop country-pairs for

which fewer than 20 observations are available.

11

country pairs for which we do not have at least 20 observations. Note that this limitation implies that we
cannot include in our analysis most of central and eastern Europe, a region in which some countries are
likely clients of the euro.

5

Which currency areas?

In this section, we sketch “natural” currency areas, based on the criteria discussed above. For anchor
currencies, we consider the U.S. dollar, the euro, and the yen. We are not assuming that all countries have
to belong to one of the unions centered around these three currencies. In fact, many countries turn out not
to be good clients for any of the anchors and seem to be better oﬀ by keeping their own currency. Therefore,
we are addressing the question of which countries would be better served by joining some currency union,
as well as the question of which anchor should be chosen if one is needed.

5.1

Inflation, trade, and co-movements

We begin in Table 1a by showing the average inflation rate, using the GDP deflator, for selected countries
and groups in our sample from 1970 to 1990. We stopped at 1990 because, in the 1990s, several countries
adopted currency arrangements, such as the EMS, that contributed to reduced inflation. We are interested
here mostly in capturing inflation rates that would arise in the absence of a monetary anchor. We take the
1970s and 1980s (that is, after Bretton Woods and before the recent emphasis on nominal anchors) as a
period with few true monetary anchors. We show the 20 countries with the highest average inflation rates,
along with the averages for industrialized countries and for regional groups of developing countries.
The top 5 average rates of inflation are all Latin American countries, and 7 Latin American countries
are in the top 11. The top 5 countries had an average annual inflation rate above 280%. Despite its poor
economic performance in other dimensions, Africa does not have a very high average inflation rate. While
there are 6 African countries in the top 20, the average for the continent is brought down by the countries
in the CFA franc zone, which have relatively low inflation records. The Middle East is the second highest
inflation group, with two countries, Israel and Lebanon, in the top 13 with inflation rates of 78% and 44%,
respectively. In the euro-zone, Greece and Italy lead in the rankings, with inflation rates of 16% and 13%,
respectively. Overall, 11 countries had an average annual inflation rate of more than 50 percent, 30 countries
had an average inflation above 20 percent, and 72 countries exceeded 10 percent.

12

Table 1b shows inflation variability and is organized in the same way as Table 1a. Since average inflation
and inflation variability are strongly positively correlated, 16 of the top 20 countries in Table 1a are also in
the top 20 of Table 1b. However, in some cases, such as Chile, the high average inflation rate (107 percent)
reflected one episode of hyperinflation followed by relative stability. In others, such as Colombia, the fairly
high average inflation rate (22 percent) resulted from a long period of moderate, double-digit inflation.
Tables 2a, 2b, and 2c list for selected countries and groups the average trade-to-GDP ratios16 over 196097 with three potential anchors for currency areas: the United States, the euro area (based on the twelve
members), and Japan. The GDP value in the denominator of these ratios refers to the country paired with
the potential anchor.
The tables show that Japan is an economy that is relatively closed; moreover, in comparison with the
United States and the euro region, Japan’s trade is more dispersed across partners. Hence, few countries
exhibit a high trade-to-GDP ratio with Japan. Notably, industrial countries’ average trade share with Japan
is below one percent. Among developing countries, oil exporters have a high trade share with Japan, but
still below that with the euro-12. Singapore, Malaysia, Hong Kong and Indonesia exhibit a relatively high
trade-to-GDP ratio with Japan (above 7 percent), but Singapore and Hong Kong trade even more with the
United States. For the United States, aside from Hong Kong and Singapore, a good portion of Latin America
has a high ratio of trade to GDP. Canada is notable for trading almost exclusively with the United States:
the trade ratio is 18 percent, compared with 1.7 percent for the euro-12 and 1.4 percent for Japan. African
countries, broadly speaking, trade significantly more with Europe, but some of them, such as Angola and
Nigeria, are also closely linked with the United States.
Tables 3a, 3b, and 3c report our measures of the co-movements of prices for selected countries with the
United States, the euro-12 area, and Japan.17 Remember that a higher number means less co-movement.
Panama and Puerto Rico, which use the U.S. dollar, have the highest co-movements of prices with the United
States. These two are followed by Canada and El Salvador, which has recently dollarized. Members of the
OECD have fairly high price co-movements with all three of the potential anchors (which are themselves
members of the OECD). For Japan, the countries that are most closely related in terms of price co-movements
lack a clear geographical distribution. For the euro-12, the euro members and other western European
countries have a high degree of price co-movement. African countries also have relatively high price co1 6 The

trade measure is equivalent to the average of imports and exports. Glick and Rose’s (2001) values come from averaging

four measures of bilateral trade (as reported for imports and exports by the partners on each side of both transactions).
1 7 Recall that we compute co-movements only for pairs of countries for which we have at least 20 annual observations.

13

movements with the euro-12, higher than that with the United States.
Tables 4a, 4b, and 4c report our measures of the co-movements of outputs (per capita GDPs) for selected
countries with the United States, the euro-12 area, and Japan.18 The general picture is reasonably similar
to that for prices. Note that all of the OECD countries have relatively high output co-movements with the
three anchors, particularly with the euro-12. Japan’s business cycle seems to be somewhat less associated
with the rest of the world: even developing countries in Asia tend to exhibit, on average, higher output
co-movements with the euro-12. The regional patterns show that Africa is generally more associated with
the euro-12, whereas there is more ambiguity for Latin America.
Overall, Japan is a worse anchor than the United States and the euro-12 because fewer countries are
associated with Japan in terms of price and output co-movements, and trade flows to Japan are more
dispersed across partners. Africa is more associated in terms of price and output co-movements with the
euro-12 than with the United States, and Africa also trades more with the euro zone. North America is
highly associated with the United States. As for Latin America, this region trades overall more with the
United States than with the euro zone or Japan. However, co-movements of prices and outputs for this
region are not much higher with respect to the United States than they are with the euro-12. An interesting
case is Argentina. In terms of co-movements of prices and outputs, Argentina is more associated with the
euro area than with the United States. Mexico, in contrast, is much more associated in its price and output
co-movements with the United States. In Asia, Hong Kong and Singapore are more associated with the
United States than with Japan.
Looking at the tables, the patterns of trade and price and output co-movements suggest geographically
connected areas that are linked to the U.S. dollar (North and part of South America) and the euro zone
(Europe and Africa). For Japan, at most a small part of east Asia seems to apply.

5.2

Which Currency Unions?

This section brings together the data already presented to discuss which currency unions appear most
attractive in terms of the criteria suggested by the underlying theory. The natural clients, with respect to
the three proposed anchors, are those countries that have no ability to commit to low inflation (as evidenced
by a history of high and variable inflation), that trade a lot (at least potentially) with the anchor, and have
high price and output co-movements with the anchor. The implicit assumption here is that the patterns
1 8 As

for prices, we consider only pairs of countries for which we have at least 20 observations.

14

for trade and co-movements that apply ex ante (under monetary autonomy) would also apply at least in a
relative sense ex post (under a currency union).
We begin in Table 5 by listing the 28 countries in our sample with average inflation rates of at least 15
percent per year from 1970 to 1990.19 We suggest that these countries are likely to have a high demand for
an external nominal anchor because of their evident lack of commitment to low inflation. We then list for
these countries their trade shares and measures of price and output co-movements with the three potential
anchors.
Table 6 summarizes the information from Table 5 by listing for each of the three criteria (trade, price
co-movement, and output co-movement) which of the three anchors is best. A bold entry means that the
chosen anchor is “much” superior to the other two, a regular font means that the diﬀerence with at least
one other anchor is small. More specifically, a bold entry in the trade column means that the highest trade
share with one of the three potential anchors is more than four percentage points higher than that of the
second of the three. In the case of price co-movements, a bold entry means that the absolute value of the
diﬀerence between the most associated of the three and the second one is larger that 0.025. For the output
co-movement, the same definition applies with a cut oﬀ of 0.005. These cut-oﬀ choices are arbitrary, but the
reader using the data reported in Table 5 can calculate another cut-oﬀ. These criteria emphasize the choice
among potential anchors, rather than the choice of whether to retain an independent currency.
Several interesting observations emerge from Table 6. First, Japan is not an attractive anchor for virtually
any of the high-inflation countries. Out of 96 entries in the table, only 8 (which includes one tie) are for
Japan. No case has more than one of the criteria in favor of Japan.
Second, high inflation Latin American countries are by no means a clear dollarization block. In fact,
Brazil might be better served by adopting the euro. (Although there is no clear superiority in terms of trade
or price co-movements, the euro performs better in terms of co-movement of output.) The case of Argentina
is interesting: having one of the highest inflation rates, this country seems to be one of the best examples
of a place with a high demand for an external currency anchor. However, as shown in Table 5, Argentina
has been highly closed to international trade, and its output and price co-movements are not high with any
of the three potential anchors. So, other than its lack of commitment ability, Argentina does not appear
to be an obvious member of a currency union with the euro or the U.S. dollar. In contrast, Mexico and
Ecuador look much closer to the U.S. dollar than to the euro. The same conclusion applies to the Dominican
1 9 We

restrict this analysis to countries with populations larger than 500,000 in 1997. The analysis is also constrained by data

availability: only countries with data on co-movements of output and prices are considered.

15

Republic. Nicaragua has low co-movements with all three anchors, but its exports go mostly toward Europe.
Hence, the euro might be a better choice than the U.S. dollar. Chile and Uruguay have higher exports to
Europe, but they have larger co-movements with the United States.
Third, looking at countries at the geographical boundaries of Europe, in some cases their natural anchor
is the euro: this conclusion applies to Greece (which has joined the euro zone) and Turkey. Israel might
be a good candidate for the euro, although it could also be well served by the U.S. dollar. As for Africa,
trade shares are much higher with Europe. Co-movements are, however, just as high with the United States.
Ghana, Guinea-Bissau, and Sierra Leone seem to be natural euro clients, but other African countries are less
clear.
We have measured lack of ability to commit based on the past inflation experience. One could also look at
institutional measures of potential commitment, such as the degree of central bank independence. However,
although this measure has some explanatory power for inflation performance among OECD countries, it does
not seem to explain much for developing countries.20
High inflation countries are not the only potential clients of an anchor. If a country trades extensively
with a potential anchor, then adopting the anchor currency may be a good strategy even if the inflation
rate under autonomy were low. In Table 7, we report all the countries that have a trade share with at least
one of the potential anchors of at least 9 percent of GDP. In column one we report the name of the anchor
that has the highest trade share; when more that one anchor has a value of at least 9 per cent, we report
all in decreasing order. For example, if country X’s trade share was 15 percent of its GDP with the United
States and 9 percent with the euro-12, the column would read USA/Euro. In the next column, we report
the name of the anchor with the highest co-movements of prices and output, with the same convention as
before concerning the bold entries.
The first inference from Table 7 is that the countries forming the euro-12 area do seem to belong together.
The same observation applies to other European countries that are not currently members of the euro-12,
such as Sweden and Switzerland. Second, African countries trade more with Europe than with the United
States or Japan, so, by and large, the best potential anchor for Africa is the euro. Note that the CFA franc
zone is already tied to the euro. Third, Central American countries trade much more with the United States.
Fourth, for several East Asian countries, such as Hong Kong and Singapore, the U.S. dollar appears to be
superior to the yen as a potential anchor. These Asian countries trade more with the United States and are
more closely associated with the U.S. business cycle. Canada is extremely tied to the United States in any
2 0 See

Alesina and Summers (1993) for OECD country evidence and Cukierman (1992) for evidence on developing countries.

16

dimension.21
Overall, we find that geographically connected currency areas tend to emerge with the U.S. dollar and
the euro as the anchor. However, Japan does not emerge as much of an anchor. Putting together the results
from Table 7 with those of Tables 5 and 6, we draw the following conclusions. 1) There seems to be a fairly
clear dollar area involving Canada, Mexico, most of Central America, and parts of South America (excluding
Argentina and Brazil). Farther afield geographically, the dollar zone seems also to encompass some Asian
countries, such as Hong Kong and Singapore. 2) The euro area includes all of western Europe and most of
Africa. Argentina might actually be better served by joining the euro area than the dollar area. However,
the only criterion for Argentina to be seeking any anchor is her history of high inflation. 3) There does
not seem to be any clear yen area. 4) There are several countries that do not appear in Tables 5-7. These
are countries with low inflation that do not trade much with any of the three potential anchors. Primary
examples are India, Australia, and New Zealand.
It is worthwhile to compare briefly our results with those of Ghosh and Wolf (1994), who use a diﬀerent
approach to assess the pros and cons for regions and countries to form currency unions. They argue that
optimal currency areas are typically formed by countries that are geographically disconnected. For example,
they conclude that Europe and the states of the United States are not optimal currency areas. We have
not examined the U.S. states, but Europe does present a good case for a currency union based on our
examination of the patterns of trade and co-movements of prices and outputs. More generally, despite some
exceptions, geographical proximity typically fits well with our criteria for currency unions. The diﬀerences
between our findings and those of Ghosh and Wolf seem to arise because they do not emphasize the link
between currency unions and trade and because they assume a very high cost from imperfect synchronization
of business cycles.
Ideally, we would go beyond the simple criteria thus far advanced to evaluate the relative costs and
benefits of the trade-oﬀ leading to the choice of currency adoption. For example, should a country such
as Argentina with high inflation but low co-movements with the United States and the euro zone remain
autonomous or use the dollar or the euro? How much can trade benefits of a currency union compensate for
the loss of monetary autonomy? To answer these questions, we need more quantitative information than we
have yet generated.
2 1 See

Buiter (1999) for a discussion of this point.

17

6

What changes with currency adoption?

Thus far, we have discussed the possible configuration of currency areas based on the behavior of inflation,
trade, and the co-movements of prices and outputs that prevail (in most cases) before the creation of a
currency union. In choosing whether to join a monetary area, a potential entrant would have to estimate the
values of trade and co-movements that would apply after the entry. In practice, this calculation is diﬃcult–
for the potential entrant and also for the econometrician.22 In the next section, we discuss estimates of
eﬀects from joining a currency union on international trade flows. Then we discuss some new estimates of
eﬀects of currency union on trade and on co-movements of prices and outputs.

6.1

Currency unions and international trade: the available evidence

Most of the existing empirical work on the eﬀects of currency unions on trade flows has been framed in the
context of the standard “gravity model.” According to this approach, the bilateral trade between a pair of
countries is increasing in their GDPs and is inversely related to their distance, broadly construed to include
all factors that create “trade resistance.” The gravity equation is then augmented with a dummy variable
indicating whether or not the countries share the same currency. The estimate of the coeﬃcient on this
dummy is interpreted as the currency-union eﬀect. In the seminal paper in this area, Rose (2000) reports
that bilateral trade between two countries that use the same currency is, controlling for other eﬀects, over
two-hundred-percent larger than bilateral trade between countries that use diﬀerent currencies.
The apparently large eﬀect of currency unions on trade is surprising because estimates of the eﬀect of
reduced exchange rate volatility on trade are small (see, for example, De Grauwe and Skudelny [2000], Frankel
and Wei [1993], and Eichengreen and Irwin [1995]). Moreover, fees on currency conversion are typically a
small percentage of total transaction costs.23 On the other hand, as already discussed, border eﬀects on
trade are large, and perhaps these large eﬀects can be explained by the necessity to use diﬀerent currencies
on the two sides of a border.
Numerous empirical studies, summarized in Table 8, have examined and extended Rose’s research. Pakko
and Wall (2001) focus on time-series variation, which involves cases in which currency union is either implemented or abandoned. Their findings reveal a negative, though insignificant, eﬀect of currency union on
2 2 Issing

(2001) argues that one should expect that prices and outputs will move more closely together in the European Union

after the adoption of the euro.
2 3 The argument that currency conversion fees are low may not apply to trade in capital, where the currency turnover is
extremely high and, hence, small proportionate costs can translate into large disbursements.

18

trade. However, Glick and Rose (2002) use an expanded panel data set that includes more episodes of regime
switching. With this enlarged data set, they find large and positive estimates from the time-series variation.
Rose (2001) provides new estimates of the eﬀect of currency unions on trade, making use of the time-series
as well as cross-sectional variation in the data. This study reports a wide range of estimates, using diﬀerent
samples and techniques. Point estimates range from a negative, though insignificant, eﬀect of - 68%, using
fixed eﬀects in the original sample, to a 708% eﬀect using a matching sample technique and a much broader
data base.
Rose and Van Wincoop (2001), Nitsch (2002), Melitz (2001), Klein (2002), and Levy (2001) address
problems of aggregation bias, arguing that pooling diﬀerent currency unions may mask diﬀerential eﬀects.
Yet, all these studies point toward a significantly positive eﬀect on trade. Thom and Walsh (2001) present
a case study on Ireland’s break with sterling, finding no significant eﬀect on trade. Other studies, including
Flandreau and Maurel (2001) and Lopez-Cordova and Meissner (2001), focus on pre-WWI data.
The underlying assumption in the various empirical studies is that currency unions are randomly chosen.
Standard endogeneity problems can, however, confound the estimates. For example, the presence of currency
union may encourage trade, but the presence or potential for substantial trade may also stimulate the
formation of a currency union. The use of country-pair fixed eﬀects, employed in some of the studies, may
not alleviate this simultaneity problem because a shift at some point in trade linkages may be related to the
change in the propensity to form a currency union.
Similarly, the existence of a currency union may reflect unmeasured characteristics that also influence
the volume of bilateral international trade. The currency union dummy can get credit for the eﬀects of these
unobserved variables. As examples, compatibility in legal systems, greater cultural links, and tied bilateral
transfers may increase the propensity to form a currency union as well as strengthen trade links between two
countries. In these cases, the OLS estimate of the currency union eﬀect on trade tends to be biased upward.
Other omitted variables may bias OLS estimates in the opposite direction. For example, a higher level of
monopoly power means higher mark-ups, which tend to deter trade. At the same time, a greater degree of
monopoly distortion may lead to higher inflation rates under discretion and, thereby, increase the desire to
join a currency union as a commitment device to reduce inflation.
Persson (2001) voices a diﬀerent critique based on the potential for self-selection in the decision to form
a currency union. Among other distinctive features, countries that have been engaged in currency unions
during the past decades are typically small and poor, tend to be geographically close, and are likely to share
tight cultural links. Examples are the 15 countries of the CFA-franc zone in Africa, the seven members of
19

the Eastern Caribbean Currency Area, and the unilaterally dollarized Panama, Puerto Rico, and Bermuda.
Systematic diﬀerences in observable characteristics can distort OLS estimates when the eﬀect of using the
same currency diﬀers across groups or when there are other types of non-linearities in the trade relation that
have been ignored. Using semi-parametric methods, Persson’s study finds little support for a currency-union
eﬀect on trade; his point estimates, ranging from 13% to 45%, are not statistically significantly diﬀerent from
zero. This result is not surprising, however, because the matching procedure–designed to deal with nonlinearities in observable variables–throws out much of the information in the sample. Moreover, as already
noted, when Rose (2001) applies the matching approach to a broader data set, he obtains an enormous
estimate for the eﬀect of currency union on trade.
Another concern is a mechanical problem caused by sample selection. Previous estimates of the currency
union eﬀect were based on a sample of countries with positive bilateral trade flows. Pairs of countries
with zero trade flows–typically pairs of small countries–were excluded from the sample to satisfy the
log-specification of the gravity equation. This issue may be important because roughly half of the annual
country-pair observations exhibit zero trade.

6.2

The eﬀects of currency unions: new results

To address the various estimation issues, Tenreyro (2002) begins by studying the empirical determinants of
past and present currency unions.24 She uses a probit analysis for all country pairings from 1960 to 1997
with four potential currency anchors: Australia, France, the United Kingdom, and the United States.25 The
anchors used here are diﬀerent from the hypothetical ones considered before for obvious reasons: the euro
did not exist before 2002, and the now defunct French franc was historically an important anchor currency.
Interestingly, the yen was never an anchor for anyone.
The main results, reported in Table 9, are that a currency union with one of the four candidate anchors
is more likely if the client country is (1) closer geographically to the anchor; (2) has the same language as
the anchor; (3) is a former or current colony of the anchor; (4) is poorer in terms of per capita GDP; and
(5) is smaller, in terms of population size. The probability is increasing in the per capita GDP of the anchor
(among the four considered). Elements that do not matter significantly include island or land-locked status
2 4 Persson
2 5 Her

(2001) also modeled the choice of curreny union, but he did not use this analysis to construct instrumental variables.
analysis, unlike Rose’s (2000), treats the CFA countries as in a currency union with France. She also departs from

Rose in treating the ECCA countries as in a currency union with the United States since 1976 and with the United Kingdom
before that.

20

and a common border with the potential anchor.
Our general idea is to use the estimated model for the propensity of a country to enter into a currency
union to form an instrumental variable for the currency-union dummy. However, it does not work directly
to use the estimates from the probit equation because the determinants of the probability of currency union
(such as distance and other gravity variables) also enter directly into the determinants of bilateral trading
volume. Hence, Tenreyro (2002) adopts an indirect approach.
Consider any potential client country, i, which is evaluating the adoption of a currency with one of the
four anchors considered, denoted by k = 1, 2, 3, 4. The probit regression determines the estimated probability,
p(i, k), of the currency adoption. This probability depends on the distance between i and k and the other
variables mentioned above. If the countries take their currency union decisions independently, then the joint
probability that i and j use the currency of anchor k will be given by

J k (i, j) = p(i, k) ∗ p(j, k).
Note that J k (i, j) will be high if countries i and j are both close to potential anchor k. The idea, for example,
is that Ecuador and El Salvador currently share a common money (the U.S. dollar) not because they are
close to each other but, rather, because each is close to the United States and, hence, each was independently
motivated to adopt the U.S. dollar.
The joint probability that i and j use the same foreign currency (among the four candidates considered)
will then be given by the sum of the joint probabilities over the support of potential anchors k:26

J(i, j) =

4
X

J k (i, j) =

k=1

4
X

k=1

p(i, k) ∗ p(j, k).

One can then use the variable J(i, j) as an instrument for the currency-union dummy, for example, in
equations for bilateral trade between countries i and j. The underlying assumption for the validity of this
instrument is that the bilateral trade between countries i and j depends on bilateral gravity variables for
i and j but not on gravity variables involving third countries, notably those associated with the potential
anchor countries k. These gravity variables involving third countries aﬀect the propensity of countries i and
2 6 For

a pair of anchors, say, k1 and k2 , the probability is J(k1 , k2 ) = p(k1 , k2 ) ∗ [1 − p(k1 , k3 ) − p(k1 , k4 )].+p(k1 , k2 ) ∗ [1 −
P4
s=3 p(k1 , ks ) ∗ p(k2 , ks ).

p(k2 , k3 ) − p(k2 , k4 )]+

21

j to be part of the same currency zone and, thereby, influence bilateral trade between i and j through that
channel. However, these variables do not (by assumption) directly influence the bilateral trade between i
and j.
Tenreyro (2002) uses the new instrument for the currency-union dummy to estimate relations for pairs
of countries for trading volume, co-movement of prices, and co-movement of outputs. We present some of
these results in Table 10, which, for brevity, reports only the estimated coeﬃcients of the currency-union
variable.
For bilateral trade, the results use annual data from 1960 to 1997 for all pairs of countries. Taking account
of data availability, this system comprises over 300,000 observations (when we include the roughly half of
the sample that has zeroes for bilateral trade). The dependent variable is measured as log(trade + positive
constant), where the presence of the positive constant allows us to include the zero-trade observations in
the regressions. For the results shown in Table 10, the constant is set to 100 1995 U.S. dollars. The system
includes as independent variables a set of usual gravity measures–log of geographical distance, membership
in a regional trade agreement, common language, former and current colonial relationship, common colonizer,
common border, and island and land-locked status–along with the logs of GDP per capita, population, and
area for each country in a pair.27 The OLS estimates of the gravity variables are typically significant.28
Table 10 shows that the estimated coeﬃcient on the currency-union dummy variable is 0.75 (s.e.=0.20)
when country fixed eﬀects are excluded and 0.91 (0.18) when country fixed eﬀects (not country-pair eﬀects)
are included. These results accord reasonably well with those presented by Rose (2000), despite two major
diﬀerences in the approaches. First, since he used log(trade) as the dependent variable, he discarded all of
the zero trade observations (which, as mentioned, constitute roughly half of the sample). Second, we defined
the currency-union dummy more liberally than Rose, in that we treated the CFA franc countries as in a
union with the French franc and the ECCA countries as in a union with the U.S. dollar or the British pound
(depending on the time period). The estimated eﬀect of the currency-union dummy variable is larger if we
adopt Rose’s more restrictive definition of a currency union.29
More interestingly, the estimated eﬀects of currency union on bilateral trade become larger when we
estimate by instrumental variables, using the instrument discussed before. As shown in Table 10, the estimated coeﬃcient on the currency-union dummy variable becomes 1.56 (0.44) when country fixed eﬀects are
2 7 See

the bottom of Table 10 for the list of independent variables.
error terms in the systems are allowed to be correlated over time for a given country pair.
2 9 The OLS estimates become 1.24 (0.25) without country fixed eﬀects and 1.06 (0.23) with country fixed eﬀects.
2 8 The

22

excluded and 2.70 (0.44) when these fixed eﬀects are included.30 Hence, these results support the argument
that currency union has an important positive eﬀect on bilateral trade. Moreover, these instrumental estimates provide some reason to believe that the causality runs from currency union to trade, rather than the
reverse.
The co-movement of prices is measured by the negative of the standard error V Pij discussed before.
In this case, the sample consists of one observation (estimated for 1960-97) on each country pair for pairs
that have the necessary data. We relate this measure of price co-movement to the gravity variables already
mentioned and to various measures of country size (logs of per capita GDP, population, and area). Most of
the gravity variables turn out to be statistically insignificant in the estimates, although common language
and a common colonial heritage are associated with greater price co-movement. Co-movement also rises with
the log of per capita GDP of each country but falls with the log of area of each country.
Table 10 shows that the currency-union dummy is significantly positive for price co-movement, with an estimated coeﬃcient of 0.069 (s.e.=0.006) when country fixed eﬀects are excluded and 0.046 (0.003) when these
fixed eﬀects are included. These estimated eﬀects are substantial relative to the mean of the co-movement
variable (the negative of the price equation standard deviation) of -0.16. The positive estimated eﬀect of
currency union on price co-movement may emerge because currency-union countries avoid the sometimes
volatile inflation rates and nominal exchange rates that characterize other regimes. The instrumental estimates are even higher than those generated by OLS. In this case, the estimated coeﬃcients are 0.24 (0.02)
when country fixed eﬀects are excluded and 0.087 (0.008) when these fixed eﬀects are included.
The co-movement of outputs is measured by the negative of the standard error V Yij discussed before. The
sample again comprises one observation (estimated for 1960-97) on each country pair with the available data.
The explanatory variables are the same as those used for price co-movements. The main eﬀects from the
gravity variables turn out to be positive relationships with a common border, a common language, and with
prior and current colonial linkages. However, Table 10 shows that the estimated coeﬃcients on the currencyunion dummy variable are typically insignificantly diﬀerent from zero. These results may arise because, as
discussed before, the theoretical link between currency union and output co-movement is ambiguous.
3 0 The

estimated eﬀects are even larger if we adopt Rose’s (2000) more restrictive definition of currency unions. In the

instrumental estimation, the estimated coeﬃcients of the currency-union dummy variable are then 2.72 (0.75) when country
fixed eﬀects are excluded and 4.68 (0.79) when these fixed eﬀects are included.

23

7

Conclusions

The basic message of this paper is two-fold. First, based on the historical data on inflation, trade, and comovements of prices and outputs, we argued that there exist well-defined dollar and euro areas but no clear
yen area. Second, it is likely that the adoption of another’s country’s currency increases bilateral trade and
raises the co-movement of prices. These responses suggest that our examination of the trade patterns and
co-movements that applied before the adoption of a common currency would underestimate the potential
benefits from joining a currency union.
Several issues should be considered in future empirical research. First, the results of the instrumental
estimation for the eﬀects of currency union need to be analyzed more fully. Second, these results can be used
to estimate how the introduction of a currency union would aﬀect trade and the co-movements of prices and
outputs for individual country-pairs under the hypothetical adoption of a currency union with a specified
anchor country. These results would then feed back into our previous analysis of the desirable pattern of
world currency unions. Third, using methodologies analogous to those used in this paper, we can assess
the formation of currency unions that are not linked to a ”major” anchor. For example, we can evaluate
a Latin American currency union or the proposed unions in southern Africa and among the Persian Gulf
states. Fourth, we expect to make particular use of the evidence that accumulates from the experience of
the European Monetary Union.

8

References

References
[1] Alesina, A. and R. Barro (2002). “Currency Unions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 409-36.
[2] Alesina, A., O. Blanchard, J. Gali, F. Giavazzi, and H. Uhlig (2001). Defining Macroeconomic Policy
for Europe, CEPR, London.
[3] Alesina, A. and E. Spolaore (2002). The Size of Nations, Cambridge MA, MIT Press, forthcoming.
[4] Alesina, A., E. Spolaore, and R. Wacziarg (2000). “Economic Integration and Political Disintegration,”
American Economic Review, December, 1276-96.

24

[5] Alesina, A and L. Summers (1993). “Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance,”
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, May.
[6] Anderson, J.and E. van Wincoop (2001). “Borders, Trade and Welfare,” Brookings Trade Forum 2001,
forthcoming.
[7] Barro, R. J. and D. B. Gordon (1983). “Rules, Discretion, and Reputation in a Model of Monetary
Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics, July, 101-121.
[8] Barro, R. and S. Tenreyro (2000), “Closed and Open Economy Models of Business Cycles with MarkedUp and Sticky Prices,” NBER Working Paper No. 8043, December.
[9] Broda, C. (2001). “Terms of Trade and Exchange Rate Regimes in Developing Countries,” American
Economic Review, May.
[10] Buiter, W. (1999). “The EMU and the NAMU: What Is the Case for North American Monetary Union,”
CEPR Working Paper no. 2181.
[11] Calvo, G. and C. Reinhart (2002). “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
[12] Cukierman, A. (1992). Central Bank Strategy, Credibility, and Independence: Theory and Evidence,
Cambridge MA, MIT Press.
[13] De Grauwe, P. and F. Skudelny (2000). “The impact of EMU on Trade Flows”, Weltwirtschaftliches
Archiv, 136.
[14] Eichengreen, B. and D. Irwin (1995). “Trade Blocs, Currency Blocs and the Disintegration of World
Trade in the 1930s,” Journal of International Economics, February 1995.
[15] Engel, C. and A. Rose (2000). “Currency Unions and International Integration,”Journal of Money,
Credit and Banking, forthcoming.
[16] Flandreau, M. and M. Maurel (2001). “Monetary Union, Trade Integration and Business Cycles in 19th
Century Europe: Just Do It,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 3087.
[17] Frankel, J. and A. Rose (1998). “The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency Area Criteria,” Economic
Journal, July, 1009-25.

25

[18] Frankel, J., with E. Stein and S. J. Wei (1997). Regional Trading Blocs in the World Economic System,
Institute for International Economics, Washington, D.C.
[19] Frankel, J. and S. J. Wei. (1992). “Trade Blocs and Currency Blocs,” NBER Working Paper no. 4335,
also in G. de la Dehesa, et al, eds., The Monetary Future of Europe, London, CEPR, 1993.
[20] Gale, D. and X. Vives (2002). “Dollarization, Bailouts, and the Stability of the Banking System,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming.
[21] Gavin, M. and R. Perotti (1997). “Fiscal Policy in Latin America,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual,
Cambridge MA, MIT Press.
[22] Ghosh, A. and H. Wolf (1994). “How Many Monies? A Generic Approach to Finding Optimal Currency
Areas,” NBER Working paper no. 4805.
[23] Glick, R. and A. Rose (2002). “Does a Currency Union Aﬀect Trade? The Time Series Evidence,”
European Economic Review, forthcoming.
[24] Hausmann, R., U. Panizza, and E. Stein (1999). “Why Do Countries Float the Way They Float?”
Interamerican Development Bank working paper no. 418.
[25] Issing O. (2001) ”The Single Monetary Policy of the European Central Bank: One Size Fits All,”
International Finance, 4: 441-62.
[26] Klein, M. (2002). “Dollarization and Trade,” unpublished.
[27] Krugman, P. (1993). “Lessons of Massachusetts for EMU,” in F. Giavazzi and F. Torres, eds., The
Transition to Economic and Monetary Union in Europe, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
[28] Levy Y. E. (2001). “On the Impact of a Common Currency on Bilateral Trade,” unpublished, Universidad Di Tella.
[29] Lopez-Cordova, J. and C. Meissner (2001). “Exchange-Rate Regimes and International Trade: Evidence
from the Classical Gold Standard Era,” unpublished, UC Berkeley.
[30] Imbs, J. (2000). “Co-Fluctuations,” unpublished, London Business School, January.
[31] McCallum, J. (1995). “National Borders Matter: Canadian-U.S. Regional Trade Patterns,” American
Economic Review, June, 615-623.
26

[32] Melitz, Jacques (2001). “Geography, Trade and Currency Unions,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 2987.
[33] Mundell, R. (1961). “A Theory of Optimum Currency Areas,” American Economic Review, September,
657-665.
[34] Nitsch, V. (2002). “Honey, I Shrunk the Currency Union Eﬀect on Trade,” World Economy, forthcoming.
[35] Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoﬀ (2000). “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics: Is There
a Common Cause,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge MA, MIT Press.
[36] Ozcan S., B Sorensen, and O. Yosha (2001). “Economic Integration, Industrial Specialization and the
Asymmetry of Economic Fluctuations,” Journal of International Economics, 107-37.
[37] Ozcan S., B Sorensen, and O. Yosha (2002) “Risk Sharing and Industrial Specialization: Regional and
International Evidence,” unpublished.
[38] Pakko, M. and H. Wall (2001). “Reconsidering the Trade Creating Eﬀect of Currency Unions,” Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, September/October.
[39] Persson, T. (2001). “Currency Union and Trade, How Large Is the Treatment Eﬀect?” Economic Policy,
335-48.
[40] Rose, A. (2000). “One Money One Market: Estimating the Eﬀect of Common Currencies on Trade,”
Economic Policy.
[41] Rose, A. (2002). “The Eﬀect of Common Currencies on International Trade: A Meta-Analysis,” unpublished, UC Berkeley, February.
[42] Rose, A. and E. van Wincoop (2001). “National Money as a Barrier to International Trade: The Real
Case for Currency Union,” American Economic Review, May, 386-90.
[43] Tenreyro, S. (2001). “On the Causes and Consequences of Currency Unions,” unpublished, Harvard
University, December.
[44] Tenreyro, S. (2002). “Economic Eﬀects of Currency Unions,” unpublished, Harvard University, March.
[45] Thom, R. and B. Walsh (2001). “The Eﬀect of a Common Currency on Trade: Ireland Before and After
the Sterling Link,” unpublished.
27

Table 1a. Mean Annual Inflation Rate (percent per year),
1970-1990*
High-Inflation Countries (ranked by inflation rate)**
Nicaragua
Bolivia
Peru
Argentina
Brazil
Vietnam
Uganda
Chile
Cambodia
Israel
Uruguay
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Lebanon
Lao PDR
Mexico
Mozambique
Somalia
Turkey
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Industrial Countries
unweighted mean
Developing Countries, unweighted means
Africa
Asia
Europe

1168
702
531
431
288
213
107
107
80
78
62
49
44
42
41
41
40
39
39
34

Middle East
Western Hemisphere

19.6
98.6

*Based on GDP deflators. Source: WDI 2001.
**This group includes only countries with 1997 population above 500,000.

9.8
16.3
17.4
6.9

Table 1b. Inflation Rate Variability (percent per year),
1970-1990*
Countries with High Inflation Variability
(ranked by standard deviation of inflation)**
Nicaragua
Bolivia
Peru
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Vietnam
Israel
Cambodia
Uganda
Mozambique
Somalia
Oman
Lebanon
Kuwait
Uruguay
Guinea-Bissau
Mexico
Guyana
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Industrial Countries
unweighted mean
Developing Countries, unweighted means
Africa
Asia
Europe
Middle East
Western Hemisphere

3197
2684
1575
749
589
170
160
95
63
63
52
50
46
41
38
38
37
37
36
36
4.6
13.9
14.0
6.6
28.4
251.2

*Std. dev. of annual inflation rates, based on GDP deflators. Source: WDI 2001.

**This group includes only countries with 1997 population above 500,000.

Table 2a. Average Trade-to-GDP Ratio with U.S.
(percent), 1960-1997*
High Trade-Ratio Countries**
Trinidad and Tobago
Honduras
Guyana
Jamaica
Angola
Canada
Dominican Republic
Nigeria
Singapore
Panama
Nicaragua
Venezuela
Costa Rica
Hong Kong
Ecuador
Haiti
Mexico
Gabon
Congo, Rep.
Guatemala

29.6%
24.3%
23.0%
19.4%
19.0%
18.3%
16.8%
15.0%
13.2%
12.2%
12.1%
11.7%
11.3%
11.0%
9.9%
9.6%
8.7%
8.0%
7.9%
7.5%

Industrial Countries
unweighted mean

2.5%

Developing Countries, unweighted means
Africa
Asia
Europe
Middle East
Western Hemisphere

3.3%
3.7%
0.8%
4.2%
12.9%

*Trade is the average of imports and exports. (Imports is the average of the
values reported by the importer and the exporter. Idem for exports.)
Averages are for 1960-97 (when GDP data are not available, the average
corresponds to the period of availability). The equations for co-movement
include only one observation for each pair, corresponding to the period 196097. The explanatory variables then refer to averages over time. Source: Glick
& Rose (trade values); WDI 2001 (GDP).
**This group includes only countries with 1997 population above 500,000.

Table 2b. Average Trade-to-GDP Ratio with Euro_12,
1960-1997*
High Trade-Ratio Countries**
Mauritania
Congo, Rep.
Guinea-Bissau
Cote d'Ivoire
Algeria
Belgium-Lux.
Gabon
Togo
Nigeria
Tunisia
Gambia, The
Senegal
Comoros
Netherlands
Oman
Cameroon
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Slovenia
Angola
Syrian Arab Republic
Industrial Countries
unweighted mean
Developing Countries, unweighted means
Africa
Asia
Europe
Middle East
Western Hemisphere

34.8%
28.3%
27.5%
24.5%
24.4%
23.4%
23.0%
22.9%
22.8%
20.9%
20.6%
20.4%
19.3%
18.2%
17.7%
17.3%
17.0%
16.9%
15.6%
15.2%
7.3%
14.2%
4.3%
7.0%
11.6%
8.3%

*Trade is the average of imports and exports. (Imports is the average of the
values reported by the importer and the exporter. Idem for exports.)
Averages are for 1960-97 (when GDP data are not available, the average
corresponds to the period of availability). Source: Glick & Rose (trade
values); WDI 2001 (GDP). For a Euro-12 country, the trade ratios apply to
the other 11 countries.
**This group includes only countries with 1997 population above 500,000.

Table 2c. Average Trade-to-GDP Ratio with Japan,
1960-1997*
High Trade-Ratio Countries**
Oman
United Arab Emirates
Panama
Singapore
Kuwait
Malaysia
Papua New Guinea
Bahrain
Saudi Arabia
Hong Kong, China
Indonesia
Swaziland
Thailand
Gambia, The
Mauritania
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Philippines
Korea, Rep.
Nicaragua
Fiji
Industrial Countries
unweighted mean
Developing Countries, unweighted means
Africa
Asia
Europe
Middle East
Western Hemisphere

16.0%
15.7%
14.1%
12.8%
9.5%
9.5%
9.2%
8.4%
8.0%
7.9%
7.8%
6.5%
5.6%
5.5%
5.4%
5.4%
4.8%
4.1%
3.9%
3.7%
0.8%
1.4%
5.5%
0.3%
6.1%
2.0%

*Trade is the average of imports and exports. (Imports is the average of the
values reported by the importer and the exporter. Idem for exports.) Averages
are for 1960-97 (when GDP data are not available, the average corresponds to
the period of availability). Source: Glick & Rose (trade values); WDI 2001
(GDP).
**This group includes only countries with 1997 population above 500,000.

Table 3a. Co-Movement of Prices with U.S.,
1960-1997*
High Co-Movement Countries**
Puerto Rico
Panama
Canada
El Salvador
Singapore
Thailand
Guinea
Bahrain
Hong Kong, China
Honduras
Malaysia
Saudi Arabia
Australia
Fiji
Hungary
Egypt, Arab Rep.
Cyprus
Tunisia
New Zealand
Norway
Industrial Countries
unweighted mean
Developing Countries, unweighted means
Africa
Asia
Europe
Middle East
Western Hemisphere

0.0193
0.0244
0.0335
0.0340
0.0444
0.0529
0.0545
0.0563
0.0566
0.0571
0.0609
0.0646
0.0664
0.0666
0.0673
0.0681
0.0687
0.0689
0.0691
0.0671
0.0830
0.1445
0.0913
0.1107
0.1348
0.1040

*The table shows the value VP, the standard error of the residual for the AR-2
regression for the log of the real exchange rate. In some cases, the sample
differs from 1960-97.
**This group includes only countries with 1997 population above 500,000.

Table 3b. Co-Movement of Prices with Euro-12,
1960-1997*
High Co-Movement Countries**
Austria
Netherlands
Denmark
Belgium
Germany
France
Norway
Switzerland
Ireland
Morocco
Italy
Portugal
Sweden
Spain
Greece
Tunisia
Cyprus
Finland
United Kingdom
New Zealand
Industrial Countries
unweighted mean
Developing Countries, unweighted means
Africa
Asia
Europe
Middle East
Western Hemisphere

0.0196
0.0217
0.0219
0.0242
0.0328
0.0338
0.0363
0.0395
0.0397
0.0426
0.0478
0.0480
0.0489
0.0491
0.0510
0.0529
0.0536
0.0552
0.0616
0.0678
0.0507
0.1403
0.1103
0.1152
0.1607
0.1350

*The table shows the value VP, the standard error of the residual for the AR2 regression for the log of the real exchange rate. For a member of the Euro12, the co-movement is in relation to the other 11 countries. In some cases,
the sample differs from 1960-97.
**This group includes only countries with 1997 population above 500,000.

Table 3c. Co-Movement of Prices with Japan,
1960-1997*
High Co-Movement Countries**
Switzerland
Austria
Germany
New Zealand
Netherlands
Denmark
Belgium
Papua New Guinea
Thailand
Cyprus
Singapore
France
Norway
Morocco
United States
Australia
Panama
Malaysia
Tunisia
Puerto Rico
Industrial Countries
unweighted mean
Developing Countries, unweighted means
Africa
Asia
Europe
Middle East
Western Hemisphere

0.0713
0.0719
0.0776
0.0791
0.0805
0.0810
0.0816
0.0827
0.0841
0.0845
0.0866
0.0883
0.0883
0.0918
0.0924
0.0940
0.0944
0.0947
0.0960
0.0961
0.0919
0.1647
0.1237
0.1307
0.1730
0.1465

*The table shows the value VP, the standard error of the residual for the AR-2
regression for the log of the real exchange rate. In some cases, the sample
differs from 1960-97.
**This group includes only countries with 1997 population above 500,000.

Table 4a. Co-Movement of Outputs with U.S.,
1960-1997*
High Co-Movement Countries**
Canada
United Kingdom
Australia
Germany
Netherlands
France
Colombia
Puerto Rico
Denmark
Norway
Italy
Spain
Honduras
Belgium
Sweden
Switzerland
Costa Rica
Austria
Japan
Guatemala
Industrial Countries
unweighted mean
Developing Countries, unweighted means
Africa
Asia
Europe
Middle East
Western Hemisphere

0.0135
0.0150
0.0175
0.0196
0.0197
0.0200
0.0205
0.0216
0.0217
0.0224
0.0230
0.0238
0.0251
0.0253
0.0254
0.0256
0.0258
0.0261
0.0265
0.0265
0.0251
0.0591
0.0524
0.0449
0.0749
0.0442

Note: The table shows the value VY, the standard error of the residual for the
AR-2 regression for the log of the ratio of real per capita GDPs. In some
cases, the sample differs from 1960-97.
**This group includes only countries with 1997 population above 500,000.

Table 4b. Co-Movement of Outputs with Euro-12,
1960-1997*
High Co-Movement Countries**
France
Belgium
Netherlands
Austria
Colombia
Italy
Germany
Sweden
Spain
Switzerland
United Kingdom
Denmark
United States
Canada
Japan
Puerto Rico
Norway
Guatemala
Australia
Cyprus
Industrial Countries
unweighted mean
Developing Countries, unweighted means
Africa
Asia
Europe
Middle East
Western Hemisphere

0.0094
0.0108
0.0116
0.0131
0.0145
0.0154
0.0154
0.0165
0.0165
0.0168
0.0170
0.0177
0.0185
0.0187
0.0202
0.0205
0.0210
0.0220
0.0222
0.0227
0.0198
0.0557
0.0500
0.0421
0.0713
0.0426

Note: The table shows the value VY, the standard error of the residual for the
AR-2 regression for the log of the ratio of real per capita GDPs. In some
cases, the sample differs from 1960-97. For a member of the Euro-12, the comovement is in relation to the other 11 countries.
**This group includes only countries with 1997 population above 500,000.

Table 4c. Co-Movement of Outputs with Japan,
1960-1997*
High Co-Movement Countries**
France
United Kingdom
Germany
Austria
Netherlands
Italy
Belgium
Colombia
Australia
Sweden
Greece
Switzerland
Puerto Rico
Denmark
United States
Sri Lanka
Spain
Thailand
Cyprus
Canada
Industrial Countries
unweighted mean
Developing Countries, unweighted means
Africa
Asia
Europe
Middle East
Western Hemisphere

0.0214
0.0217
0.0229
0.0234
0.0235
0.0236
0.0243
0.0252
0.0254
0.0256
0.0260
0.0262
0.0262
0.0265
0.0265
0.0271
0.0272
0.0282
0.0286
0.0296
0.0282
0.0596
0.0541
0.0443
0.0748
0.0463

Note: The table shows the value VY, the standard error of the residual for the
AR-2 regression for the log of the ratio of real per capita GDPs. In some cases,
the sample differs from 1960-97.
**This group includes only countries with 1997 population above 500,000.

Table 5. High-Inflation Countries.* Trade Ratios and Co-Movements with U.S., Euro-12, and Japan

Country Name

Nicaragua
Bolivia
Peru
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Israel
Uruguay
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Mexico
Turkey
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Guinea-Bissau
Ecuador
Colombia
Guyana
Costa Rica
Venezuela, RB
Paraguay
Nigeria
Jamaica
Portugal
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Oman
Greece
Dominican Republic
Indonesia

Mean Annual
Trade Ratio Trade Ratio Trade Ratio
Inflation Rate
with US
with Euro-12 with Japan
(%)
1168
702
531
431
288
107
78
62
49
41
39
39
34
30
25
23
22
20
18
18
18
17
16
16
16
16
15
15

0.121
0.053
0.035
0.009
0.015
0.047
0.052
0.014
0.033
0.087
0.011
0.056
0.049
0.014
0.099
0.045
0.230
0.113
0.117
0.024
0.150
0.194
0.011
0.031
0.036
0.008
0.168
0.040

0.079
0.032
0.024
0.017
0.015
0.051
0.069
0.027
0.170
0.013
0.046
0.108
0.123
0.275
0.043
0.027
0.094
0.049
0.040
0.034
0.228
0.031
0.077
0.123
0.177
0.061
0.031
0.028

0.039
0.014
0.011
0.003
0.004
0.021
0.007
0.002
0.010
0.006
0.003
0.024
0.025
0.018
0.017
0.006
0.035
0.013
0.010
0.008
0.025
0.011
0.003
0.054
0.160
0.006
0.011
0.078

VP with US

0.521
0.105
0.135
0.255
0.122
0.116
0.092
0.158
0.170
0.111
0.116
0.231
0.207
0.156
0.072
0.071
0.117
0.109
0.112
0.109
0.160
0.113
0.083
0.479
0.125
0.075
0.096
0.122

VP with Euro12
0.530
0.155
0.134
0.230
0.133
0.139
0.099
0.154
0.163
0.160
0.113
0.248
0.254
0.142
0.114
0.098
0.155
0.110
0.144
0.119
0.195
0.135
0.048
0.467
0.145
0.051
0.114
0.148

VP with
Japan
0.551
0.150
0.157
0.251
0.155
0.140
0.124
0.174
0.179
0.165
0.138
0.253
0.249
0.174
0.113
0.116
0.151
0.141
0.147
0.125
0.213
0.145
0.096
0.497
0.162
0.097
0.134
0.151

VY with US

0.078
0.043
0.057
0.060
0.042
0.050
0.038
0.038
0.054
0.036
0.036
0.047
0.058
0.063
0.042
0.020
0.058
0.026
0.044
0.037
0.082
0.050
0.035
0.073
0.120
0.029
0.057
0.031

VY with
Euro-12
0.077
0.043
0.055
0.056
0.035
0.052
0.032
0.038
0.052
0.036
0.038
0.042
0.050
0.063
0.040
0.014
0.058
0.029
0.040
0.034
0.070
0.046
0.028
0.066
0.118
0.024
0.053
0.030

VY with
Japan
0.082
0.049
0.060
0.062
0.041
0.058
0.039
0.043
0.057
0.036
0.042
0.048
0.056
0.062
0.041
0.025
0.062
0.040
0.043
0.040
0.079
0.044
0.030
0.069
0.112
0.026
0.056
0.033

*Only countries with population above 500,000 are considered. For euro-12 members, co-movements are computed in relation to the other 11 countries. High-inflation countries with
no data on VY or VP are not reported in the table.

Table 6. High-Inflation Countries
Best Anchor Based on the Three Criteria

Country
Nicaragua
Bolivia
Peru
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Israel
Uruguay
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Mexico
Turkey
Ghana
Sierra Leone
Guinea-Bissau
Ecuador
Colombia
Guyana
Costa Rica
Venezuela
Paraguay
Nigeria
Jamaica
Portugal
Iran
Oman
Greece
Dominican Republic
Indonesia

Mean Annual
Inflation Rate

Trade

VP

VY

1168.4
702.4
530.7
430.8
288.4
106.9
78.2
62.2
48.7
41.0
39.4
38.7
34.2
30.5
25.0
22.7
22.3
20.0
18.5
17.8
17.5
16.6
16.2
16.1
16.0
15.6
15.1
15.0

US
US
US
Euro
US
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
US
US
US
US
US
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
US
Japan

US
US
Euro
Euro
US
US
US
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
US
US
Euro
US
US
US
US
US
US
US
US
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
US
US

Euro
US
Euro
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
US/Euro
Euro
Euro/Japan
US
Euro
Euro
Japan
Euro
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
Euro
Euro
Japan
Euro
Euro
Japan
Euro
Euro
Euro

Note: The table excludes countries with 1997 population below 500,000 and countries for
which VP or VY are not available. Bold values apply if 1) highest trade share less second
highest trade exceeds 0.04; 2) magnitude of difference between lowest VP and next lowest
VP exceeds 0.025; or 3) magnitude of difference between lowest VY and next lowest VY
exceeds 0.005.

Table 7. High Trade-Share Countries
Best Anchor Based on the Three Criteria
Country
Algeria
Austria
Belgium-Lux***
Benin
Cameroon
Canada
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo, Dem. Rep.
Congo, Rep.
Costa Rica
Cote d'Ivoire
Cyprus
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Gabon
Gambia, The
Ghana
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hong Kong, China
Iran, Islamic Rep.
Ireland
Jamaica
Jordan
Kenya
Madagascar
Malaysia
Mauritania
Mauritius
Morocco
Netherlands

Trade*

VP**

VY**

Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
Euro
US
US
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
US/Euro
US
US
US
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
Euro
Euro
Japan
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro

Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
Euro
US
US
Euro
US
US
Euro
US
US
US
US
Euro
Euro
US
US
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro

Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
US
US
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
US
Japan
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
Japan
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
Euro
Euro
Japan
Euro
US/Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
Euro

Table 7 (continued). High Trade-Share Countries
Best Anchor Based on the Three Criteria
Country
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Oman
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Romania
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
United Arab Emirates
Venezuela, RB

Trade*

VP**

VY**

US
Euro
Euro/US
Euro/Japan
Japan/US
Japan
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
US/Japan
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
Japan/Euro
US

US
Euro
US
US
US
US
US
US
Euro
US
US
Euro
Euro
US
Euro
US
Euro
US
US

Euro
Euro
Euro
Japan
Euro
Japan
Euro
US/Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro
Euro

*The table excludes countries with 1997 population below 500,000 and countries for
which VP or VY are not available. The best anchor according to the trade criterion is
shown only when the trade share exceeds 9%. When there is more than one anchor
country for which the trade share exceeds 9%, we list the anchors in descending order
of the trade shares.
**Bold values apply if the magnitude of the difference between the lowest VP and the
next lowest VP exceeds 0.025 or the magnitude of the difference between the lowest
VY and the next lowest VY exceeds 0.005.

Table 8
Empirical Studies of the Effect of Currency Union on Trade

Authors

Rose (2000)
Frankel and Rose (2002)
Engel and Rose (2002)
Persson (2001)
Tenreyro (2001)
Pakko and Wall (2001)
Glick and Rose (2001)
Rose and van Wincoop (2001)
Rose (2001)
Lopez-C. and Meissner (2001)
Levy Y. (2001)
Nitsch (2002)
Flandreau and Maurel (2001)
Klein (2002)

Significance

Point estimate of
increased trade from
currency union

s
s
s
ns
ns
ns
s
s
ns, s
s
s
s
s
s

around 240%
around 290%
around 240%
around 40%
around 60%
around -55%
around 100%
around 140%
-68%-708%
around 100%
around 50%
around 85%
around 220%
around 50%

Note: s=statistically significantly different from zero, ns=not significant.

Table 9. Propensity to Adopt the Currency of Main Anchors
Dependent Variable: Currency Union Dummy
Coefficient
min (log of per capita GDP in pair )
max (log of per capita GDP in pair )
min (log of population in pair )
max (log of population in pair )
min (log of area in pair )
max (log of area in pair )
regional trade agreement dummy
log of distance (km)
border contiguity dummy
landlocked client dummy
one island in pair dummy
two islands in pair dummy
common language dummy
ex colony-colonizer dummy
current colony (or territory) dummy
Pseudo R-squared
Number of observations

-0.1586
1.7167
-0.1352
0.2372
-0.0546
0.2181
-0.8864
-0.8766
-1.2398
-0.1522
0.0226
1.1880
0.7487
1.8799
0.8491
0.473
29564

Std. Error
*
*
*

*
*
*
*

*
*
*
*

0.061
0.385
0.048
0.127
0.046
0.072
0.277
0.143
0.619
0.242
0.240
0.437
0.216
0.285
0.239

Marginal
Effect at
Mean
-0.0015
0.0163
-0.0013
0.0023
-0.0005
0.0021
-0.0032
-0.0083
-0.0033
-0.0013
0.0002
0.0512
0.0124
0.1369
0.0253

Notes: The sample consists of country pairs that include the four candidate anchors, Australia, France, U.K.,
and U.S. The equations are for annual data from 1960 to 1997, include year effects, and allow for clustering
over time for country pairs. The definition of currency union treats the CFA franc countries as linked to France
and treats the ECCA countries as linked to the U.S. since 1976 and to the U.K. before 1976. The mean of the
currency-union dummy for this sample is 0.051. For the sample that regards the CFA countries as unlinked to
France and the ECCA countries as unlinked to the U.S. or the U.K., the mean is 0.024. The last column shows
the marginal effect, evaluated at the sample mean, of each explanatory variable on the estimated probability of
a currency union. For dummy variables, the effect refers to a shift from zero to one.
*statistically significant at 1% level.

Table 10. Estimated Coefficients of Currency-Union Dummy in Various Systems
System

OLS

OLS with country
effects

IV

IV with country
effects

log (bilateral trade+100),
N=348,295

0.75
(0.20)

0.91
(0.18)

1.56
(0.44)

2.70
(0.44)

Co-movement of
prices, mean=-0.16,
N=9027

0.0690
(0.0058)

0.0456
(0.0028)

0.2433
(0.0243)

0.0874
(0.0080)

Co-movement of
outputs, mean=-0.07,
N=7610

0.0029
(0.0026)

0.0000
(0.0011)

0.0119
(0.0061)

-0.0020
(0.0022)

Notes: The equations for bilateral trade use annual data from 1960 to 1997, include year effects, and allow for clustering of the error
terms over time for country pairs. The dependent variable is log(trade+100), where trade is measured in 1995 U.S. dollars. The value
100 is close to the maximum-likelood estimate of the constant in the expression log(trade+constant). The explanatory variables included,
aside from the currency-union dummy, are log(distance); dummy variables for contiguity, common language, colonial relationships, landlocked, and island; and the values for each country in the pair of log(per capita GDP), log(population), and log(area). The definition of
currency union treats the CFA franc countries as linked to France and treats the ECCA countries as linked to the U.S. since 1976 and to
the U.K. before 1976. Country effects refer to each member of the pair (not to a country-pair). The instrumental variable (IV) systems
include as an instrument for the currency-union dummy the variable described in the text.
The equations for co-movement include only one observation for each pair, corresponding to the period 1960-97. The explanatory
variables then refer to averages over time. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Number of Countries
25

20

15

10

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20

-25
1870-4
1875-9
1880-4
1885-9
1890-4
1895-9
1900-4

Figure 1. Countries Created and Destroyed
(5-year periods, excludes Sub-Saharan Africa)

1905-9
1910-4
1915-9
1920-4
1925-9
Year

1930-4
1935-9
1940-4
1945-9
1950-4
1955-9
1960-4
1965-9
1970-4

1980-4
1985-9
1990-4

Destroyed
Created

1975-9

Figure 2. Trade Openness and the Number of Countries
210

0.7

Number of Countries (excl. Sub-Saharan Africa)

Number of Countries (incl. Sub-Saharan Africa)

190

0.6
Trade to GDP Ratio ( average of France, UK, Denmark,
Italy, Norway, Portugal, Australia, Brazil, Sweden)

170

0.5

0.4

130

110

0.3

90
0.2
70
0.1
50

Year

1996

1993

1990

1987

1984

1981

1978

1975

1972

1969

1966

1963

1960

1957

1954

1951

1948

1945

1942

1939

1936

1933

1930

1927

1924

1921

1918

1915

1912

1909

1906

1903

1900

1897

1894

1891

1888

1885

1882

1879

1876

0
1873

30

Trade to GDP Ratio

150

1870

Number of Countries

Trade to GDP Ratio (average of 61 countries since 1950)

