                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           EDUCATION, POVERTY, POLITICAL VIOLENCE AND TERRORISM:
                       IS THERE A CAUSAL CONNECTION?


                                            Alan B. Krueger
                                            Jitka Maleckova


                                          Working Paper 9074
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9074


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002




We thank Claude Berrebi for excellent research assistance, Eli Hurvitz, Ayoub Mustafa, Adib Nehmeh and
Zeina el Khalil for providing data, and Joshua Angrist, Fran Blau, Mia Bloom, Yinon Cohen, Jed Devaro,
Guido Imbens, Christina Paxson, Jessica Stern and Elie Tamer for helpful discussions and comments. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Alan B. Krueger and Jitka Maleckova. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Education, Poverty, Political Violence and Terrorism:
Is There a Causal Connection?
Alan B. Krueger and Jitka Maleckova
NBER Working Paper No. 9074
July 2002
JEL No. J2



                                               ABSTRACT

        The paper investigates whether there is a causal link between poverty or low education and
participation in politically motivated violence and terrorist activities. After presenting a discussion of
theoretical issues, we review evidence on the determinants of hate crimes. This literature finds that the
occurrence of hate crimes is largely independent of economic conditions. Next we analyze data on
support for attacks against Israeli targets from public opinion polls conducted in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip. These polls indicate that support for violent attacks does not decrease among those with higher
education and higher living standards. The core contribution of the paper is a statistical analysis of the
determinants of participation in Hezbollah militant activities in Lebanon. The evidence we have
assembled suggests that having a living standard above the poverty line or a secondary school or higher
education is positively associated with participation in Hezbollah. We also find that Israeli Jewish settlers
who attacked Palestinians in the West Bank in the early 1980s were overwhelmingly from high-paying
occupations. The conclusion speculates on why economic conditions and education are largely unrelated
to participation in, and support for, terrorism.




Alan B. Krueger                                           Jitka Maleckova
Woodrow Wilson School                                     Institute for Near Eastern and African Studies
Princeton University                                      Charles University in Prague
Princeton, NJ 08544                                       Celetna 20
and NBER                                                  100 00 Praha 1, Czech Republic
akrueger@pucc.princeton.edu                               jitka.maleckova@ff.cuni.cz
Introduction

        That investment in education is critical for economic growth, improved health,

and social progress is beyond question. That poverty is a scourge that the international

aid community and industrialized countries should work to eradicate is also beyond

question. What is less clear, however, is whether poverty and low education are root

causes of terrorism. This paper investigates whether there is a causal link between

poverty or low education and support for terrorist activities and politically motivated

violence.

        In the aftermath of the tragic events of September 11th, several prominent

observers – ranging from former United States Presidential candidate George McGovern

to President George W. Bush, as well as academics, including Joseph Nye, Dean of the

Kennedy School of Government, Laura Tyson, Dean of the London Business School, and

Richard Sokolsky and Joseph McMillan of the National Defense University – have called

for increased aid and educational assistance to end terrorism.1 Perhaps surprisingly, our

review of the evidence provides little reason for optimism that a reduction in poverty or

an increase in educational attainment, by themselves, would meaningfully reduce

international terrorism. Any connection between poverty, education and terrorism is

indirect, complicated and probably quite weak. Instead of viewing terrorism as a direct

response to low market opportunities or ignorance, we suggest it is more accurately

viewed as a response to political conditions and long-standing feelings (either perceived

or real) of indignity and frustration that have little to do with economics.

1
  After refraining from drawing a connection between poverty and terrorism for a time, on March 23, 2002
President Bush announced in Monterrey, Mexico, “We fight against poverty because hope is an answer to
terror.” See Laura Tyson, “It’s Time to Step Up the Global War on Poverty” Business Week, Dec. 3, 2001,
Richard Sokolsky and Joseph McMillan, “Foreign Aid in our Own Defense,” New York Times Op-ed,



                                                   1
        An understanding of the causes of terrorism is essential if an effective strategy is

to be crafted to combat it. Moreover, drawing a connection between poverty and

terrorism if it is not justified is potentially quite dangerous as the international aid

community may lose interest in providing support to developing nations when the

imminent threat of terrorism recedes, much like support for development waned in the

aftermath of the Cold War. And connecting foreign aid with terrorism risks the

possibility of humiliating many in less developed countries, who are implicitly told they

only receive aid to prevent them from committing acts of terror. Furthermore, premising

foreign aid on the threat of terrorism could create perverse incentives in which some

groups are induced to engage in terrorism to increase their prospect of receiving aid. In

our view, alleviating poverty is reason enough to pressure economically advanced

countries to provide more aid than they are currently giving.

        To make any headway investigating the determinants of terrorism, one must have

a working definition of terrorism. This is a difficult task. More than 100 diplomatic or

scholarly definitions exist. The types of activities by various groups considered terrorist

acts differ substantially across the definitions. The term terrorism has also evolved over

time. When first used in a political context during the French Revolution, the term was

reserved for accusations against those who, like Robespierre, made use of violence in the

name of the state. By the late 19th Century, however, Russian and French anarchists

proudly used the term terrorism to describe their violent endeavors against the state. Part

of the difficulty in defining terrorism is that there are valid disputes as to which party is a

legitimate government. During World War II, for example, the German occupation


February 12, 2002, and George McGovern, “The Healing in Helping the World’s Poor,” New York Times
Op-ed, January 1, 2002.


                                                 2
forces labeled members of resistance groups as terrorists. “One man’s terrorist,” the

saying goes, “is another’s freedom fighter.”

       There is a range of possible definitions. On the one hand, the U.S. State

Department, which acknowledges that no single definition of terrorism has gained

universal acceptance, seems to capture what is considered terrorism by many

governments and international organizations. Since 1983, the State Department has

employed the following definition for statistical and analytical purposes:

         The term ‘terrorism’ means premeditated, politically motivated
         violence perpetrated against noncombatant targets by subnational
         groups or clandestine agents, usually intended to influence an audience.

         The term ‘international terrorism’ means terrorism involving citizens
         or the territory of more than one country.

The State Department also specifies that “the term noncombatant is interpreted to

include, in addition to civilians, military personnel who at the time of the incident are

unarmed and/or not on duty. … We also consider as acts of terrorism attacks on military

installations or on armed military personnel when a state of military hostilities does not

exist at the site, such as bombings against U.S. bases in the Persian Gulf, Europe, or

elsewhere.” The rub, of course, is that the definition of “subnational” and “military

hostilities” leaves much latitude for disagreement.

       On the other hand, definitions used by scholars tend to place more emphasis on

the intention of terrorists to cause fear and terror among a target audience with the aim of

persuasion that transcends the harm caused to the immediate victims. Scholarly

definitions often also include nation states as potential perpetrators of terrorism.

       Rather than dogmatically adhere to one definition, we analyze involvement in, or

support for, activities that, at least when judged by some parties, constitute terrorism.



                                               3
Nevertheless, in the incidents analyzed in our paper the line between terrorism and

resistance is often blurred; indeed, in the case of Hezbollah in the 1980s we think it is fair

to say that terrorism was a tactic sometimes used in resistance against an occupying

force. A similar statement could be made about Palestinian militance. At the least,

however, all of the cases we examine could be thought of as involving politically

motivated violence. Moreover, it is reassuring that our main conclusions appear to hold

across a varying set of circumstances, cultures and countries.

       We do not examine state terrorism because we suspect the process underlying

participation in state terrorism is quite different than the process underlying substate

terrorism, and would involve a different type of analysis. We do not dispute, however,

that state terrorism exists, and has at times generated substate terrorism as a response.

       In the next section we provide an overview of theoretical considerations involved

in the decision to participate in terrorist-type activities. As is conventional in economics,

involvement in terrorism is viewed as a rational decision, depending on the benefits, costs

and risks involved from engagement in terrorism compared to other activities. Not

surprisingly, the standard rational choice framework does not yield an unambiguous

answer to the question of whether higher income and more education would reduce

participation in terrorism.

       Evidence on the determinants of terrorism is just beginning to be assembled. The

second section of our paper considers evidence on “hate crimes,” which we argue can be

viewed as a close cousin to terrorism in that the target of the offense is selected because

of his or her group identity, not their individual behavior, and because the effect of both

is to wreak terror in a wider audience than those directly affected. A consensus is




                                              4
emerging in the social science literature that the incidence of hate crimes, such as

lynchings of African Americans or violence against Turks in Germany, bears little

relation to economic conditions.

       The third section considers data from a public opinion poll conducted in the West

Bank and Gaza Strip by the Palestinian Center for Policy and Survey Research (PCPSR).

In December 2001, Palestinians were asked whether they support attacks on Israeli

civilian and military targets, and about whether they considered certain events acts of

terrorism. We report breakdowns of the data by education and occupation. These results

indicate that support for violence against Israeli targets is widespread in the Palestinian

population, and at least as great among those with higher education and higher living

standards as it is among the unemployed and illiterate.

       The fourth section contains the main new contribution of our paper, a statistical

analysis of the determinants of participation in Hezbollah in Lebanon. We analyze a

sample of data that combines information on 129 members of Hezbollah who were killed

primarily while involved in paramilitary actions in the late 1980s and early 1990s with a

general population survey of similarly aged individuals in Lebanon. We find that

education and poverty are statistically insignificant predictors of whether individuals

become martyrs for Hezbollah. Indeed, having a standard of living above the poverty

line or a secondary-school education or higher is positively associated with participation

in Hezbollah. The results are consistent with the biographical evidence assembled for

Palestinian suicide bombers.

       The fifth section presents a summary of the backgrounds of 27 Israeli Jews who

were involved in terrorist activities in the Occupied Territories in the early 1980s. These




                                              5
individuals, who planted bombs and attempted to assassinate Palestinian mayors, are

remarkably well educated and drawn from well paying occupations.

        In the sixth section we present an analysis of the incidence of major terrorist acts

(cited in the International Encyclopedia of Terrorism) over time in Israel. Specifically,

we relate the number of terrorist acts each year to the rate of economic growth in that

year or in the recent past.

        The data on participation and support for political violence, militance and/or

terrorism that we examine are meager, often indirect, and possibly nonrepresentative. In

addition, participation in terrorist activities may be highly context-specific, and we only

examine terrorism, militance and politically motivated violence in a small number of

settings primarily in the Middle East. Consequently, our results must be considered

tentative and exploratory. Nonetheless, we are not aware of compelling evidence that

points in the opposite direction from what we have found. In light of our results and the

literature, we would urge intellectuals and policy makers to exercise caution in presuming

that poverty and education have a direct, causal impact on terrorism.


1. Theoretical Considerations of Participation in Terrorism

        A simple view of terrorism is that participation in terrorism is akin to participation

in crime in general. Economists have a well worked out and empirically successful

theory of participation in criminal activities. As emphasized by Becker (1968),

individuals should choose to allocate their time between working in the legal job market

or working in criminal activities in such a way that maximizes their utility. After

accounting for the risk of being caught and penalized, the size of the penalty, and any

stigma or moral distress associated with involvement in crime, those who receive higher



                                              6
income from criminal activities would choose involvement in crime. In this model, crime

increases as one’s market wage falls relative to the rewards associated with crime, and

decreases if the risk of being apprehended after committing a crime or the penalty for

being convicted of a crime rises.

           Available evidence suggests that individuals are more likely to commit property

crimes if they have lower wages or less education.2 The occurrence of violent crimes,

including murders, however, is typically found to be unrelated to economic

opportunities.3

           Landes (1978) and Sandler, et al. (1983) apply the economic model of crime to

transnational terrorism. They focus on how an increase in penalties and law enforcement

influences the incentive to partake in terrorist activities. The economic model, however,

yields few concrete predictions insofar as the relationship between market opportunities

and participation in terrorism is concerned because participation in terrorist acts by

individuals with different characteristics depends on the probability that participation will

bring about the desired political change, and the differential payoff for the various groups

associated with achieving the terrorists’ desired aims versus the penalties associated with

failure. For example, it is possible that well educated individuals will disproportionately

participate in terrorist groups if they think that they will assume leadership positions if

they succeed, or if they identify more strongly with the goals of the terrorist organization

than less educated individuals.

           Other important considerations include the relative pay of skilled and unskilled

individuals for participation in terrorist organizations and how it compares to relative pay


2
    See, for example, Ehrlich (1973), Freeman (1996), and Piehl (1998).
3
    See, for example, Piehl (1998) and Ruhm (2000).


                                                      7
in the legal sector, and the selection of terrorists by terrorist organizations from the pool

of potential applicants. Keller (2002) reported that Iraq decided to increase the payment

to families of suicide bombers from $10,000 to $25,000 in March 2002 in the West Bank

and Gaza Strip. In the month after that decision, suicide bombings increased, although it

is unclear whether the connection is causal.

        Even before the increase in the payment to families of suicide bombers, Nasra

Hassan (2001) reported that there was an excess supply of willing suicide bombers.

Between 1996 and 1999, Ms. Hassan, a relief worker for the U.N., interviewed nearly

250 militants and associates of militants involved in the Palestinian cause, including

failed suicide bombers, the families of deceased bombers, and those who trained and

prepared suicide bombers for their missions.4 One Hamas leader Ms. Hassan interviewed

said, “Our biggest problem is the hordes of young men who beat on our doors, clamoring

to be sent [on suicide missions]. It is difficult to select only a few.” Another senior

member of Hamas’s al-Qassam said, “The selection process is complicated by the fact

that so many wish to embark on this journey of honor. When one is selected, countless

others are disappointed.” Thus, the demand side is also part of the equation.

        With a queue of willing participants, how do terrorist or militant groups choose

their suicide bombers? A planner for Islamic Jihad explained to Ms. Hassan that his

group scrutinizes the motives of a potential bomber to be sure that the individual is

committed to carrying out the task.5 A high level of educational attainment is probably a

signal of one’s commitment to a cause and determination, as well as of one’s ability to

4
  Ms. Hassan reported that the sponsoring terrorist organization usually gave between $3,000 and $5,000 to
the families of suicide bombers. Apart from that payment, she reported that the typical cost of the
operation was around $150.




                                                    8
prepare for an assignment and carry it off, so the stereotype of suicide bombers being

drawn from the ranks of those who are so impoverished that they have nothing to live for

may be 180 degrees off base. This interpretation is also consistent with another of Ms.

Hassan’s observations about suicide bombers:

          None of them were uneducated, desperately poor, simple minded or
          depressed. Many were middle class and, unless they were fugitives,
          held paying jobs. More than half of them were refugees from what is
          now Israel. Two were the sons of millionaires.

          Suicide bombers are clearly not motivated by the prospect of their own

individual economic gain, although it is possible that the promise of larger payments to

their families may increase the willingness of some to participate in suicide bombing

missions. We suspect their primary motivation instead results from their passionate

support for the ultimate aims and desires of their movement. Nassra Hassan, for

example, reported, “Over and over, I heard them say, ‘The Israelis humiliate us. They

occupy our land, and deny our history.’” Eradication of poverty and universal high

school education are unlikely to change these feelings. Indeed, it is even possible that

those who are well off and well educated perceive such feelings more acutely.6

        Economic theory is unlikely to give a very convincing answer one way or the

other as to whether poverty or education are important root causes of terrorism. One

could construct plausible explanations for why a reduction in poverty and a rise in

education might increase or decrease the incidence of terrorism. Next we turn to a broad

consideration of evidence related to terrorism.

5
  Ms. Hassan also observed that the groups generally reject for suicide bombing missions “those who are
under eighteen, who are the sole wage earners in their families, or who are married and have family
responsibilities.”
6
  Observe, for example, that well educated and high-income people are consistently more likely to vote than
are less educated and poor people. If the primary payoff motivating people to join and support terrorist



                                                    9
2. Evidence from Hate Crimes

         Because the literature on participation in terrorism is less well developed than the

literature on “hate crimes,” we begin by briefly reviewing evidence on the economic

determinants of hate crimes, a phenomenon that many have considered closely related to

terrorism (e.g., Hamm, 1998 and Kressell, 1996). Hate crimes are commonly defined as

crimes against members of religious, racial or ethnic groups because of their group

membership, rather than their characteristics or actions as individuals. Hate crimes

include acts of violence, as well as destruction of property, harassment and trespassing.

Until recently, social scientists thought economic deprivation was a crucial determinant

of hate crimes. New evidence, however, strongly challenges the empirical basis for this

conclusion.7 A new consensus is emerging that views hate crimes as independent of

economic deprivation.

          The original empirical support for the “economic deprivation hypothesis”

stemmed mainly from historical evidence on anti-black lynchings in the southern part of

the United States. In his 1933 classic study, The Tragedy of Lynching, Arthur Raper

documented a correlation of -0.532 between the number of lynchings in a year and the

value of an acre of cotton (a measure of economic conditions) in that year using annual

time-series data from 1882 to 1930. He concluded that, “periods of relative prosperity

bring reduction in lynching and periods of depression cause an increase.” The

psychologists Carl Hovland and Robert Sears (1940) seized on this finding as support for




organizations is the potential to influence political change, then it would not be surprising if education and
income have the same effect on participation in terrorism as they do on participation in voting.
7
  See Green, McFalls, and Smith (2001) for a good survey of the literature.


                                                      10
the view that intergroup antagonism results from frustration accompanying economic

contractions.

       A landmark study by Green, Glaser and Rich (1998) overturns that conclusion.

First, they showed that the correlation between lynchings and economic conditions

vanished once secular trends in both variables were taken into account. That is, apart

from the long-term tendency for the number of lynchings to decline and the economy to

grow, lynchings were unrelated to year-to-year economic fluctuations. Second, when

they use Simon Kuznets’s measure of real per capita GNP growth (which was

unavailable to Raper) as a measure of economic conditions instead of the price of cotton,

they find that lynchings and economic conditions are virtually uncorrelated.

       Third, and most important, Raper’s sample ended just before the Great

Depression. Lynchings did not rise during the Great Depression, despite the dramatic

deterioration in economic conditions. When Green, Glaser and Rich extend the original

sample through 1938, they find an insignificant correlation between the number of anti-

black lynchings and the value of an acre of cotton, and a positive correlation between

anti-black lynchings and real GNP growth. It is almost certainly the case that the inverse

correlation reported between economic conditions and anti-black lynchings that launched

the aggression-frustration hypothesis was spurious, a coincidence of two unrelated trends

that happened to move in the opposite direction at the turn of the 20th Century.

       Moreover, the evidence of a connection between economic conditions and other

types of hate crimes in contemporary data is also elusive. Green, Glaser and Rich (1998)

report time-series evidence on the incidence of hate crimes against blacks, Jews, Asians

and gay men and lesbians using data from New York City each month from 1987 to




                                            11
1995. They found that the incidence of these crimes was unrelated to the city's

unemployment rate.

       Across regions in a given year, the occurrence of hate crimes and prevalence of

hate groups are also found to be unrelated to economic circumstances of the area.

Jefferson and Pryor (1999), for example, examined determinants of the existence of hate

groups across counties in the United States in 1997, using a list of hate groups assembled

by the Southern Poverty Law Center. Specifically, they used logistic regressions to relate

the characteristics of counties to the likelihood that the county was home to a chapter of a

hate group. About 10 percent of the 3,100 counties in the continental United States

contained one or more hate group, like the Klu Klux Klan. The existence of hate groups

was unrelated to the unemployment rate, divorce rate, percent black, or gap in per capita

income between whites and blacks in the county. The share of the adult population with

a high school diploma or higher had a statistically significant, positive association with

the probability that a hate group was located in the area. They concluded that, “economic

or sociological explanations for the existence of hate groups in an area are far less

important than adventitious circumstances due to history and particular conditions.”

       The findings for the United States do not appear to be unique. Germany

experienced a rash of violence against foreigners in the early 1990's. Unemployment was

high, particularly in the former East Germany. Krueger and Pischke (1997), however,

found no relationship between the unemployment rate and the incidence of ethnic

violence across 543 counties in Germany, once they controlled for a dummy variable

indicating whether the county was located in the former East or West Germany.

Likewise, average education and the average manufacturing wage in the county was




                                             12
unrelated to the amount of violence against foreigners. Within the former East Germany,

those counties located furthest from the west had the highest incidence of ethnic violence.

Krueger and Pischke attribute the geographic pattern to a failure of law enforcement

further east, and pent up animosity that was suppressed during Communism.

       To summarize, neither cyclical downturns nor longer-term regional disparities in

living standards appear to be correlated with the incidence of a wide range of hate crimes.

This is not proof of the absence of a causal relationship, but if there were a direct causal

effect one would expect hate crimes to rise during periods of economic hardship. Rather

than economic conditions, the hate crimes literature points to a breakdown in law

enforcement and official sanctioning and encouragement of civil disobedience as

significant causes of the occurrence of hate crimes.


3. Evidence from Public Opinion Polls in the West Bank and Gaza Strip

   Although public opinion polls are subject to multiple interpretations, such data can

provide indirect information about which segments of the population support terrorist or

militant activities. Here we analyze public opinion data collected by the Palestinian

Center for Policy and Survey Research (PCPSR), an independent, nonprofit institution

and think tank located in Ramallah that performs policy analysis and academic research

in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. We should emphasize that these results are

undoubtedly highly context specific, due to the long lasting Israeli-Palestinian conflict

and due to the fact that Palestinians are without a state or army and are highly dependent

economically on Israel.

   The PCPSR conducted a public opinion poll of 1,357 Palestinians age 18 or older in

the West Bank and Gaza Strip on December 19-24, 2001. The survey, which was



                                              13
conducted by in-person interviews, covered topics including views toward the September

11th attacks in the United States, support for an Israeli-Palestinian peace agreement, and

views toward armed attacks against Israel.8 Under trying circumstances in the midst of

one of the worst periods of the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, Ayoub Mustafa of the Center

kindly provided us with tabulations of key questions broken down by the educational

level and occupational status of the respondents.

      Tables 1 and 2 provide a summary of the results. The questions are presented in the

order in which they were asked in the survey, so the reader can gauge context and order

effects (although results are not available for all questions, so there are some gaps in the

questions).

      Several findings are evident. First, the support for armed attacks against Israeli

targets by the Palestinian population is widespread (Q18). It is important to emphasize,

however, the distinction between support for armed attacks expressed in a public opinion

poll at a particular point in time and participation in such attacks.

      Second, a majority of the Palestinian population believes that armed attacks against

Israeli civilians have helped achieve Palestinian rights in a way that negotiations could

not have (Q17). This finding raises obvious implications concerning the difficulty of

ending the attacks, and may partially account for the opposition to a United Nations

initiative to fight terrorism (see Q21). If the Palestinian public believes the attacks are

efficacious, they are unlikely to cease supporting additional attacks unless their demands

are met. Another question (Q19, not shown in table) asked, “To what extent do you

support or oppose the position taken by President Arafat and the PA regarding the U.S.



8
    The questionnaire and aggregate results are available from <www.pcpsr.org/survey/polls/2001/p3a.html>.


                                                     14
campaign against terror?” Thirty-six percent supported or strongly supported the position

of President Arafat in this case, and 50.4 percent opposed it.

   Third, a majority of the Palestinian population did not consider suicide bombings, like

the one that killed 21 Israeli youths at the Dolphinarium night club in Tel Aviv, terrorist

events (Q22-5). Toward the end of the questionnaire, respondents were also asked

whether they thought the international community considered the Dolphinarium bombing

a terrorist event (Q23-5, not shown). Ninety-two percent responded yes. These results

highlight differences in interpreting the meaning of the word terrorism.

   Fourth, and important for our purposes, there is no evidence in these results that more

highly educated individuals are less supportive of violent attacks against Israeli targets

than are those who are illiterate or poorly educated. Consider, for example, the

percentage of individuals who say they support or strongly support armed attacks against

Israeli targets less those who say they oppose or strongly oppose such attacks. By a 68

percentage point margin those with more than a secondary school education support

armed attacks against Israeli targets, while the margin is 46 points for those who are

illiterate and 63 points for those with an elementary school education. A chi-square

goodness-of-fit test decisively rejects the null hypothesis that responses to the question

concerning support for armed attacks against Israel (Q18) are independent of educational

attainment (p-value = 0.004).

   A survey conducted by PCPSR in November 1994, before the current intifada, asked

respondents whether they supported a dialogue between Hamas and Israel (see

www.pcpsr.org/survey/cprspolls/94/poll13a.html). Responses were reported by

educational attainment. More highly educated respondents were less supportive of a




                                             15
dialogue with Israel: 53 percent of those with a BA and 40 percent of those with an MA

or Ph.D. supported a dialogue, compared with 60 percent of those with a 9 years or less

of schooling. (Based on other questions, it is clear that supporters of dialogue generally

favored a more peaceful coexistence with Israel.)

    Fifth, support for armed attacks against Israeli targets is widespread across all

occupations and groups, but particularly strong among students (recall that respondents

are age 18 or older) and merchants, farmers and professionals. (Only 22 respondents

were farmers, and some may own farms, so we included them with merchants and

professionals.) Notably, the unemployed are somewhat less likely to support armed

attacks against Israeli military, and especially civilian, targets. If poverty was the

wellspring of support for terrorism or politically motivated violence, one would have

expected the unemployed to be more supportive of armed attacks than merchants and

professionals, not less.

    Sixth, notice that housewives’ responses are quite similar to those of the general

public. The attitudes of the housewives exhibited in the PCPSR survey are significant in

part because they are likely to have substantial influence on their children’s views and

activities.

    Seventh, the survey found that the Palestinian population doubted bin Laden’s role in

the September 11th attacks on New York. A subsequent poll by the Gallup Organization

of adults in nine countries in the Islamic world also found considerable skepticism toward

the role of bin Laden’s group in the attacks on New York and Washington. For example,

74 percent of Muslim Lebanese did not believe news reports that groups of Arabs carried

out the attacks. In contrast, 65 percent of Christian Lebanese accepted the veracity of the




                                              16
news reports. Respondents in the PCPSR survey were divided on whether they defined

as a “terrorist event” the “destruction of the Twin Towers in New York City by people

suspected to be members of Bin Laden’s organization”: 41.4 percent agreed and 53.1

percent disagreed.


Economic Expectations

   It is possible to use public opinion data to infer trends in economic expectations. On

three occasions – in July/August 1998, September 1999, and February 2000 – PCPSR

asked respondents in the West Bank and Gaza Strip the following two questions: “How

would you describe your economic situation over the last three years compared to the

situation today? Better, Worse, Stayed the Same, or Don’t Know?” and “Are you

optimistic or pessimistic regarding your economic situation over the next three years?

Optimistic, Pessimistic, It will remain the same, No Opinion/Don't Know?” Tabulations

of responses to these two questions, as well as the unemployment rate, which is available

with more frequency, are shown in Table 3.

   The survey results indicate that between 1998 and 2000 the public perceived

economic conditions to be improving, and optimism for the future was rising. The

downward trend in the unemployment rate is also consistent with this interpretation of

economic circumstances. There is little evidence here to suggest that a deteriorating

economy or falling expectations for the economy precipitated the latest intifada, which

began in September 2000, although it is possible that expectations could have changed

between the PCPSR’s last survey and the start of the intifada.

   Angrist (1995) closely examines trends in school enrollment, earnings and

unemployment by level of education in a period encompassing the intifada in 1988. He



                                             17
finds that college enrollment in the West Bank and Gaza Strip increased rapidly in the

early 1980s, doubling between 1981 and 1985. Between 1982 and 1988 the number of

Palestinian men in the labor force with 12 or more years of schooling doubled, while the

number with 11 or fewer years of schooling increased only around 30 percent. This

remarkable rise in the education of the workforce coincided with a sharp increase in the

unemployment rate for college graduates relative to high school graduates in the 1980s.

In addition, from 1985 to 1988 the real daily wage of college graduates fell by around 30

percent, while the real wage of those with 12 years of schooling held steady and the real

wage of those with 11 or fewer years of schooling increased slightly. Angrist notes that

the decline in Palestinian school enrollment in the early 1990s probably represents “a

belated supply response to low returns to schooling.”

   Thus, the noteworthy increase in educational attainment of Palestinians in the 1980s

coincided with a marked deterioration in the economic position of more highly educated

Palestinians. Angrist and others speculate that the deterioration in economic

opportunities for the highly educated contributed to the civil unrest that broke out in

December 1987. Angrist notes, however, that the confluence of these developments

could be unique to the Palestinian situation, and not a universal response to expanding

educational opportunities. Importantly, the Israeli occupation of the territories and lack

of an effective capital market or banking system probably prevented the labor markets in

the West Bank and Gaza Strip from equilibrating, particularly in light of the fact that

many Palestinians are dependent on Israel for jobs. Consequently, the link between an

expansion in educational attainment, deteriorating economic conditions and protest may

not generalize. Indeed, the contrasting economic environments surrounding the intifadas




                                             18
in 1988 and 2000 suggest that protest, violence and even terrorism can follow either a

rising or declining economic tide.


4. Correlates of Participation in Hezbollah Militant Activities

        The Hezbollah (or Hizb'allah, Party of God) was founded in Lebanon in 1982,

following the Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon. The original goal of Hezbollah

was to fight the Israeli occupation and create a Shiite state in Lebanon, modeled on Iran.

The organization refrained from publicly claiming responsibility for its actions for three

years after it was formed, and did not reveal its name until 1985. Hezbollah has since

evolved into a complex social, political and resistance organization, and currently posts a

web site in English and Arabic (www.hizbollah.org) that describes its multifaceted

activities.

        Hezbollah is based in three main areas in Lebanon: Beirut, the Bekaa Valley and

southern Lebanon. Hezbollah has used various means to achieve its goals. In the 1980s,

taking Western hostages proved successful, especially when President Reagan was

willing to trade arms for hostages. In the early 1990s, Hezbolah participated in Lebanese

elections with some success. Beginning in the 1980s, Hezbollah also introduced suicide

attacks, first against Israeli military bases in southern Lebanon and later against Western

soldiers in Beirut. Hezbollah is believed to be responsible for the suicide truck bombings

of the U.S. Embassy annex in 1984, and the U.S. marines’ and French paratroopers’

barracks in 1983 in Beirut. The U.S. State Department and British Home Office have

labeled Hezbollah as a terrorist organization.

        Currently, Hezbollah supports the radical Palestinian movements, Hamas and

Islamic Jihad, in their campaign against Israel. It is from Hezbollah that these



                                             19
organizations reportedly have adopted the technique of suicide bombings. It has also

been reported that Hezbollah and al Qaeda have joined forces after al Qaeda was

dispersed from Afghanistan.9



Statistical Analysis of Hezbollah Participation

      Eli Hurvitz of Tel Aviv University graciously provided us with biographical

information on 129 members of Hezbollah’s military wing (Al-Muqawama Al-Islamiya)

who died in action from 1982 to 1994. Two-thirds of the Shahids, or martyrs, were killed

between 1986 and 1988. The biographical details were extracted by Hurvitz from articles

about the deceased fighters in Hezbollah’s weekly newspaper, Al-Ahd. The observations

in the sample may make up as many as one third of the members of Hezbollah’s military

wing in this period, according to Hurvitz. Hurvitz (1998) used the data to develop a

profile of Hezbollah, but did not compare the Shahids to the Lebanese population from

which they were drawn. We culled a data set from the biographies that included the

individuals’ age at death, highest level of school attended, poverty status, region of

residence, and marital status.

      There are at least three problems with the data for our purposes worth emphasizing.

First, the deceased Hezbollah fighters were involved in a mix of activities, not all of

which might be classified as terrorist attacks. An attack on a military post was the most

common type of activity the individuals were engaged in when they were killed. Others

died planting booby traps, or were assassinated by the Israeli Defense Forces or Lebanese

forces. Three died in suicide bombing attacks.



9
    See Dana Priest and Douglas Farah, “Hezbollah, Al Qaeda Team Up,” Washington Post, June 30, 2002.


                                                   20
   Second, there are obvious selection bias issues. It is unclear whether the deceased

Hezbollah militants who are described in the organization’s newspaper are representative

of Hezbollah members who engaged in terrorist and paramilitary activities. Hezbollah

has a heterogeneous membership, ranging from untrained foot soldiers to well trained

individuals. It is possible that the foot soldiers are over represented among the deceased.

If this is the case, then our sample may under represent highly educated members from

middle or upper income families.

   Third, relevant information was missing for several individuals, and sometimes we

were forced to indirectly infer variables from available information. For example, we

inferred poverty status from available information on individuals’ family background

(e.g., parents’ occupation) or from their own economic condition when it was reported,

but this information was available for fewer than half of all cases. We tried to define

poverty in a comparable way to how it was defined in the general population survey

described below, but we could only do so with partial information so the data may not be

perfectly comparable.

   Obtaining data on the general population in Lebanon proved to be difficult as well.

To compare the sample of Hezbollah fighters to the general population of Lebanon, we

obtained an extract of individual-level data on a small subset of variables from the

Lebanese Population and Housing Survey (PHS), 1996, conducted by the Administration

Centrale de la Statistique. Specifically, we have information on the age, poverty status,

and highest level of education attended of 287,204 individuals. Poverty status is defined

on the basis of 11 living conditions indicators, including rooms per person, principal

means of heating, water and sewerage access, car ownership, and occupation. There is no




                                            21
information in the PHS on whether respondents were Hezbollah members. But because

we estimate that Hezbollah militants made up only 3 in 10,000 people in the Lebanese

population (in the relevant age group), we ignore the fact that, in principle, some

members of the PHS sample may have been Hezbollah members.

   A strength of the PHS data is that the sample is large, and the survey covers a period

close to the time frame of the Hezbollah sample. One problem with these data, however,

is that we were not provided the sex of individuals in the population sample. All of the

deceased Hezbollah fighters were male. Although we readily acknowledge that this is a

shortcoming of the data, we suspect it does not seriously confound our results because, as

best we can ascertain, educational attainment is similar for male and female youth in the

relevant cohorts in Lebanon. The following text table reports school enrollment at

various ages for male and female Lebanese youth in 1996, based on Figuié (1998).

   Age                    Males             Females
   6-9                     83.7%              83.9%
   10-14                   92.6               93.6
   15-19                    59.3              65.7
   20-24                    24.7              24.9
   25-29                     6.0               4.6

Family poverty status, region of residence and age are also likely to be orthogonal to sex,

so including data on young women in the sample without controlling for gender is

unlikely to severely bias our estimates.

   Despite the limitations of both data sets, the samples provide some information on the

characteristics of Hezbollah militants vis-à-vis the general population. If nothing else,

this exercise provides an illustration of the type of analysis that could be done to learn

more about the characteristics of individuals who participate in organizations that use

terrorist techniques.


                                              22
   Because the sample of 129 deceased Hezbollah fighters ranged in age from 15 to 38,

we restricted the PHS sample to the 120,796 individuals age 15 to 38 as well. Table 4

presents summary statistics for the sample of deceased Hezbollah militants and the

general population of Lebanon age 15 to 38. For each variable, only observations with

nonmissing data on that variable are used to construct the table, so the sample varies

across rows. (The PHS sample we were provided does not have any missing values.)

   Several findings are of interest. First, notice that the poverty rate is 28 percent among

the Hezbollah militants and 33 percent for the population – 5 points lower for members

of the Hezbollah military wing, although the gap is not statistically significant.

   Second, in terms of education the Hezbollah fighters are more likely to have attended

secondary school than are those in the general population, and a chi-square test indicates

that the differences in the educational distributions between the Hezbollah and population

samples are statistically significant. Because, even in this restricted age range, the

Hezbollah members are younger, the education differences would be even greater if

individuals with the same age distribution were compared.

   Third, about one fifth of the Hezbollah sample was schooled in the Hezbollah

education system. Hurvitz (1998) reports that virtually all of the Hezbollah militants

were Shiite Muslims. Information on the religious affiliation of the Lebanese population

is unavailable in the PHS. According to the 2002 Gallup Survey of Lebanon, however,

about 57 percent of Lebanese are Muslims and nearly 43 percent are Christians. This

also accords well with estimates in El Khoury and Panizza (2002).




                                             23
     Fourth, the Hezbollah fighters tended to be in their late teens and early 20s when they

died. Russell and Miller (1983) report that “the usual urban terrorist was between [age]

22 and 25” in their sample of more than 350 terrorists from 18 different organizations.

     Fifth, the deceased Hezbollah fighters were more likely to reside in South Lebanon

and Beirut than were members of the population. This finding is not surprising given that

the south of Lebanon is a stronghold of Hezbollah, and was the area occupied by Israeli

forces. Because educational attainment and living conditions are notably higher in Beirut

than in the rest of Lebanon, it is important to try to control for regional differences in

comparing the Hezbollah fighters to the general population.

     Table 5 provides logistic estimates using the pooled sample of Hezbollah and PHS

observations.10 The dependent variable equals one if the individual is a deceased

Hezbollah fighter, and zero otherwise. The first two columns simply present unweighted

estimates for the pooled sample of Hezbollah fighters and the PHS data set. However,

this setup presents a classic problem of choice-based sampling: the Hezbollah militants

were selected for inclusion in the sample on the basis of the dependent variable of the

logit equation equaling one. Consequently, the sample does not constitute a random

sample, and the unweighted estimates will generally be inconsistent. (See Manski and

Lerner, 1977 for an exposition of choice-based sampling.) Columns 3-4 present logit

models in which the observations have been weighted by the estimated relative

frequencies of the groups in the population to their relative frequencies in the sample,

which should yield consistent estimates.

10
  To maximize the sample size, the mean value of nonmissing values was assigned to observations with
missing data for each variable in the Hezbollah sample. This procedure is not ideal and has some
undesirable properties (e.g., data may not be missing at random and the reported standard errors do not
reflect the additional variability due to the imputations), but it provides a simple way to impute missing



                                                     24
    Concentrating on the weighted estimates in columns (3) and (4), the results suggest

that poverty is inversely related with the likelihood that someone becomes a Hezbollah

fighter, and education is positively related with the likelihood that someone becomes a

Hezbollah fighter. The former effect is statistically significant at the 0.05 level, and the

latter at the 0.10 level, when the equation excludes region dummies, but both coefficients

become insignificant when region is held constant in column (4). (The p-value for a joint

test that poverty and education are unrelated to participation in Hezbollah in column (4)

is 0.12.) According to the coefficient in column (3), a 30 percentage point increase in the

poverty rate is associated with a 10 percent reduction in participation in Hezbollah. The

same model implies that a 30 percentage point increase in the secondary school or higher

attendance rate is associated with an 8 percent increase in participation in Hezbollah.

These effects are 40 to 50 percent smaller in column (4), which adjusts for whether the

individual resides in Beirut, South Lebanon or elsewhere in Lebanon.

    As suggested by the means in Table 4, residents of Beirut and southern Lebanon are

more likely to join Hezbollah. Also, even in the sample of 15 to 38 year olds, younger

individuals are more likely to be represented in the deceased Hezbollah sample than in

the population.

    Although we lack data on the population sample’s religious affiliation, and the

Hezbollah participants were Shiite Muslims, to partially control for differences across

religious groups we can restrict the sample to districts with a high proportion of Shiite

Muslims. El Khoury and Panizza (2002; Table 1) provide estimates of the percent of the

Lebanese population belonging to various religious groups for 26 districts in the PHS,


data. A more sophisticated technique would multiply impute missing observations along the lines proposed
by Rubin (1987).


                                                  25
based on voter registration from the 1996 national parliamentary elections. We limit the

PHS sample to the six districts in which at least 69 percent of the population is a Shiitie

Muslim and to Beirut, because 42 percent of the Hezbollah militants were from Beirut.11

Columns (5) and (6) provide estimates for this geographic subsample. The results

indicate an even larger negative effect of poverty on the propensity to join Hezbollah in

this subsample. For this sample, which is arguably a more relevant one, a 30 percentage

point reduction in poverty is associated with a 15 percent increase in participation in

Hezbollah, based on column (6). And a 30 percentage point increase in secondary school

enrollment is associated with an 8 percent increase in Hezbollah participation.

     We regard these findings as suggestive but not definitive. First, data limitations

prevent us from drawing strong conclusions. Second, the process of participation in

Hezbollah, primarily a resistance organization, may not be representative of participation

in other organizations that are more exclusively focused on terrorist activities.

Nevertheless, these findings provide little support for the view that those who live in

poverty or have a low level of education are disproportionately drawn to participate in

terrorist activities. It would be useful if future research could conduct this type of

analysis for other groups and in other contexts.



5. Israeli Jewish Underground

        In the late 1970s and early 1980s, numerous violent attacks against Palestinians

were conducted by Israeli Jews in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, led most prominently


11
  The six districts and percent of voters identified as Shiite Muslims are: Baalbek (69.1%); Bent-Jbayl
(86.7%); El-Hermel (100%); El-Nabatiyye (99.3%); Marj'ayun (91.6%); and Sour/Tyre (91.8%). In
Beirut, 13.6 percent of voters were Shiite Muslims and 44.9 percent were Sunni Muslims. We are grateful
to Marianne El Khoury and Ugo Panizza for sharing these data with us.


                                                  26
by the Gush Emunim (Bloc of the Faithful) group. These attacks included attempts to kill

three Palestinian mayors of West Bank cities and failed attempts to blow up the Dome of

the Rock Mosque, the third-holiest shrine of Islam. From 1980 to 1984, a total of 23

Palestinians were killed in attacks by the Jewish Underground, and 191 individuals were

injured. The International Encyclopedia of Terrorism (1997) refers to these attacks as

terrorism. In a ruling in 1985, an Israeli court convicted three Israeli settlers of murder

and found others guilty of violent crimes in cases involving attacks in the West Bank.

       What were the biographical backgrounds of those involved in these violent

attacks by Israeli Jewish extremists? Table 6 reports the name, birth year, occupation and

nature of underground activity for 27 individuals involved in the Jewish Underground in

the early 1980s. We think this list is fairly complete and accurate, as the main source is a

book by Haggai Segal (1988), one of the members of the Underground. It is clear that

these Israeli extremists were overwhelmingly well educated and in high paying

occupations. The list includes teachers, writers, university students, geographers, an

engineer, a combat pilot, a chemist, and a computer programmer. As Neff (1999)

observed of the three men convicted of murder, “All were highly regarded, well-

educated, very religious.” Although we have not statistically compared the backgrounds

of the extremists to the wider Israeli population, the group of individuals listed in Table 6

certainly does not appear to be particularly underprivileged or undereducated.


6. Time-Series Analysis of Terrorism in Israel

       A deterioration in economic conditions over time may be associated with the

likelihood of terrorist incidents, even if cross-family differences in education and living

conditions are unrelated with participation in terrorism. Sandler and Enders (2001)



                                             27
examine time trends in the number of various forms of transnational terrorist events, but

do not relate economic conditions to the number of terrorist attacks. To begin to fill this

void, we briefly examined whether real GDP growth in the West Bank and Gaza Strip

was related to the number of major terrorist incidents in Israel.

        The number of major terrorist incidents each year was derived from the

International Encyclopedia of Terrorism. Between 1969 and 1996, there were 54 major

terrorist attacks in Israel. The number of attacks ranged from 0 to 7 a year. We relate the

number of attacks in a year to real GDP growth in the same year. Because the terrorist

attacks are a count variable, a linear regression model is inappropriate. Consequently, we

estimated a Poisson regression model.12 The estimated bivariate relationship, with

standard errors shown in parentheses, is as follows:


     Log Number of Incidents = 0.54 + 2.86 (Real GDP Growth)
                              (0.16) (1.41)

The number of terrorist attacks moved pro-cyclically, not counter-cyclically, and the

positive association is statistically significant.

        The relationship is sensitive to the specification and inclusion of other variables,

however. For example, the number of terrorist incidents per year has trended

significantly upward over this period. If we include a linear time trend, GDP Growth

becomes statistically insignificant (p-value=0.30), though it continues to have a positive

effect. Interestingly, the time trend becomes negative if GDP growth is held constant.

More importantly, if we use one-year lagged GDP growth instead of contemporaneous

GDP growth in the equation, economic growth is found to have an inverse but

statistically insignificant (p-value = 0.30) bivariate relationship with the number of




                                                28
terrorist incidents. If we also include the linear time trend in the Poisson model,

however, the negative effect of lagged GDP growth becomes statistically significant (p-

value=.02).

       We interpret these results as providing mixed evidence as to whether terrorist attacks

tend to increase or decrease with economic growth. Conducting this type of analysis on

more countries and varying lag lengths, would be a useful exercise for future research.


7. Conclusion

       The evidence we have assembled and reviewed suggests there is little direct

connection between poverty, education and participation in terrorism and politically

motivated violence. Indeed, the available evidence indicates that, compared with the

relevant population, participants in Hezbollah’s militant wing in the late 1980s and early

1990s were at least as likely to come from economically advantaged families and have a

relatively high level of education as they were to come from impoverished families

without educational opportunities. We should caution, however, that the evidence we

have considered is tentative due to data limitations. In addition, our focus has been

primarily on the Middle East, so our conclusions may not generalize to other regions or

circumstances.

       Nevertheless, less quantitative studies of participants in a variety of forms of

terrorism in several different settings have reached a conclusion similar to ours. We are

particularly struck by Russell and Miller’s (1983) work in this regard. To derive a profile

of terrorists, they assembled demographic information on more than 350 individuals

engaged in terrorist activities in Latin America, Europe, Asia and the Middle East from


12
     Results are similar if we estimate a Negative Binomial model.


                                                      29
1966 to 1976 based on newspaper reports. Their sample consisted of individuals from 18

revolutionary groups known to engage in urban terrorism, including the Red Army in

Japan, Baader-Meinhof Gang in Germany, Irish Republican Army in Northern Ireland,

Red Brigades in Italy and People’s Liberation Army in Turkey. Russell and Miller found

that, “… the vast majority of those individuals involved in terrorist activities as cadres or

leaders is quite well educated. In fact, approximately two-thirds of those identified

terrorists are persons with some university training, university graduates or postgraduate

students.” They also report that more than two-thirds of arrested terrorists “came from

the middle or upper classes in their respective nations or areas.”

   Taylor (1988) likewise concludes from his survey of the literature that, “Neither

social background, educational opportunity or attainment seem to be particularly

associated with terrorism.” Similarly, we show that members of the Israeli Jewish

Underground who terrorized Palestinian civilians in the late 1970s and early 1980s were

overwhelmingly well educated and in highly regarded occupations. Although other

research has not systematically compared the backgrounds of those involved in terrorism

to that of the general population, these findings suggest that most terrorists do not tend to

have underprivileged backgrounds, and that this conclusion is not limited to Hezbollah.

   While economic deprivation may not be associated with participation in terrorism and

politically motivated violence at the individual level, it may nonetheless matter at the

national level. For example, if a country is impoverished, a minority of the relatively

well off in that country may turn to terrorism to seek to improve conditions of their

countrymen. One might question, however, whether the end goal of many terrorist

organizations is to install a political regime that is likely to reduce poverty. In addition,




                                              30
there are well documented cases of terrorism in economically advanced countries (e.g.,

Ireland, Spain, Italy), so it is far from clear that poverty at a national level is associated

with support for terrorism. Nevertheless, this question can only be addressed by cross-

country analyses.

    In addition, poverty may indirectly affect terrorism through the apparent connection

between economic conditions and the proclivity for countries to undergo civil wars.

Fearon and Laitin (2001) find that GDP per capita is inversely related to the onset of civil

war, and Collier and Hoeffler (2000) find that the growth rate of GDP per capita and

male secondary school enrollment rate are inversely related to the incidence of civil war.

Lebanon, Afghanistan and the Sudan are high-profile examples of countries where civil

war provided a hospitable environment for international terrorists to operate. There are

other situations, however, where countries undergoing a civil war did not provide a

breeding ground for international terrorism, so it is unclear how much one should

extrapolate from the relationship between economic development and civil war. And

terrorism has arisen in many countries that were not undergoing a civil war. Before too

much is inferred about terrorism from the relationship between civil war and poverty, we

think it would be useful for future research to directly examine the relationship between

terrorist incidents and GDP at the national level, using similar cross-country analyses to

those used in the literature on civil wars.

    Enough evidence is accumulating that it is fruitful to begin to conjecture why

participation in terrorism and political violence is apparently unrelated, or positively

related, to individuals’ income and education. The standard economic model of crime

suggests that those with the lowest value of time should engage in criminal activity. But




                                               31
we would hypothesize that in most cases terrorism is less like property crime and more

like a violent form of political engagement. More educated people from privileged

backgrounds are more likely to participate in politics, probably in part because political

involvement requires some minimum level of interest, expertise, commitment to issues

and effort, all of which are more likely if people are educated and wealthy enough to

concern themselves with more than mere economic subsistence. These factors could

outweigh the effect of opportunity cost on individuals’ decisions to become involved in

terrorism.

   The demand side for terrorists must be considered as well as the supply side.

Terrorist organizations may prefer highly educated individuals over less educated ones,

even for homicide suicide bomb attacks. In addition, educated, middle or upper class

individuals are better suited to carry out acts of international terrorism than are

impoverished illiterates because the terrorists must fit into a foreign environment to be

successful. This consideration suggests that terrorists who threaten economically

developed countries will disproportionately be drawn from the ranks of the relatively well

off and highly educated.

   On the whole, we conclude that there is little reason to be optimistic that a reduction

in poverty or increase in educational attainment will lead to a meaningful reduction in the

amount of international terrorism, without other changes. Stern (2000) observes that

many madrasahs, or religious schools, in Pakistan are funded by wealthy industrialists,

and that these schools deliberately educate students to become foot soldiers and elite

operatives in various extremist movements around the world. She further reports that,

“Most madrasahs offer only religious instruction, ignoring math, science, and other




                                              32
secular subjects important for functioning in modern society.” These observations

suggest that, to use education as part of a strategy to reduce terrorism, the international

community should not limit itself to increasing years of schooling but should consider the

content of education.




                                              33
References

Angrist, Joshua. “The Economic Retrusn to Schooling in the West Bank and Gaza
Strip,” American Economic Review 85(5), December 1995, pp. 1065-87.

Becker, Gary S. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,” The Journal
of Political Economy, 76(2), Mar. - Apr., 1968, pp. 169-217.

Black, Ian and Benny Morris. 1991. Israel's Secret Wars: The Untold History of Israeli
Intelligence. London : Hamish Hamilton.

Collier, Paul and Anne Hoeffler, “Greed and Grievance in Civil War,” World Bank,
Policy Research Working Paper 2355.

Ehrlich, Isaac. 1973. “Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A Theoretical and
Empirical Investigation.” The Journal of Political Economy, May 1973, 81(3), pp. 521-
565.

El Khoury, Marianne and Ugo Panizza. 2002. “Social Mobility and Religion: Evidence
from Lebanon,” Mimeo., Inter-American Development Bank, Washington, DC.

Fearon, James and David Laitin. 2001. “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War,” Mimeo.,
Stanford University,.

Figuié, Gérard. Le point sur le Liban 1998, Anthologie, Beyrouth (Maisonneuve &
Larose) 1998.

Freeman, Richard. 1996. “Why Do So Many Young American Men Commit Crimes
and What Might We Do About It?” Journal of Economic Perspectives 10 (1), Winter
1996, pp. 25-42.

Friedman, Robert. 1992. Zealots for Zion : Inside Israel's West Bank Settlement
Movement, New York : Random House.

Green, Donald P., Jack Glaser, and A. Rich. 1998. “From lynching to gay-bashing: The
elusive connection between economic conditions and hate crime,” Journal of Personality
and Social Psychology, 75: 82-92.

Green, Donald P., Laurence H. McFalls, and Jennifer K. Smith. 2001. “Hate Crime: An
Emergent Research Agenda,” Annual Review of Sociology. 27:479-504.

Hamm, Mark S. 1998. “Terrorism, Hate Crime, and Antigovernment Violence: A
Review of the Research,” in Harvey W. Kushner, ed., The Future of Terrorism: Violence
in the New Millenium, London: SAGE, pp. 59-96.




                                           34
Hassan, Nasra. 2001. “An Arsenal of Believers,” The New Yorker, November 19, pp.
36-41.

Hovland, C. and R. Sears. 1940. “Minor Studies of Aggression: Correlation of
Lynchings with Economic Indices,” Journal of Psychology 9, pp. 301-10.

Hurvitz, Eli. 1998. The Military Wing of Hizballah: A Social Profile, A Masters Thesis
submitted to the School of History, Tel Aviv University, and published by the Moshe
Dayan Centre for Middle Eastern Studies, Tel Aviv University <www.dayan.org/
frameres.htm>.

International Encyclopedia of Terrorism, Chicago and London: Fitzroy Dearborn
Publishers, 1997.

Jefferson, Philip, and Frederic L. Pryor. 1999. "On the Geography of Hate," Economics
Letters, Vol. 65, No. 3, December 1999, pp. 389-395.

Keller, Bill. 2002. “Springtime for Saddam,” The New York Times, April 6, p. A15.

Kressel, Neil J. 1996. Mass Hate: The Global Rise of Genocide and Terror, New York:
Plenum Press.

Krueger, Alan and Jörn-Steffen Pischke. 1997. "A Statistical Analysis of Crime Against
Foreigners in Unified Germany," Journal of Human Resources, Winter 1997, vol. 32, no.
1, pp. 182-209.

Landes, William. “An Economic Study of US Aircraft Hijackings, 1961-1976,” Journal
of Law and Economics 21(1), pp. 1-31.

Manski, Charles and Steven Lerner. “The Estimation of Choice Probabilities from
Choice Base Samples,” Econometrica 45 (8), November 1977, pp. 1977-88.

Neff, Donald. 1999. “Jewish Terrorists Try to Assassinate Three Palestinian Mayors,”
Washington Report on Middle East Affairs, June, pp. 87-88.

Raper, Arthur. 1969. The Tragedy of Lynching, Montclair, NJ: Patterson Smith reprint
series in criminology, law enforcement, and social problems. Publication no. 25.
Originally published 1933.

Rubin, Donald. 1987. Multiple Imputation for Nonresponse in Surveys, New York: John
Wiley.

Ruhm, Christopher. 2000. “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 115 (2), May, pp. 617-50.

Russell, Charles and Bowman Miller. 1983. “Profile of a Terrorist,” reprinted in
Perspectives on Terrorism, Wilmington, Delaware: Scholarly Resources Inc., pp. 45-60.


                                          35
Sandler, Todd , John T. Tschirhart, and Jon Cauley, “A Theoretical Analysis of
Transnational Terrorism,” The American Political Science Review, Vol. 77, No. 1. (Mar.,
1983), pp. 36-54.

Sandler, Todd and Walter Enders. 2001. “An Economic Perspective on Transnational
Terrorism,” Mimeo., University of Southern California, December.

Segal, Haggai. 1988. Dear Brothers - The West Bank Jewish Underground, New York :
Beit-Shamai Publications, Inc.

Stern, Jessica. 2000. "Pakistan's Jihad Culture," Foreign Affairs, November/December.

Taylor, Maxwell. The Terrorist. London: Brassey’s Defence Publishers, 1988.




                                          36
Table 1: Results of December 19-24, 2001 PCPSR Poll of West Bank and Gaza Strip, by Occcupation and Employment Status



                                                                     Laborer,                     Merchant,
                                                                     Craftsman &                  Farmer &
Question                                                   Student   Employee        Housewife    Professional   Unemployed

Q15. Do you believe that the bin
Laden group is the one that
hijacked the American planes
and destroyed the Twin Towers in
New York on 11 September?        Yes or Definitely Yes      25.6%          14.4%         16.0%          16.7%           12.3%
                                 No or Definitely No        53.8%          63.0%         56.6%          68.3%           64.5%
                                 No Opinion                 20.5%          22.6%         27.4%          15.0%           23.2%


Q16. In your opinion, are there
any circumstances under which
you would justify the use of
terrorism to achieve political
goals?                            Yes or Definitely Yes     41.0%          34.6%         36.0%          43.3%           38.4%
                                  No or Definitely No       49.6%          58.0%         50.6%          48.3%           54.3%
                                  No Opinion                 9.4%           7.3%         13.4%           8.3%            7.2%


Q17. Do you believe that armed
attacks against Israeli civilians
inside Israel so far have achieved
Palestinian rights in a way that
negotiations could not?            Yes or Definitely Yes    66.7%          66.4%         58.2%          64.2%           63.8%
                                   No or Definitely No      31.6%          31.5%         37.2%          29.2%           36.2%
                                   No Opinion                1.7%           2.1%          4.6%           6.7%            0.0%
                                                                              Laborer,                        Merchant,
                                                                              Craftsman &                     Farmer &
Question                                                            Student   Employee          Housewife     Professional    Unemployed


Q18. Concerning armed attacks
against Israeli targets, I….        Support or Strongly Support      89.7%          80.8%           82.0%           86.7%            73.9%
                                    Oppose or Strongly Oppose         9.4%          16.0%           15.7%           10.0%            23.9%
                                    No Opinion                        0.9%           3.1%            2.3%            3.3%             2.2%


Q21. Would you support or
oppose a UN international
initiative to fight terrorism ?     Support or Strongly Support      38.5%          34.9%           27.9%           35.0%            33.3%
                                    Oppose or Strongly Oppose        59.0%          60.9%           63.9%           60.0%            63.8%
                                    No Opinion                        2.6%           4.2%            8.2%            5.0%             2.9%

Q22-5.To what extent do you
agree or disagree to define the
following event as a terrorist
event: "The killing of 21 Israeli
youths by a Palestinian who
exploded himself at the
Dolphinarium night club in Tel
Aviv"                               Agree or Strongly Agree          12.0%          14.4%           15.9%           12.5%            18.1%
                                    Disagree or Strongly Disagree    87.2%          81.9%           82.7%           80.8%            79.7%
                                    No Opinion                        0.9%           3.7%            1.4%            6.7%             2.2%


Q28. Concerning armed attacks
against Israeli soldiers in the
West Bank and the Gaza Strip,
I….                                 Support or Strongly Support      95.7%          93.4%           91.3%           94.2%            89.9%
                                    Oppose or Strongly Oppose         3.4%           5.0%            7.9%            4.2%             9.4%
                                    No Opinion                        0.9%           1.6%            0.9%            1.7%             0.7%

Notes: Sample size is 117 for students, 381 for laborers, craftsment and employees, 562 for housewives, 120 for merchants, farmers
and professionals, and 138 for unemployed. Percentages may not add up to 100 because of rounding.
Table 2: Results of December 19-24, 2001 PCPSR Poll of West Bank and Gaza Strip, by Educational Attainment

                                                                                                   Level of Schooling:

Question                                                               Illiterate    Elementary     Middle    Secondary Post-Secondary

Q15. Do you believe that the bin Laden
group is the one that hijacked the
American planes and destroyed the Twin
Towers in New York on 11 September?    Yes or Definitely Yes                  4.9%         11.6%      19.3%        18.8%   18.5%
                                       No or Definitely No                   58.0%         61.4%      58.8%        58.4%   65.9%
                                       No Opinion                            37.0%         27.1%      21.9%        22.8%   15.7%


Q16. In your opinion, are there any
circumstances under which you would
justify the use of terrorism to achieve
political goals?                             Yes or Definitely Yes           32.3%         37.5%      36.9%        39.4%   36.4%
                                             No or Definitely No             45.3%         53.4%      55.3%        51.4%   56.7%
                                             No Opinion                      22.4%          9.2%       7.8%         9.2%    6.9%




Q17. Do you believe that armed attacks
against Israeli civilians inside Israel so far
have achieved Palestinian rights in a way
that negotiations could not?                   Yes or Definitely Yes         56.8%         63.3%      64.8%        63.3%   59.9%
                                               No or Definitely No           36.4%         33.1%      32.9%        34.2%   37.4%
                                               No Opinion                     6.8%          3.6%       2.3%         2.4%    2.8%
Table 2 -- Continued                                                                                     Level of Schooling:

Question                                                                     Illiterate    Elementary     Middle    Secondary Post-Secondary

Q18. Concerning armed attacks against
Israeli targets, I….                           Support or Strongly Support         72.2%         80.5%      82.1%        86.1%   81.5%
                                               Oppose or Strongly Oppose           25.9%         17.5%      15.3%        12.0%   13.9%
                                               No Opinion                           1.9%          2.0%       2.6%         1.9%    4.6%




Q21. Would you support or oppose a UN
international initiative to fight terrorism?   Support or Strongly Support         23.6%         29.5%      32.0%        33.0%   42.4%
                                               Oppose or Strongly Oppose           55.9%         65.7%      63.7%        64.0%   54.4%
                                               No Opinion                          20.5%          4.8%       4.3%         3.0%    3.2%



Q22-5 To what extent do you agree or
disagree to define the following event as a
terrorist event: "The killing of 21 Israeli
youths by a Palestinian who exploded
himself at the Dolphinarium night club in
Tel Aviv"                                   Agree or Strongly Agree                16.1%         18.8%      13.8%        13.6%   13.5%
                                            Disagree or Strongly Disagree          78.3%         80.4%      84.1%        84.0%   83.3%
                                            No Opinion                              5.6%          0.8%       2.0%         2.4%    3.2%


Education Distribution                                                             12.0%         18.7%      25.8%        27.4%   16.1%

Notes: Sample size is 1,345. Percentages may not add up to 100 because of rounding.
Table 3: PCSR Surveys on Economic Conditions in the West Bank and Gaza Strip


                                     Economic       Economic          Optimistic     Pessimistic
                                     situation      situation         about          about
                 Unemployment        better over    worse over        economy        economy
Date             Rate                last 3 years   last 3 years      Next 3 years   next 3 years

Mar       1995      38%
Mar       1996      49
Nov       1997      27
Jul/Aug   1998      26                   37.5%         31.2%              50.8%       29.2%
Oct       1998      29
Nov       1998      24
Jan       1999      25
April     1999      20
June      1999      20
July      1999      18
Sept      1999      23                   39.2          27.6               50.4        27.5
Oct       1999      17
Dec       1999      19
Jan       2000      23
Feb       2000      19                   43.3          24.6               55.8        27.2
Mar/Apr   2000      17
Dec       2001      21


Source: PCPSR polls conducted at various times. Poll results are available from
www.pcpsr.org/survey/cprspolls/index.html.
Table 4: Characteristics of Hezbollah Militants (Shahid ) and Lebanese Population of
Similar Age

                                   Deceased               Lebanese
                                   Hezbollah              Population
          Characteristic           Militants              Age 15-38

          < Poverty                      28%                    33%         p-value for chi-sq test =0.489

          Education
             Illiterate                   0%                     6%
             Read and write              22%                     7%
             Primary                     17%                    23%
             Preparatory                 14%                    26%
             Secondary                   33%                    23%
             University                  13%                    14%
             High Studies                 1%                     1%         p-value for chi-sq test =0.000

          Age
             Mean                       22.17                   25.57
             [std. dev.]               (3.99)                  (6.78)

              15-17                       2%                    15%
              18-20                      41%                    14%
              21-25                      42%                    23%
              26-30                      10%                    20%
              31-38                       5%                    28%         p-value for chi-sq test =0.000

          Hezbollah                      21%                      NA
          Education
          System

          Region of Residence

              Beirut                     42%                    13%
              Mount Lebanon               0%                    36%
              Bekaa                      26%                    13%
              Nabatieh                    2%                     6%
              South                      30%                    10%
              North                       0%                    22%         p-value for chi-sq test =0.000

          Marrital Status
             Divorced                     1%                      NA
             Engaged                      5%                      NA
             Married                     39%                      NA
             Single                      55%                      NA

          Notes: Sample size for Lebanese population sample is 120,796. Sample size
          for Hezbollah is 50 for poverty status, 78 for education, 81 for age (measured at
          death, 129 for education in Hezbollah system, 116 for region of residence, and
          75 for marital status. Chi-square test refers to a test of the null hypothesis
          that the characteristic is independent of Hezbollah status.
Table 5: Logistic Estimates of Participation in Hezbollah
Dependent Variable is 1 if Individual is a Deceased Hezbollah Militant, and 0 Otherwise
Standard errors shown in parentheses

                                             All of Lebanon:                    Heavily Shiite Regions:
                            Unweighted Estimates      Weighted Estimates         Weighted Estimates

                               (1)         (2)           (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)

Intercept                    -4.886      -5.910         -5.965     -6.991         -4.658     -5.009
                             (0.365)     (0.391)        (0.230)    (0.255)        (0.232)    (0.261)

Attended Secondary           0.281       0.171          0.281      0.170          0.220      0.279
School or Higher (1=yes)     (0.191)     (0.193)        (0.159)    (0.164)        (0.159)    (0.167)

Poverty (1=yes)              -0.335      -0.167         -0.335     -0.167         -0.467     -0.500
                             (0.221)     (0.223)        (0.158)    (0.162)        (0.159)    (0.166)

Age                          -0.083      -0.083         -0.083     -0.083         -0.083     -0.082
                             (0.015)     (0.015)        (0.008)    (0.008)        (0.008)    (0.008)

Beirut (1=yes)               ---         2.199          ---        2.200          ---        0.168
                                         (0.219)                   (0.209)                   (0.222)

South Lebanon                ---         2.187          ---        2.187          ---        1.091
(1=yes)                                  (0.232)                   (0.221)                   (0.221)

Pseudo R-Square              0.020       0.091          0.018      0.080          0.021      0.033

Sample Size                  120,925     120,925        120,925      120,925      34,826     34,826

Notes: Sample pools together observations on 129 deceased Hezbollah fighters and the general Lebanese
population from 1996 PHS. Weights used in columns (3) and (4) are the relative share of Hezbollah
militants in the population to their share in the sample and relative share of PHS respondents in the
sample to their share in the population. Weight is 0.273 for Hezbollah sample and .093 for PHS sample.
Table 6: Characteristics of Israeli Jewish Underground Terrorists in Early 1980s

                           Year of
Name                         Birth    Occupation              Underground Activity

Katriel Avinoam             >1965     Army officer            Related to the conspiracy attempt to blow
                                                              up the Dome of the Rock Mosque 1980.


Dan Be'eri                   1945     Established an          Related to the conspiracy attempt to blow
                                      elemetary school in     up the Dome of the Rock Mosque, 1980
                                      Kiryat Arba, founder    (left the group in 1982).
                                      of the Barkai
                                      educational method
Haim Ben-David               1952     Geography and           Related to the conspiracy attempt to blow
                                      history expert          up the dome of the rock mosque 1980-82,
                                                              and participated in the attack on the
                                                              National Guidance Committee 1980.


Yeshua Ben-Shushan           1946     NA                      Instigated the conspiracy attempt to blow
                                                              up the Dome of the Rock Mosque 1980.


Yehuda Cohen                   NA     Yeshiva student         Carried out the reconnaissance on the
                                                              Temple Mount.
Yossi Edri                     NA     Electrician             Participated in the acquisition of the
                                                              clocks used in the attempt to blow up Arab
                                                              buses (April 27, 1984).

Yehuda Etzion                1951     Farmer and writer       Prime mover of the Dome of the Rock
                                                              conspiracy and key figure in the attack on
                                                              the mayors.

Yitzhak Ganiram (Akaleh)     1945     Teacher and special     Participated in the attack on the mayors,
                                      education teacher for   offered limited assistance in the Dome of
                                      learning disabled       the Rock conspiracy. Let the perpatrators
                                      youth                   of the Islamic College killings use his car.


Aaron (Roni) Gilo              NA     Army captain            Not member of the Underground. But
                                                              used his military position to aid those
                                                              involved in the attack on the mayors.

Benzion (Bentz)              1936     Religious scholar and   Helped carry out the technical
Heineman                              farmer                  preparations of several underground
                                                              operations.

Boaz Heineman                         The owner of a farm     Prepared explosives for the underground.
                                      and carpentry shop


                                                                                               Continued
Table 6 -- Continued

Yaakov Heineman               1948     Air force combat pilot   Played a limited role in the conspiracy
                                       and a farmer.            attempt to blow up the Dome of the Rock
                                                                Mosque, 1980.

Shlomo Liviatan                NA      Officer in the Judeans   Played a limited role in the attack of the
                                       Samaria Army             mayors.
                                       headquarters

Menachem Livni                1950     Engineer                 Participated in planning all operations
                                                                associated with the underground.

Uri Meier                      NA      Farmer                   Participated in the aborted attack on
                                                                Bethlehem's Dr. Natshe.

Natan Natanson                1957     NA                       Involved in the attack on the mayors.

Menachem Neuberger            1965     Yeshiva student          Participated in the intelligence gathering
                                                                stage of the attack on the mayors.

Barak Nir                      NA      Teacher                  Participated in the attack on the Islamic
                                                                College and in the attempt to sabotage
                                                                the Arab buses.
Shaul Nir                     1954     Engineer                 Involved in the Islamic College killings and
                                                                initiated the attempt to sabotage the Arab
                                                                buses
Yitzchak Novik                1948     Chemist, farmer          Participated in the attack on the mayors.

Gilad Peli                     NA      Farmer and Israel        Helped in the attack on the mayors;
                                       geography expert.        helped in the Dome of the Rock
                                                                conspiracy.
Era Rappaport                 1948     NA                       Participated in the attack on the mayors.

Hagai Segal                   1957     Reporter and             Participated in the attack on the mayors.
                                       university student
Uzi Sharbaf                   1960     Physical education       Involved in the Islamic College killings and
                                       teacher                  initiated the attempt to sabotage the Arab
                                                                buses.
Yosef Tzuria                  1959     Computer                 Related to the conspiracy attempt to blow
                                       programmer               up the Dome of the Rock Mosque.

Noam Yinon                    1957     Farmer                   Convicted of supplying explosives to Livni
                                                                and Shaul.

Moshe Zar                     1937     Land dealer              Was the driver in the attack on the
                                                                mayors.

Sources: Black and Morris (1991); Friedman (1992); Neff (1999) and Segal (1988).
