                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE HOME MARKET EFFECT AND BILATERAL TRADE PATTERNS


                                           Gordon H. Hanson
                                             Chong Xiang


                                          Working Paper 9076
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9076


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002




The authors thank Richard Baldwin,John Bound,Alan Deardorff,Robert Feenstra, David Hummels,and
seminar participants at the CEPR,the University of Michigan,and UCSD for valuable suggestions. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Gordon H. Hanson and Chong Xiang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Home Market Effect and Bilateral Trade Patterns
Gordon H. Hanson and Chong Xiang
NBER Working Paper No. 9076
July 2002
JEL No. F0, F1


                                             ABSTRACT

        We test for home-market effects using a difference-in-difference gravity specification. The
home-market effect is the tendency for large countries to be net exporters of goods with high transport
costs and strong scale economies. It is predicted by models of trade based on increasing returns to scale
but not by models of trade based on comparative advantage. In our estimation approach, we select pairs
of exporting countries that belong to a common preferential trade area and examine their exports of goods
with high transport costs and strong scale economies relative to their exports of goods with low transport
costs and weak scale economies. We find that home-market effects exist and that the nature of these
effects depends on industry transport costs. For industries with very high transport costs, it is national
market size that determines national exports. For industries with moderately high transport costs, it is
neighborhood market size that matters. In this case, national market size plus market size in nearby
countries determine national exports.




Gordon H. Hanson                                                 Chong Xiang
IR/PS                                                            Krannert School of Management
University of California, San Diego                              Purdue University
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu
1. Introduction

        Much recent theoretical work in international trade is based on increasing returns

to scale of some kind. This includes models of intra-industry trade (Krugman, 1979,

1981; Helpman, 1981), multinational firms (Helpman, 1984; Markusen, 1984), and

economic geography (Krugman, 1991; Venables, 1996). These efforts have produced

compelling explanations for why similar countries may gain from trade, why most

foreign direct investment tends to flow between rich countries, and why manufacturing

activity tends to agglomerate spatially within countries.

         For purposes of empirical work, however, trade theories based on increasing

returns present a problem. Their predictions for trade flows are similar to those of

models based on comparative advantage (Helpman and Krugman, 1985; Davis, 1995).

This complicates testing trade theory (Helpman, 1999) and may account for why some

attempts to estimate the importance of increasing returns for trade have yielded mixed

results (Helpman, 1987; Hummels and Levinsohn, 1995; Debaere, 2001).1

        Recently, empirical researchers have begun to estimate the impact of increasing

returns on trade by exploiting home-market effects, as derived by Krugman (1980). The

home-market effect is the tendency for large countries to be net exporters of goods with

high transport costs and strong scale economies.2 In the presence of fixed costs, and thus

scale economies, firms prefer to concentrate global production of a good in a single


1
  The observational equivalence of scale economies and comparative advantage is a problem also for
testing models of economic geography. See Ellison and Glaeser (1997) and Hanson (2001). See Evenett
and Keller (2001) for other work on trade flows, increasing returns, and comparative advantage.
2
  There is debate about the robustness of the home market effect in Krugman (1980). Davis (1998) finds
that with one differentiated-good sector (with positive fixed costs), one homogeneous good sector (with
zero fixed costs), and identical sectoral transport costs the home-market effect disappears. Krugman and
Venables (1999) counter Davis’ result by showing that the home-market effect holds as long as some
homogenous goods have low transport costs or some differentiated goods have zero fixed costs. Holmes
and Stevens (2002) demonstrate further support for the generality of home-market effects.


                                                                                                      1
location; in the presence of transport costs, it makes sense for this location to be a market

with high product demand. Goods that are subject to weak scale economies and/or low

transport costs are then produced by small economies. The home-market effect implies a

link between market size and exports that does not exist in models in which trade is based

solely on comparative advantage.

           One approach to identify home-market effects uses the correlation between

industry supply and industry demand across countries or regions. In Krugman (1980),

the demand for individual goods varies across markets because of differences in

consumer preferences (e.g., German consumers prefer beer, French consumers prefer

wine), leading production of a good to concentrate in markets with high levels of

demand. Davis and Weinstein (1999, 2002) find that, for manufacturing industries in

either OECD countries or Japanese regions, industry production increases more than one-

for-one with local demand for a good. Head and Ries (2001) find evidence of similar

patterns of industry production and consumption in Canada and the United States. Both

sets of results are interpreted as consistent with home-market effects.3

           A second approach to estimate home-market effects is to examine how the income

elasticity of exports varies across goods. In theory, the income elasticity of exports

should be higher for goods subject to higher price-cost markups and higher trade costs,

which are conditions often associated with differentiated products (Rauch, 1999).

Feenstra, Markusen, and Rose (1998) estimate gravity models of trade for an aggregate of

differentiated products and for an aggregate of homogeneous products. They find that

income elasticity of exports is higher in the former sample than in the latter, which they

interpret as evidence of home-market effects.
3
    For related work, see Trionfetti (1998, 2001), Weder (1998), and Brulhart and Trionfetti (2001).


                                                                                                       2
       Empirical literature finds support for home-market effects, and so for the

importance of increasing returns for trade.      But existing approaches are subject to

concerns about how these effects are identified. A problem with using the correlation

between industry production and consumption to identify home-market effects is that it

requires industry demand to be uncorrelated with shocks to industry supply. There are

many instances in which this condition may fail, leading to concerns about consistency in

estimation. There are also potential problems in using gravity equations to identify

home-market effects. When estimated on aggregate data the gravity model may hide

cross-industry variation in bilateral trade flows that we would expect to see were home-

market effects present. Additionally, Anderson and van Wincoop (2001) show that many

gravity applications fail to control for the ‘remoteness’ of importing countries and

thereby introduce specification bias into the estimation.

        In this paper, we develop an alternative test for home-market effects. Similar to

some previous work, we use the gravity model as a starting point. But distinct from

previous work, we develop a “difference-in-difference” gravity specification that is

consistent with theory and estimable with readily available data. First, we select pairs of

countries that are likely to face common trade barriers in markets to which they export;

second, we restrict attention to two groups of industries, one with high transport costs and

strong scale economies and one with low transport costs and weak scale economies; and

third, we examine whether, across exporter pairs, larger countries tend to export more of

high-transport cost, strong-scale economy goods relative to their exports of low-transport

cost, weak-scale economy goods, as implied by the home-market effect. Our test for




                                                                                          3
home-market effects, then, is to see whether German exports of steel relative to pencils

are higher than Belgian exports of steel relative to pencils.

       This approach has several important advantages. By using a gravity framework,

with national income, distance, and similar controls as regressors, we reduce concerns

about simultaneity in the estimation.      By examining exports for country pairs to a

common set of markets, we difference out the impacts of remoteness and trade barriers

on trade flows. And by separating industries by scale economies and transport costs, we

focus the analysis on cases where home-market effects are most likely to appear.

       To preview the results, we find that home-market effects exist and that the nature

of these effects depends on industry transport costs. Measuring exporter size using

national GDP, support for home-market effects is strong for industries with very high

transport costs and weak for industries with moderately high transport costs.

Alternatively, measuring exporter size using market potential, which accounts for

demand links between proximate countries, the pattern reverses. Support for home-

market effects is weak for industries with very high transport costs and strong for

industries with moderately high transport costs. These results suggest that for industries

with very high transport costs, it is national market size that determines national exports.

But for industries with moderately high transport costs, it is not the national market that

matters as much as the neighborhood market. In this case, national market size plus

market size in nearby countries determine national exports. As we explain in section 4,

our results differ from those in previous literature and it seems plausible that these

differences are due to our choice of empirical identification strategy.

       Our findings that home-market effects vary systematically across industries are




                                                                                          4
important for understanding how falling trade barriers may affect industry location. In

Europe, for instance, there is concern that economic integration will deindustrialize small

countries (Krugman and Venables, 1990). The fear is that lower trade barriers would

allow large countries to attract industry away from small, peripheral countries. Our

results suggest that only in very high transport cost industries would this sort of industry

relocation occur. Following a reduction in trade barriers, moderately high transport cost

industries might actually move into well-located small countries.

       The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section 2, we use theory to

develop an empirical framework. In section 3, we describe the data and estimation

issues. In section 4, we present empirical results. And in section 5, we conclude.



2. Theory and Empirical Specification

       In this section, we use a standard model of trade with increasing returns to scale

and monopolistic competition (Helpman and Krugman, 1985) to develop an estimation

strategy for identifying home-market effects.



2.1 A Model

       Let there be J countries and M sectors, where each sector has a large number of

product varieties. All consumers have identical Cobb-Douglas preferences over sectoral

composites of manufacturing products,

                                           M
                                                  µm
                                      U = ∏ Qm         ,                             (1)
                                           m =1




                                                                                           5
where we temporarily ignore country subscripts, µm is the share of expenditure on sector m

( ∑ µ m = 1 ), and Qm is a composite of symmetric product varieties in sector m given by
 m

                                                 σ m −1 σ m
                                               nm
                                                  σ
                                      Qm = [ ∑ C mi m ] σm −1    .                            (2)
                                            i =1


In (2), σm > 1 is the elasticity of substitution between any pair of varieties in m, and nm is the

number of varieties of m produced. There are increasing returns to scale in the production

of each variety such that the minimum cost for producing xim units of variety i in sector m is

                                 f m ( w m , x im ) = w m (a m + b m x im ) ,                 (3)

where am and bm are constants and wm is unit factor cost (e.g., the wage, for a single factor of

production, or a factor-price index, for multiple factors), which are assumed to be constant

across varieties of m. In equilibrium each variety is produced by a single monopolistically-

competitive firm and nm is large, so that the price for each variety is a constant markup over

marginal cost. Free entry drives profits to zero, equating price with average cost.

        Consider the variation in product prices across countries. We allow for iceberg

transport costs in shipping goods between countries and for import tariffs, such that the c.i.f.

price of variety i in sector m produced by country j and sold in country k is

                                                           σ     
                        Pimjk = Pimj t mjk (d jk ) γ m =  m  b m w mj t mjk (d jk ) γ m   (4)
                                                           σm − 1

where Pimj is the f.o.b. price of product i in sector m manufactured in country j; tmjk is one

plus the ad valorem tariff in k on imports of m from j; djk is distance between j and k; γm>0




                                                                                                    6
is the elasticity of transportation costs with respect to distance; and the second equality

replaces Pimj with a markup over marginal cost (which is constant across varieties of m).4

         Next, consider the demand by country k for varieties of m produced in country j.

Let Cimjk be the quantity of variety i from sector m that k purchases from j, which equals,

                                                             (Pimjk ) − σm
                                    C imjk = µ m Yk      J n mh
                                                                                                        (5)
                                                                                1− σ m
                                                        ∑ ∑ (Pimhk )
                                                        h =1 i =1


where Yk is national income in k. Define S mjk ≡ ∑ Pimjk C imjk , which is total sales of
                                                                       i

varieties of sector m by country j to country k. Utilizing the symmetry of product varieties

in preferences and technology (and dropping variety subscripts), these sales equal,

                                                                            1− σ m
                                                            Pmjk 
                                    S mjk    = µ m Yk n mj                                            (6)
                                                            Pmk 
                                                                 

where Pmk is the price index for sector m products in country k (equal to the denominator on

the right of (5) raised to the power, 1/(1-σm)).

         To develop the logic of the home-market effect, compare country j’s exports of good

m to country k with some other country h’s exports of good m to country k. Combining

equations (4) and (6), these relative export sales are given by,

                                                                    1−σ m                (1−σ m ) γ m
                                     S mjk     n mj  w mj                  d jk   
                                             =                                                      (7)
                                    S mhk      n mh  w mh     
                                                                
                                                                            d
                                                                             hk
                                                                                     
                                                                                     

where we assume countries h and j have common production technology and face common

tariffs in country k. Expressing sales in relative terms removes the price index in country k

from the expression and comparing exporters that face common trade policy barriers in k

4
 For analytical ease, we assume that the markup of price over marginal cost is a multiplicative function of
production costs, tariffs, and transport costs.


                                                                                                              7
removes tariffs from the expression. Since σm > 1, equation (7) shows that for some sector

m, country j’s exports to country k are more likely to exceed country h’s exports to country

k the lower are production costs in j relative to h, the closer to k is j relative to h, and the

larger is the number of product varieties produced in j relative to h. Country j may produce

more product varieties than country h for many reasons, including a home-market effect.

         To isolate this effect, compare two sectors: sector m, which has a low value of σm

(and so extensive product differentiation and high markups of price over marginal cost) and

a high value of γ (and so high transport costs), and sector o, which has a high value of σ

(low price-cost markups) and a low value of γ (low transport costs). In what follows, we

will refer to sector m (high markups, high transport costs) as the “treatment” industry and

sector o (low markups, low transport costs) as the “control” industry. From equation (7), the

ratio of relative sales of m versus o goods by countries j and h to country k is,

         S mjk / S mhk       n mj / n mh ( w mj / w mh )1−σm
                         =                                     (d jk / d hk ) (1−σm ) γ m −(1−σo ) γ o   (8)
          Sojk / Sohk        n oj / n oh ( w oj / w oh )1−σo

A home-market effect exists where the ratio (nmj/nmh)/(noj/noh) is higher the larger is country

j relative to country h. In words, for two countries, j and h, the ratio of their relative

exports of high-markup, high-transport cost good m to their relative exports of low-

markup, low-transport cost good o will be higher the larger is j relative to h.5




5
   The simplest proof of the home-market effect (see Krugman, 1980, and Helpman and Krugman, 1985)
uses a model with a single factor of production, two countries, and two sectors, one with a finite
substitution elasticity and positive fixed costs and another with a homogeneous good (i.e., an infinite
substitution elasticity) and zero fixed costs. In this case, the number of goods in the o sector (the
homogeneous-good sector) is one in both countries and the number of differentiated goods country 1
produces relative to country 2 is increasing in the relative size of country 1 to country 2. This result holds
over the range of relative country sizes where both countries produce the differentiated good. If country
sizes are too asymmetric, only the large country produces the differentiated good. As a practical matter, in
our data all exporting countries have positive exports in all industrial sectors we examine.


                                                                                                               8
           Formal statements of the home-market effect abound in the literature (Krugman,

1980; Helpman and Krugman, 1985; Davis, 1995; Feenstra, Markusen, and Rose, 1998;

Krugman and Venables, 1999). A general intuition for the result is that, with fixed costs in

producing varieties of sector m and transport costs in delivering sector m products to

market, it is cost minimizing for firms to concentrate production of m in larger markets.

This logic depends on there being a sector o, in which transport costs are small and σ is

large. Such products can be made anywhere, because they are cheap to transport and highly

substitutable in consumption. In equilibrium, they are produced in small economies.

           To clarify the logic of the home-market effect, we simulate the model based on

explicit assumptions about how transport costs and substitution elasticities vary across

sectors. We assume a single factor of production, labor, and two countries of unequal sizes.

There is a continuum of sectors indexed by z∈[0,1], each of which has a large number of

product varieties. Cobb-Douglas expenditure shares are uniform across sectors. σ is

monotonically decreasing in z according to the formula σ(z)=(2-z)*4, such that σ declines

from 8 to 4 as z rises from 0 to 1 (implying, over the range of z, an increase in the price-cost

markup from 1.13 to 1.25). Transport costs are given by exp(-τ(z)), where τ is increasing

monotonically in z (according to the formula log([15z+3]/[(2-z)*4)-1]) such that τ rises from

0.06 to 0.40 as z rises from 0 to 1. High z sectors, then, have high transport costs and low

σ’s and are good candidates for treatment industries in our framework; low z sectors have

low transport costs and high σ’s and are good candidates for control industries.6 Theory

predicts that high z sectors will be relatively concentrated in the large country and that low z

sectors to be relatively concentrated in the small country.


6
    This setup loosely follows the framework in Krugman and Venables (1999).


                                                                                              9
       Figure 1 plots the excess concentration of production in the large country – the large

country’s share of world output of a sector minus it’s share of world GDP – against z. This

is done for two scenarios, one in which the large country is 1.2 times the size of the small

country and one in which the size differential is 1.6. Consistent with theory, high z (high

transportation costs, low σ) sectors are relatively concentrated in the large country and low z

(low transportation cost, high σ) sectors are relatively concentrated in the small country.

The extent of excess concentration in the large country is greater the larger is the size

difference between the two countries.



2.2 Empirical Specification

       To search for evidence of home-market effects empirically, we specify equation (8)

in log terms using the following regression:

           S mjk / S mhk            Y                           d     
        ln                = α + β ln j    + φ(X j − X h ) + θ ln jk    + ε mojkh   (9)
           S ojk / S ohk            Y                           d     
                                     h                           hk   

where Yj/Yh is relative exporter market size; Xl is a vector of control variables that

determine relative production costs for sectors m and o in country l; and εmojkh is an error

term. Our test for home-market effects is whether β>0, or whether larger countries export

relatively more of high-markup, high-transport cost goods.

       Equation (9) is a ‘difference-in-difference’ specification of trade flows between

countries. The dependent variable is for two countries the log difference in their exports

of high-markup, high-transport cost good m minus the log difference in their exports of a

low-markup, low-transport cost good o. The home-market effect implies that for two

countries, j and h, the ratio of their relative exports of good m to their relative exports of



                                                                                               10
good o will be higher the larger is Yj relative to Yh. The countries’ relative exports of

good o act as a control, sweeping out of the dependent variable any general tendency for

one country to export relatively more than the other.

       Consider, instead, using the log difference in two countries' exports of good m as

the dependent variable (i.e., the log of the variable on the left of equation (7)). Then the

coefficient β could not be interpreted as capturing a home-market effect since large

countries may export relatively more of all goods. The advantage of the difference-in-

difference specification is that it (a) controls for the tendency of large countries to export

more of all goods, (b) removes from the estimation tariffs, sectoral price indices, and

home bias effects, all of which are hard to measure, and (c) for exporter pairs with similar

production costs, differences out of the estimation all determinants of relative exports,

except relative distance and relative country size. For completeness, we report estimation

results using both the single log difference of exports (for a pair of exporters, log relative

exports of a single good) and the double log difference of exports (for a pair of exporters,

log relative exports of a treatment industry minus log relative exports of a control

industry) as the dependent variable.

       Estimation of equation (9) requires that we place restrictions on the set of industries

and countries included in the sample and define the set of regressors. First, we must choose

pairs of exporting countries that face common trade policy barriers in the countries that

import their goods. It is an added advantage if these country pairs have similar production

costs, such that comparative advantage plays a small role in determining their relative

exports (i.e., in (9), (Xj-Xh)≅0). We choose exporting country pairs that belong to a

common preferential trade area and that have relatively similar average incomes. Second,



                                                                                           11
we must identify a set of high-markup, high-transport cost industries and a set of low-

markup, low-transport cost industries. This is complicated somewhat by the simplicity of

trade models. The standard framework is the Dixit-Stiglitz (1977) model of monopolistic

competition, in which prices, and so average costs, are a constant markup over marginal

cost, where this markup is fixed by σ. σ, then, determines both the equilibrium extent of

product differentiation (the number of product varieties) and the equilibrium strength of

scale economies (the ratio of average to marginal costs). In reality, product differentiation

and scale economies may not be so tightly related. The apparel industry, for instance, has a

high degree of product differentiation but flat average cost curves. We would not expect

this industry to be subject to a home-market effect. We select high-markup and low-markup

industries on the basis of average plant size, a common metric of scale economies.

       A final consideration is how to measure relative country size. In equation (9), we

use relative GDP to capture relative market size for a pair of exporters. This is certainly

appropriate for a world with two countries. But with many countries neighborhood effects

may be important for industry location. Belgium’s national market, for instance, is small

relative to Spain’s. But Belgium has three large neighbors, France, Germany, and the

Netherlands, whereas Spain has one large neighbor, France and one small neighbor,

Portugal. Belgium’s neighbors may be an important source of demand for its output and

may result in the country having stronger home-market effects than its own GDP would

imply. To capture relative market size for Belgium and Spain, we may want to account for

the relative size of both their national markets and their neighboring markets.

       The potential for neighborhood effects to influence the location of production is

implied by recent theories of economic geography (Fujita, Krugman, and Venables, 1999).




                                                                                          12
These theories extend trade models based on monopolistic competition to regional settings.

In this body of work, neighborhood effects are captured by a market-potential function, in

which demand for a country’s goods is a function of income in other countries weighted by

transport costs to those economies. Applying this logic, we measure relative exporter size in

two ways. The first is the simple ratio of national GDPs, as in equation (9). The second is

the ratio of the market-potential functions for two countries.7 Following Fujita, Krugman,

and Venables (1999) and Hanson (2001), we define the market potential for country i as the

distance-weighted sum of GDP in other countries, or

                                                          J       −λ
                                                MPi = ∑ Yl d li                                          (10)
                                                         l =1


When using market potential to define country size, we replace ln(Yj/Yh) in (9) with

ln(MPj/MPh).8 This approach is similar in spirit to Davis and Weinstein (2002), who use a

gravity-based measure of industry demand to test for home-market effects.                                  Using

coefficient estimates on the distance variable from the gravity model in Hummels (1999),

we set λ equal to 0.92, but we also report results for other values.9



3. Data and Estimation Issues

         The data for the estimation come from several sources. For country exports by

product, we use the World Trade Database for 1990 (Feenstra, Lipsey, and Bowen,

1997). This source gives bilateral trade flows between countries for three- or four-digit

SITC revision 2 product classes.                At this level of industry classification (chemical

7
  For other empirical applications of market potential see Hanson (2001) and Redding and Venables (2002).
8
  One issue is how to measure a country’s distance to itself. Following Davis and Weinstein (2002) and
previous literature, we set this distance equal to (land area/π)0.5. Distance to the domestic market is then larger
for countries with greater land mass. We also discuss results for other measures.
9
  Hummels’ (1999) estimates of the gravity distance coefficient are similar to results in many other studies.
We choose to use his estimates because we also rely on other results in his paper.


                                                                                                                13
fertilizers, woven cotton fabrics, gas turbines) product classes are better seen as sectoral

aggregates than as individual product varieties, which is consistent with our empirical

specification. We choose 1990 to have a recent year, for which there are more non-zero

observations on bilateral trade at the product level, but not so recent that data on other

country characteristics are unavailable.

        For data on GDP, we use the Penn World Tables.                      For data on country

characteristics related to production costs, we use nonresidential capital per worker from

the Penn World Tables; available land supply relative to the population and average

education of the adult population from Barro and Lee (2000); and the average wage in

low-skill industries (apparel and textiles) from the UNIDO Industrial data base. For

distance and other gravity variables (whether countries share a common border, whether

countries share a common language), we use data from Haveman (www.eiit.org). Table

1 gives summary statistics on the regression variables.

        There are several estimation issues to be addressed. First, we need to select pairs

of exporting countries under the constraint that both members of a pair face common

trade policy barriers in importing countries. To ensure that exporters have diversified

manufacturing industries (and are not specialized in primary commodities or low-skill

goods), we limit the sample of exporters to OECD countries. Within this group, we form

country pairs from sets of countries that belong to a preferential trading arrangement of

some kind. These include the members of the European Economic Community (now

European Union);10 Canada and the United States (U.S.-Canada Free Trade Area); and

New Zealand and Australia (British Commonwealth). This yields a potential number of


10
  The European exporter countries are Austria, Belgium-Luxembourg, Denmark, Finland, France,
Germany, Great Britain, Greece, Italy, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden.


                                                                                                  14
107 exporter pairs per importer and industry.

        Figure 2 shows the cumulative distribution of log relative exporter GDPs (in

which the larger country of a pair occupies the numerator) for all exporter country pairs

in the sample.      There is considerable variation in country size.             For 65% of the

observations one country is at least 75 log points larger than the other and for 40% of the

observations one country is at least 150 log points larger than the other. The variation in

relative market potential within our sample, shown in Figure 3, is also considerable, but

is less than that for relative GDP. This is not surprising, since the market potential

measure places less weight on own-country GDP and more weight on other-countries’

GDP, reducing the cross-country variation in market size.

        Second, we need to choose the set of countries that import goods from these

exporters. One might presume that we should include all importer countries in the

sample. A problem with this approach is that many small countries have zero imports

from many of their bilateral trading partners, as one would expect given their size. In

many contexts, having the dependent variable take zero values can be addressed with

standard techniques, such as the Tobit. In our case, however, the dependent variable is

constructed from four separate export values (since it is a double log difference).

Determining the joint probability that two or more of these values are zero, as would be

necessary to employ a Tobit-style estimator, is a complicated problem and beyond the

scope of this paper. Instead, we limit our sample to the 15 largest importing countries,11

which in 1990 accounted for 69% of world imports of manufacturing goods. Restricting


11
   These are Australia, Austria, Belgium-Luxembourg, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the
Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Among other large
importers, we exclude Hong Kong and Singapore, which are entrepot economies, and China, which has
much lower per capita income than other large importers.


                                                                                                  15
the sample in this way greatly reduces the number of observations with zero export

values.12 Since the theory applies to importers on a case-by-case basis, there is in

principle no loss in focusing on large importers. To check the sensitivity of the results to

this restriction, we report results using samples of either the 58 largest importers (97% of

1990 world imports) or the 7 largest importers (52% of 1990 world imports).13

        Third, we need to identify industries with strong scale economies and low

transport costs and industries with weak scale economies and high transport costs. To do

so, we use data on average industry plant size from the 1992 U.S. Census of

Manufacturers and data on average industry transport costs in 1990 based on Feenstra’s

(1996) import series for U.S. industries. We use the SIC code to define these industries,

as it is the only classification for which we can obtain data on both industry plant size and

industry transport costs. We then match the selected SIC industries to SITC industries.

The measure of transport costs we use is freight costs as a share of total import value by

industry across all countries that export to the United States.14

        Table 2 lists the industries in the sample. To obtain this group, we rank industries

by average employment per establishment and by average freight costs. We first select

industries with freight costs in either the bottom third of the industry distribution of

freight costs, which constitute the low-transport cost group, or in the top third of the

distribution of freight costs, which constitute the high-transport cost group. Table 3

shows quantiles for freight costs and plant size. We then define the control group of


12
    For this sample, 81% of the observations have non-zero values for all four components of the dependent
variable. To preserve information on zero trade values, we follow Eaton and Tamura (1994) and assume
countries with zero reported bilateral imports of a good actually import minute quantities, which we set to
one. The results are unaffected by dropping observations that contain zero trade values from the sample.
13
   For the samples of 7 large importers and 58 large importers, respectively, 85% and 47% of the
observations have non-zero values for all four components of the dependent variable.
14
   Freight costs for an industry equal (c.i.f. imports/customs value of imports)-1.


                                                                                                        16
industries to be those with transport costs in the top third and above median average plant

size and the treatment group of industries to be those with transport costs in the bottom

third and below median average plant size.15 From these two groups, we exclude (a)

industries for which natural resources are likely to influence heavily industry location

(food processing (SIC 20), tobacco (SIC 21), lumber and wood products (SIC 24),

petroleum refining (SIC 29)); (b) industries that could not be concorded easily to an SITC

industry at the three digit-level (fabricated metal products (SIC 34), industries with a “not

elsewhere classified” designation); and (c) SIC industries that can only be matched to

SITC industries at the three-digit level and whose four-digit industries show high

variance in either plant size or freight cost (electric and electronic equipment (SIC 36),

some nonmetallic minerals (SIC 32), jewelry (SIC 391)).16

        One might be concerned that large average plant size is a noisy measure of

industries with high markups of price over marginal cost. For independent verification

that our large-plant size industries appear to have relatively high markups and that our

small-plant size industries appear to have relatively low markups, we draw on Hummels’

(1999) estimates of the elasticity of substitution (σ) by industry. Hummels estimates a

specification similar to (6), using data on bilateral trade flows, import tariffs, transport

costs, etc. In theory, σ pins down both the markup of price over marginal cost and the

ratio of average to marginal cost (under free entry) for an industry. Hummels estimates

substitution elasticities by two-digit SITC industry. In Table 2, we report his estimates


15
   This excludes from the sample low-transport cost industries with above median average plant size (most
transportation equipment (SIC 37) and chemicals (SIC 28)) and high-transport cost industries with below
median average plant size (textiles (SIC 22), apparel (SIC 23), leather and footwear (SIC 31)).
16
   We also exclude printing trades machinery (SIC 3555, SITC 726), due to the fact that measured trade of
this good was zero for nearly all bilateral country pairings, and cement (SIC 3241, SITC 6612), as this
industry had zero bilateral trade values for nearly two-thirds of bilateral country pairings.


                                                                                                      17
that correspond to the three or four digit SITC industries in our data. 17 It is reassuring to

find that our large-plant size industries have low values of σ (indicating high price-cost

markups and high average to marginal cost ratios), with a median value of 3.5, and that

our small-plant size industries have high values of σ (indicating low price-cost markups

and low average to marginal cost ratios), with a median value of 7.1.18

        We estimate equation (9) by matching industries from the first group in Table 2

with industries from the second group in Table 2. The high-transport cost, large-plant

size industries are the treatment group that theory suggests will be subject to home

market effects; the low-transport cost, small-plant size industries are the control group.



4. Estimation Results

4.1 Preliminary Results

        Before we present the main estimation results, it is useful to consider a simple

specification in which the dependent variable is for a pair of exporters log relative exports

of a good (which is equivalent to the numerator of the regressand in (9)) and the

independent variables are as in equation (9). We are interested in seeing whether the

results of this initial ‘single-difference’ specification are consistent with results for

standard gravity models, which show an elasticity of bilateral exporters with respect to

exporter GDP of about one. The results will also reveal whether the correlation between

relative exports and relative exporter size is larger for treatment (high-transport cost,


17
   These are OLS estimates. Hummels (1999) also reports IV estimates of σ, which tend to produce lower
values of σ for our large-plant size industries and higher values of σ for our small-plant size industries.
18
   Other industries are poor candidates for treatment or control groups. Those with low values of σ (less
than 4) tend to be intensive in natural resources (sugar, animal oils), and those with high values of σ
(greater than 7) tend to be intensive in natural resources (meat, dairy products), to have large plant sizes
(organic chemicals, pharmaceuticals, communications equipment), or to have high transport costs (leather).


                                                                                                         18
large plant size) industries than for control (low-transport cost, small plant size)

industries, as would be consistent with home-market effects.

        Table 4 shows single-difference gravity estimation results for the 8 treatment and

13 control industries in our sample. The regressors are for a pair of exporters log relative

exporter size, dummy variables for whether an exporter and importer share a common

border or a common language (in level differences for an exporter pair), log relative

capital per worker, log relative land area per capita, log relative average schooling, and

log relative wages in low-skill industries.19            The variable of interest is log relative

exporter size, which we measure as either log relative exporter GDP or log relative

exporter market potential. We show coefficient estimates for these variables only. In the

appendix, we show complete estimation results for a subset of industries.

        Coefficient estimates on relative exporter GDP are uniformly positive and in most

cases precisely estimated. Large countries export more of all kinds of goods, both those

with high transport costs and those with low transport costs. This is consistent with

estimation of standard gravity models, which show that bilateral exports are increasing in

exporter income.        We obtain qualitatively similar results when we replace relative

exporter GDP with relative exporter market potential, though these estimates are

somewhat less precise and contain some negative values.

        More illuminating is to compare results for relative exporter size for treatment and

control industries. The average coefficient on exporter GDP is 1.5 for the treatment

industries and 1.1 for the control industries and on exporter market potential is 1.5 for the

treatment industries and 0.9 for the control industries. This is suggestive of home-market

19
   Since the data include observations on relative income, distance, and other variables for given exporter
pairs across multiple importing countries, we correct the standard errors to allow for correlation in the
errors across observations that share the same exporter pair.


                                                                                                        19
effects. Exporters with larger home markets have higher exports of high-transport cost,

large-plant-size goods and lower exports of low-transport cost, small-plant-size goods. It

is also apparent in Table 4 that the impact of relative size on relative exports is larger for

some control industries than for some treatment industries. This is an initial indication

that support for home-market effects may not be uniform across industries.



4.2 Main Results

        Tables 5a and 5b show estimation results for equation (9).                     The dependent

variable is for two countries log relative exports of a treatment (high-transport cost, large-

plant size) industry minus log relative exports of a control (low-transport cost, small-

plant size) industry.       The independent variables are as in Table 4.                  We estimate

regressions separately for each of the 104 (8x13) treatment and control industry matches

in the data.20 In Table 5a, the measure of relative exporter size is relative GDP and for

brevity we report coefficient estimates for this variable only. The sample is exports by

107 country pairs to 15 large importing countries. Treatment industries, in order of

ascending freight costs, are arrayed across the columns; control industries, also in order

of ascending freight costs, are arrayed down the rows.

        Table 5a shows some evidence of home-market effects and of variation in these

effects across industries (as suggested by Table 4).                  Of the 104 regressions, the

coefficient on relative exporter GDPs is positive in 76 (73%) of the cases and positive

and statistically significant at the 10% level in 54 (52%) of the cases. Overall, this is

hardly overwhelming support for home-market effects. But, as we shall see, the results


20
   Since the regressors do not vary across industries, there is no gain to estimating equation (9) jointly
across pairs of treatment and control industries (OLS is just as efficient as GLS).


                                                                                                       20
are stronger for treatment industries with particular characteristics.

       Table 5b summarizes the coefficient estimates in Table 5a for subgroups of

treatment and control industry pairings.       For each group we report the fraction of

regressions with a positive coefficient estimate on log relative exporter GDP and the

fraction of regressions in which this coefficient is positive and statistically significant at

the 10% level. Treatment industries with very high transport costs show strong evidence

of home-market effects. Of the 39 regressions for the three treatment industries in the top

15% of transport costs (clay products, steel mills, steel pipes and tubes), the coefficient

on relative exporter GDPs is positive in 87% of the cases and positive and statistically

significant at the 10% level in 74% of the cases. For the five treatment industries in the

next 20% of transport costs, the coefficient on relative exporter GDP is positive in only

58% of the cases and positive and statistically significant in only 37% of the cases. Thus,

we find the strongest support for home-market effects where we would expect, among the

treatment industries with highest transport costs. No clear patterns appear when we break

out low-transport cost industries in terms of either freight costs or average plant size.

       Table 6a shows coefficient estimates for relative exporter size measured using

relative exporter market potential. There is again variation in the strength of home-

market effects across industries, but the patterns are quite different from Table 5a. This

is perhaps easier to see in Table 6b, which summarizes the results in Table 6a. With

exporter size measured in terms of market potential, home-market effects are strongest

among treatment industries with lower transport costs (with transport costs between the

65th and 85th percentiles). For treatment industries in the top 15% of transport costs, the

coefficient on relative exporter market potential is positive and statistically significant in




                                                                                            21
only 8% of the cases. For treatment industries in the next 20% of transport costs, the

coefficient on relative exporter market potential is positive in 89% of the cases and

positive and statistically significant in 75% of the cases. For all treatment industries,

evidence of home-market effects is stronger when compared against the control industries

with either the lowest transport costs or the smallest average plant sizes.

       To summarize the results, support for home-market effects depends on the

measure of relative exporter size that is used. For relative exporter size measured using

GDP, support for home-market effects is strong for treatment industries with very high

transport costs and weak for treatment industries with moderately high transport costs.

For relative exporter size measured using market potential, this pattern is reversed.

Support for home-market effects is weak for very high transport cost treatment industries

and strong for moderately high transport cost treatment industries.

       One explanation for these results is that the relevant definition of exporter size for

the home-market effect depends on the transport costs of the industry in question. For

industries with strong scale economies and very high transport costs, the relevant market

for exporter size may be the national market. Very high transport costs may mean that

the demand kick from an exporter’s neighboring markets is small. To return to the

Belgium and Spain example, in strong scale economy and very high transport cost

industries, national market size may matter more for industry location than how big an

exporting country’s neighbors are. In these industries, Belgium may get only a small

demand boost from France, Germany, and the Netherlands, such that their proximity does

not compensate for Belgium having a smaller national market than Spain. For industries

with strong scale economies and moderately high transport costs, however, the relevant




                                                                                          22
market for exporter size appears to include neighboring countries. Transport costs may

be low enough that industries in a given country get a demand boost from nearby nations.

In these cases, Belgium’s neighbors may generate enough demand for Belgium’s goods

that the country offers industries a larger base of demand than does Spain.



4.3 Further Results and Sensitivity Analysis

       To gauge the sensitivity of our findings to sample selection and model

specification, we examine the impact on the results of imposing alternative sample

restrictions and of using alternative sets of regression variables.

       We begin by expanding the list of importers to include the 58 countries with the

highest value of imports in 1990 (which together accounted for 97% of world imports)

and then re-estimating equation (9). Table 7a summarizes results using GDP to measure

relative exporter size and Table 7b summarizes results using market potential to measure

relative exporter size. These findings are quite similar to those in Tables 5a and 6a. This

is reassuring, given that a higher fraction of bilateral industry trade values are zero for

this expanded sample of importers. Zero industry trade values in the data thus do not

appear to be overly influencing the results (see notes 12 and 13).

       In Table 7a (market size measured using GDP), for treatment industries in the top

15% of transport costs, the coefficient on relative exporter GDPs is positive in 87% of

cases and positive and statistically significant in 74% of cases. For treatment industries

in the next 20% of transport costs, the coefficient on relative exporter GDPs is positive in

59% of cases and positive and statistically significant in 37% of cases. In Table 7b

(market size measured using market potential), for treatment industries in the top 15% of




                                                                                         23
transport costs, the coefficient on relative exporter GDPs is positive in 31% of cases and

positive and statistically significant in 21% of cases. And for treatment industries in the

next 20% of transport costs, the coefficient on relative exporter GDPs is positive in 88%

of cases and positive and statistically significant in 72% of cases.

       In Table 8, we try alternative specifications and sample restrictions. First, we

restrict the sample of importers to be the seven largest importing countries. Relative to

samples used in Tables 5-7, this sample contains fewer observations with zero bilateral

industry trade values. These results are quite similar to those already reported. Second,

we drop from the sample of exporters countries in Europe with relatively low per capita

incomes (Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain). This has very little impact on the results.

This finding is helpful in that it suggests that our controls for relative production costs do

a reasonably adequate job of controlling for differences in comparative advantage across

countries. Third, we use alternative measures of market potential. We allow λ, the

coefficient on distance in equation (10), to be as large as 1 or as small as 0.84, which

represents an increase or decrease of λ by two-standard deviations based on Hummels’

(1999) gravity estimates. These results are very similar to those in Table 6a. Fourth, in

constructing the market-potential measure, we experiment with changing the definition of

a country’s distance to itself. We set this distance equal to one, rather than π-0.5(land

area).5 (see note 8). This specification produces results very similar to Table 5a. This

alternative definition of market potential places a greater weight on national market size

than does the definition used in the regressions in Tables 6 and 7, and so yields results

that are similar to using national GDPs as the measure of exporter size.




                                                                                           24
4.4 Discussion

       Previous empirical literature has sought to identify home-market effects either by

(a) comparing gravity-model estimation results for aggregates of differentiated-product

industries and homogeneous-product industries, or (b) estimating the cross-country

correlation between industry output and the local demand for industry output. Relative

to the first body of work, we allow for greater industry heterogeneity in the strength of

home-market effects. Our findings strongly suggest that such industry heterogeneity is

important empirically. The second body of work, like ours, tests for the presence of

home-market effects at the level of individual industries. As we have mentioned, one

concern about this second approach is that it requires strong assumptions about the

orthogonality of industry demand and supply shocks. A justification for our approach is

that it appears to be relatively free from concerns about simultaneity bias.          These

concerns are moot, of course, if the two approaches yield similar results. To see whether

or not this is the case, we compare our results with representative results using the

industry supply-industry demand approach.

       In one prominent example of this approach, Davis and Weinstein (2002) find

evidence consistent with home-market effects for many industries, including food

products, textiles, leather, and wood products. These are industries with high-transport

costs, small average plant sizes, and large estimated substitution elasticities (see notes 15

and 18). Since these are industries with high-transport costs but presumably weak scale

economies, our selection criterion would suggest that they would be poor candidates for

either treatment or control industries. These are not industries that theory would suggest

are subject to home-market effects. Based on our approach, we would interpret evidence




                                                                                          25
of home-market effects for these industries as at best as neutral support for the

proposition that increasing returns influence trade patterns. Davis and Weinstein (2002)

find evidence inconsistent with home-market effects for other industries, including paper

and pulp, industrial chemicals, other chemicals, non-metallic mineral products, non-

electric machinery, electrical machinery, and transportation equipment.21 Of this group,

our selection criterion identifies pulp and paper, industrial chemicals, and non-metallic

mineral products as containing good candidates for treatment industries. We find

evidence consistent with home-market effects for some three- or four-digit industries

(paper, glassware, inorganic chemicals, clay) within this group.

         Thus, our approach, which is based on a difference-in-difference gravity

specification, yields results that are quite different from the industry supply-industry-

demand approach. While a full evaluation of competing approaches to test for home-

market effects is beyond the scope of this paper, it is clear that the strategy one takes to

identify home-market effects matters greatly for what one finds.



5. Conclusion

         In this paper, we test for home-market effects using a difference-in-difference

gravity specification. Home-market effects exist when relatively large countries have

relatively high exports of goods with high-transport costs and strong scale economies.

Such effects are predicted by models of trade based on increasing returns to scale but not

by models of trade based on comparative advantage. In our estimation approach, we


21
   In David and Weinstein (2002), there are a third set of industries (including beverage industries and
fabricated metals) for which results on home-market effects are inconclusive. The results of theirs that we
cite are for two-digit industries. They also report results for three-digit industries, but since these estimates
are based on very small sample sizes we do not dwell on them here.


                                                                                                             26
select pairs of exporting countries that belong to a common preferential trade area and

examine their exports of goods with high transport costs and strong scale economies

relative to their exports of goods with low transport costs and weak scale economies.

Previous tests of home-market effects may be subject to concerns about simultaneity bias,

specification bias, or industry heterogeneity.       The difference-in-difference gravity

specification that we use sweeps out of the regression the effects of import tariffs, home

bias in demand, and relative goods’ prices in importing countries. As in the estimation of

standard gravity models, our specification uses plausibly exogenous regressors.

       Empirical support for home-market effects depends on how we measure relative

exporter size. When measuring exporter size using national GDP, support for home-

market effects is strong for industries with very high transport costs and weak for

industries with moderately high transport costs. Alternatively, when measuring exporter

size using market potential, which accounts for demand links between nearby countries,

the pattern is reversed. Support for home-market effects is weak for the industries with

very high transport costs and strong for industries with moderately high transport costs.

       Our results suggest that in very high transport cost industries export production

tends to concentrate in large countries. For these industries, home-market effects appear

to be operative in the standard sense. Relative to small countries, large countries have

high exports of goods subject to strong scale economies and high transport costs. For

industries with moderately high transport costs, export production appears to concentrate

in neighborhoods with strong regional demand. Export production in these industries

may concentrate in small countries, as long as these countries have large neighbors that

increase effective demand for goods produced in the country. These results suggest that




                                                                                            27
the potential for falling trade barriers to deindustrialize small economies is weaker than

previous theoretical and empirical literature would indicate.

       As far as we are aware, the interaction between transport costs, scale economies,

and the location of export production that we uncover has not been found in previous

studies. One particular feature of our empirical approach may aid in identifying these

effects. We select industries that theory suggests are good candidates for home-market

effects and we make explicit comparisons between export production in these industries

and in a control group of industries. For countries to have excess concentration of

production in some industries, they must have an under concentration of production in

other industries. Our framework exploits these general equilibrium effects explicitly.




                                                                                         28
                                     References

Anderson, James E. and Eric van Wincoop. 2001. “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution
to the Border Puzzle.” NBER Working Paper No. 8079.

Barro, Robert J. and Jong-Wha Lee. 2000. “International Data on Educational
Attainment Updates and Implications.” NBER Working Paper No. 7911.

Brulhart, Marius and Federico Trionfetti. 2001. “A Test of Trade Theories when
Expenditure is Home Biased.” Mimeo, Universite de Lausanne.

Davis, Donald R. 1998. “The Home Market, Trade, and Industrial Structure.” American
Economic Review 88: 1264-1276.

Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein. 1999. "Economic Geography and Regional
Production Structure: An Empirical Investigation." European Economic Review 43:
379-407.

Davis, Donald R. and David E. Weinstein. 2002. "Market Access, Economic Geography
and Comparative Advantage: An Empirical Assessment.” Journal of International
Economics, forthcoming.

Debaere, Peter. 2001. “Testing ‘New’ Trade Theory without Gravity: Reinterpreting the
Evidence.” Mimeo, University of Texas.

Dixit, Avinash and Joseph Stiglitz. 1977. “Monopolistic Competition and Optimum
Product Diversity.” American Economic Review 67: 297-308.

Eaton, Jonathan and Akiko Tamura. 1994. “Bilateralism and Regionalism in Japanese-
U.S. Trade and Direct Foreign Investment Patterns.” Journal of the Japanese and
International Economies 8: 478-510.

Ellison, Glen and Edward L. Glaeser. 1997. “Geographic Concentration in U.S.
Manufacturing Industries: A Dartboard Approach.” Journal of Political Economy 105:
889-927.

Engel, Charles. and John Rogers.    1999.   “How Wide is the Border?“      American
Economic Review 86: 1112-1125.


Evenett, Simon J. and Wolfgang Keller. 2001. “On Theories Explaining the Success of
the Gravity Equation.” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.

Feenstra, Robert C. 1996. “U.S. Imports, 1972-1994: Data and Concordances.” NBER
Working Paper No. 5515.



                                                                                  29
Feenstra, Robert C., Robert Lipsey, and Charles Bowen. 1997. “World Trade Flows,
1970-1992, with Production and Tariff Data.” NBER Working Paper No. 5910.

Feenstra, Robert C., James R. Markusen, and Andrew Rose. 1998. “Understanding the
Home Market Effect and the Gravity Equation: The Role of Differentiating Goods.”
NBER Working Paper No. 6804.

Fujita, M., P. Krugman, and A. Venables. 1999. The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions,
and International Trade. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Hanson, Gordon. 2001. “Market Potential, Increasing Returns, and Geographic
Concentration.” Mimeo, UCSD.

Hanson, Gordon. 2001. "Scale Economies and the Geographic Concentration of
Industry," Journal of Economic Geography, 1(2001): 255-276.

Head, Keith and John Ries. 2001. “Increasing Returns versus National Product
Differentiation as an Explanation for the Pattern of US-Canada Trade.” American
Economic Review, forthcoming.

Helpman, Elhanan.      1981.    “International Trade in the Presence of Product
Differentiation, Economies of Scale, and Monopolistic Competition: A Chamberlin-
Heckscher-Ohlin Approach.” Journal of International Economics 11: 305-340.

Helpman, Elhanan. 1984. “A Simple Theory of Trade with Multinational Corporations.”
Journal of Political Economy 92: 451-471.

Helpman, Elhanan. 1987. “Imperfect Competition and International Trade: Evidence
from Fourteen Industrial Countries.” Journal of the Japanese and International
Economies 1: 62-81.

Helpman, Elhanan. 1999. “The Structure of Foreign Trade.” Journal of Economic
Perspectives 13: 121-144.

Helpman, Elhanan and Paul Krugman. 1985. Market Structure and Foreign Trade.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Holmes, Thomas J. and John J. Stevens. 2002. “The Home Market and the Pattern of
Trade: Round Three.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report 304.

Hummels, David. 1999. “Towards a Geography of Trade Costs.” Mimeo, University of
Chicago.

Hummels, David and James Levinsohn. 1995. “Monopolistic Competition and
International Trade: Reconsidering the Evidence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 110:
799-836.



                                                                                  30
Krugman, Paul. 1979. “Increasing Returns, Monopolistic Competition and International
Trade.” Journal of International Economics 9: 469-479.

Krugman, Paul. 1980. "Scale Economies, Product Differentiation, and the Pattern of
Trade." American Economic Review 70: 950-959.

Krugman, Paul. 1981. “Intraindustry Specialization and the Gains from Trade.” Journal
of Political Economy 89: 959-974.

Krugman, Paul. 1991. "Increasing Returns and Economic Geography." Journal of
Political Economy 99: 483-499.

Krugman, Paul and Anthony J. Venables. 1990. “Integration and the Competitiveness of
Peripheral Industry.” In. Christopher Bliss and Jaime de Macedo, eds., Unity with
Diversity in the European Economy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Krugman, Paul and Anthony J. Venables. 1999. “How Robust Is the Home Market
Effect?” Mimeo, MIT and LSE.

Markusen, James R. 1984. “Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains from
Trade.” Journal of International Economics 16: 205-226.

McCallum, John. 1995. “National Borders Matter:         Canada-U.S. Regional Trade
Patterns.” American Economic Review 85: 615-23.

Rauch, James E., “Networks versus Markets in International Trade,” Journal of
International Economics, 48(1), June 1999, 7-37.

Redding, Stephen and Anthony J. Venables. 2002. “Economic Geography and Global
Development.” Mimeo, LSE.

Trionfetti, Federico. 1998. “On the Home Market Effect: Theory and Empirical
Evidence.” Centre for Economic Performance Working Paper No. 987.

Trionfetti, Federico. 2001. “Using Home-Biased Demand to Test Trade Theories.”
Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv : 137(3): 404-426.

Venables, Anthony J. 1996. "Equilibrium Locations of Vertically Linked Industries."
International Economic Review 37: 341-360.

Weder, Rolf. 1998. “Comparative Home-Market Advantage: An Empirical Analysis of
British and American Exports.” Mimeo, University of Basel.




                                                                                  31
        Appendix: Full Estimation Results for Selected Industries (Single-Difference)

Independent                 662        641           52           68            786          898
Variables                   Clay      Paper        Inorg.     Sec. Nonf.      Trailers     Music.
                                                  Chem.        Metals                     Instrum.
GDP                     1.369          1.323       1.176         1.156         0.930        0.416
                       (14.11)         (6.97)     (6.17)        (9.61)        (13.19)       (1.92)
Distance               -0.533         -0.704      -1.957        -0.671         -1.350      -1.413
                       (-3.84)        (-4.11)    (-11.82)      (-6.31)        (-8.68)      (-8.44)
Common Language         0.398          0.660       1.449        -0.227         1.659        1.861
                        (1.83)         (2.12)     (5.31)       (-0.97)         (9.34)       (9.86)
Common Border           1.379          1.044      -0.543         0.988         0.643       -0.793
                        (8.98)         (4.57)     (-2.59)       (6.68)         (3.64)      (-3.93)
Capital/Worker          0.350          3.654       2.934         3.198         1.945       -2.362
                        (0.80)         (4.95)     (4.35)        (9.43)         (6.65)      (-3.40)
Wage in Low-Skill Ind. 0.574           2.113       1.094        -1.135         2.715        2.704
                        (1.77)         (3.39)     (1.79)       (-4.21)        (13.14)       (5.35)
Area/Population        -0.776          0.364       0.078        -0.172         -0.547      -0.660
                       (-7.74)         (2.02)     (0.44)       (-1.55)        (-8.46)      (-3.50)
Average Education      -3.001          4.659       0.079         1.125         3.321        1.373
                       (-4.00)         (3.88)     (0.08)        (2.23)         (7.20)       (1.59)
Constant               -0.094          0.275       0.441        -0.029         0.286        0.016
                       (-0.75)         (1.22)     (2.02)       (-0.23)         (3.42)       (0.07)

R2                         0.704      0.669       0.654          0.663         0.749        0.625


Notes: This table shows the coefficient estimates on all independent variables from
regressions in which the dependent variable is log relative industry exports for a pair of
countries for select industries. T-statistics (calculated from standard errors that have been
adjusted for correlation of the errors across observations that share the same pair of
exporting countries) are in parentheses. For each industry, the sample is relative bilateral
exports by 107 country pairs to 15 large importing countries (1262 observations).




                                                                                          32
                               Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                         Standard
                    Variable                             Mean            Deviation

                    Exports                                -0.056           4.021

                    GDP                                    0.261            1.564

                    Market Potential                       -0.096           0.440

                    Distance                               0.103            0.715

                    Common Language                        -0.006           0.353

                    Common Border                          -0.040           0.346

                    Capital per Worker                     -0.175           0.508

                    Wage in Low-Skill Industries           -0.044           0.507

                    Land Area/Population                   0.115            1.531

                    Average Education                      -0.070           0.314

Notes: All variables are differences in log values for pairs of exporting countries (except
for common language and common border, which are level differences in dummy
variables). The exporter pairs are Australia-New Zealand, Canada-United States, and all
pair wise combinations of the set, Austria, Belgium-Luxembourg, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Great Britain, Greece, Italy, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway,
Portugal, Spain, and Sweden. The importing countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium-
Luxembourg, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United States. (In this table, exports are log
differences for one industry; in most regressions, exports are double-log differences.)




                                                                                        33
               Table 2: Industry Average Plant Size and Freight Costs

     SIC        SITC                                          Freight              Plant
  Industry    Industry    Low-Transport Cost Industries        Cost                Size          σ
     334          68       Secondary nonferrous metals         0.014               35.1         6.7
382, 384, 385    87    Measuring devices, medical instruments 0.023                57.7         6.7
    3554         725        Paper industries machinery         0.024               54.7         8.5
     237         848                 Fur goods                 0.027                4.7         5.6
     387         885            Watches and clocks             0.027               42.2         8.1
     354      736, 737       Metalworking machinery            0.027               22.2         8.1
    3792         786           Trailers and campers            0.027               50.3         7.1
    3552         724             Textile machinery             0.028               29.6         8.5
     358         741          Refrigeration machinery          0.030               77.6         7.0
     393         898           Musical instruments             0.030               26.5         4.9
     353         723          Construction machinery           0.035               53.8         8.5
     352         721              Farm machinery               0.035               48.6         8.5
     395         895     Pens, pencils, and office supplies    0.035               28.5         4.9



                               High-Transport Cost Industries
 2621, 2631        641               Paper and paperboard               0.058      359.5        4.3
    332          671, 672      Iron and steel founded products          0.062      104.3        3.5
   3315            677         Steel wire and related products          0.066       70.8        3.5
    281             52                Inorganic chemicals               0.070       72.4        1.4
    322            665         Glassware and Glass Containers           0.070      125.9        2.7
   3317            678               Steel pipes and tubes              0.079      101.7        3.5
   3312            674       Blast furnace and steel mill products      0.079      786.2        3.5
    325            662              Structural clay products            0.158       56.6        2.7

Notes: Freight costs equal (c.i.f. industry imports/customs value of industry imports)-1, and
are based on U.S. imports in 1990 from Feenstra (1996). Plant size is industry average
workers per establishment, based on the 1992 U.S. Census of Manufacturers. σ is the OLS
estimate of the elasticity of substitution in Hummels (1999) for the corresponding two-digit
SITC industry. All estimates are statistically significant at the 5% level. See his paper for
more details on the estimation technique.




                                                                                           34
            Table 3: Quantiles for Industry Freight Costs and Plant Size

                                          Freight    Plant
                             Percentile     Cost      Size
                                      5    0.015      15.3
                                    15     0.026      27.1
                                    25     0.032      36.2
                                    35     0.037      44.8
                                    50     0.048      62.2
                                    65     0.058      84.0
                                    75     0.066     107.8
                                    85     0.074     150.3
                                    95     0.113     318.9

Notes: See Table 2 for variable definitions and sources.




                                                                           35
                        Table 4: Single-Difference Gravity Estimation

                 Relative Exporter Size                             Relative Exporter Size
 High-Transport              Market            Low-Transport                     Market
 Cost Industries    GDP     Potential          Cost Industries         GDP      Potential
       641         1.323      2.967                   68              1.156       0.345
     Paper         (6.97)     (2.70)           Sec. Nonf. Met.        (9.60)      (0.56)
    671, 672       1.329      3.632                   87              0.848       1.562
   Iron Prod.      (6.71)     (3.26)            Med. Instrum.         (7.12)      (1.76)
       677         1.419      3.413                  725              1.548      -0.639
   Steel Wire      (7.57)     (2.94)           Paper Machin.         (10.70)     (-0.78)
        52         1.176      5.967                  724              1.242      -0.111
   In. Chem.       (6.17)     (4.13)           Textile Machin.       (12.85)     (-0.15)
       665         1.202      2.411                  848              1.211      -3.844
   Glassware       (7.93)     (2.37)            Fur Clothing          (8.41)     (-6.07)
       678         1.731     -1.051                  885               1.43       0.367
   Steel Pipe     (13.28)    (-1.27)           Watches, Clocks       (21.56)      (0.49)
       674         2.345     -0.965               736, 737            1.534       0.106
   Steel Mill      (9.77)    (-0.86)           Machine Tools         (13.95)      (0.12)
       662         1.369     -2.560                  786               0.93       0.721
      Clay        (14.11)    (-3.39)               Trailers          (13.19)      (1.10)
                                                     741              0.915       1.153
                                                Refrig. Equip.        (6.02)      (1.27)
                                                     898              0.416       3.274
                                               Music. Instrum.        (1.92)      (3.14)
                                                     723              1.648       3.696
                                               Constr. Machin.       (10.77)      (2.77)
                                                     721              0.494       2.494
                                                Farm Machin.          (4.27)      (2.73)
                                                     895              0.922       1.921
                                                Pens, Pencils         (5.09)      (1.48)

Notes: This table shows coefficient estimates on log relative exporter size (measured either as GDP
or market potential) from regressions in which the dependent variable is log relative industry
exports for a pair of countries. T-statistics (calculated from standard errors that have been adjusted
for correlation of the errors across observations that share the same pair of exporting countries) are
shown in parentheses. Coefficient estimates on other regressors (see text or notes to Table 5a for
details) are suppressed. For each industry, the sample is relative bilateral exports by 107 country
pairs to 15 large importing countries (1262 observations)




                                                                                                   36
     Table 5a: Difference-in-Difference Gravity Estimation for Relative Exporter GDP
   High Tr. Cost    641       671, 672     677         52       665       678        674        662
Low Tr. Cost       Paper     Iron Prod. Steel Wire In. Chem. Glassware Steel Pipe Steel Mill    Clay
       68          0.167       0.174      0.264      0.021     0.046     0.575      1.189      0.213
 Sec. Nonf. Met.   (1.02)      (1.23)     (1.63)     (0.08)    (0.23)    (5.87)     (7.37)     (1.23)

      87           0.475      0.481      0.571      0.328     0.353      0.882      1.497      0.521
 Med. Instrum.     (2.23)     (1.86)     (2.81)     (2.29)    (2.97)     (4.44)     (4.65)     (3.89)

      725          -0.225     -0.219     -0.129     -0.372    -0.347     0.183      0.797      -0.179
 Paper Machin.     (-1.90)    (-0.98)    (-0.75)    (-1.58)   (-2.70)    (1.58)     (3.83)     (-1.22)

      848          0.112      0.119      0.209      -0.034    -0.009     0.520      1.134      0.158
  Fur Clothing     (0.50)     (0.47)     (1.12)     (-0.11)   (-0.04)    (4.03)     (6.10)     (1.06)

     885           -0.107     -0.101     -0.010     -0.254    -0.228     0.301      0.915      -0.061
Watches, Clocks    (-0.50)    (-0.44)    (-0.06)    (-1.33)   (-1.61)    (1.97)     (3.35)     (-0.66)

   736, 737        -0.211     -0.204     -0.114     -0.357    -0.332     0.197      0.811      -0.165
 Machine Tools     (-1.17)    (-0.83)    (-0.70)    (-2.07)   (-4.16)    (1.37)     (3.05)     (-2.11)

      786          0.394       0.40      0.490      0.247     0.272      0.801      1.416      0.439
    Trailers       (2.27)     (2.28)     (2.67)     (1.52)    (1.72)     (5.53)     (5.32)     (3.53)

      724          0.081      0.087      0.177      -0.066    -0.041     0.489      1.103      0.127
Textile Machin.    (0.37)     (0.37)     (1.12)     (-0.33)   (-0.29)    (3.17)     (3.86)     (1.56)

      741          0.409      0.415      0.505      0.262     0.287      0.816      1.431      0.454
 Refrig. Equip.    (1.71)     (1.44)     (2.31)     (1.78)    (2.32)     (3.72)     (4.18)     (3.39)

      898          0.907      0.914      1.004      0.761     0.786      1.315      1.929      0.953
 Music. Instrum.   (2.99)     (2.65)     (3.40)     (4.92)    (4.00)     (4.42)     (4.61)     (4.40)

     723           -0.324     -0.318     -0.228     -0.471    -0.446     0.083      0.698      -0.279
Constr. Machin.    (-2.15)    (-1.75)    (-1.51)    (-3.14)   (-3.36)    (0.51)     (2.71)     (-1.62)

     721           0.829      0.835      0.926      0.682     0.708      1.237      1.851      0.875
 Farm Machin.      (4.78)     (3.95)     (5.41)     (4.91)    (5.66)     (7.21)     (6.37)     (6.46)

      895          0.401      0.408      0.498      0.255     0.280      0.809      1.423      0.447
  Pens, Pencils    (1.72)     (1.39)     (2.32)     (1.44)    (1.97)     (3.64)     (4.05)     (2.74)



                                                                                                  37
Notes to Table 5a:

This table shows coefficient estimates on relative log exporter GDP for the specification shown
in equation (9). T-statistics (calculated from standard errors that have been adjusted for
correlation of the errors across observations that share the same pair of exporting countries) are
shown in parentheses. Coefficient estimates and t-statistics for other variables in the regressions
are suppressed. Some results are presented in an appendix.

All regressions are estimated separately for each pair of industries (which includes one high-
transport cost industry and one low-transport industry). For each industry pair, the sample is
1262 observations on relative exports by 107 high-income country pairs to 15 large importing
countries. High-transport cost industries are arrayed (in ascending order of transport costs)
across the columns; low-transport cost industries are arrayed (in ascending order of transport
costs) down the rows. The dependent variable is, for a given pair of exporters, the log difference
in their exports of the high-transport cost good minus the log difference in their exports of the
low-transport cost good. The independent variables are the log difference in the exporters’
GDPs, the log difference in the exporters’ distances to the importing country, the difference in
dummy variables for whether the exporters are adjacent to the importer, the difference in dummy
variables for whether the exporters share a common language with the importer, the log
difference in the exporters’ capital per worker, the log difference in the exporters’ average years
of education among the adult population, the log difference in the exporters’ land area per
population, and the log difference in the exporters’ average wage in low-skill industries.




                                                                                                38
                                       Table 5b:
                              Summary of Regression Results

                                            High-Transport Cost Industries
                       Transport costs in top 15%                  Transport costs in next 20%
Low-Transport        No. of Share of regressions with             No. of Share of regressions with
Cost Industries      Cases       β>0          p-value<0.1         Cases     β>0        p-value<0.1

All industries         39        0.872           0.744             65       0.585        0.369

Average size           18        0.889           0.778             30       0.567        0.300
 in bottom 25%
Average size           21        0.857           0.714             35       0.600        0.429
 in next 25%

Transport costs        21        0.810           0.667             35       0.486        0.343
 in bottom 15%
Transport costs        18        0.944           0.833             30       0.700        0.400
 in next 20%


Notes: This table summarizes the regression results in Table 5a. Table 5a shows estimated
coefficients on log relative exporter GDP from 104 regressions, where each regression matches a
high-transport cost industry to a low-transport cost industry. This table shows, for subsets of
industry matches, the fractions of regressions with a positive coefficient estimate and with a
positive coefficient estimate that is statistically significant at the 10% level.




                                                                                            39
    Table 6a: Difference-in-Difference Gravity Estimation, Relative Market Potential
   High Tr. Cost    641       671, 672     677         52       665       678        674         662
Low Tr. Cost       Paper     Iron Prod. Steel Wire In. Chem. Glassware Steel Pipe Steel Mill    Clay
       68          2.622       3.287      3.069      5.622     2.066     -1.395     -1.309     -2.904
 Sec. Nonf. Met.   (3.08)      (5.05)     (3.52)     (4.65)    (2.35)   (-2.32)    (-1.69)     (-3.73)

       87          1.405      2.070      1.851      4.405      0.849     -2.613     -2.527     -4.122
  Med. Instrum.    (2.13)     (2.43)     (2.32)     (6.60)     (1.87)    (-2.89)    (-1.97)    (-4.46)

       725         3.605      4.270      4.052      6.605      3.049     -0.412     -0.326     -1.921
  Paper Machin.    (6.52)     (5.00)     (4.84)     (6.51)     (5.18)    (-0.86)    (-0.39)    (-3.38)

      848          6.811      7.476      7.257      9.811      6.255     2.793      2.879      1.284
  Fur Clothing     (5.27)     (5.98)     (5.72)     (5.70)     (5.10)    (4.04)     (3.53)     (1.97)

      885           2.60      3.265      3.046      5.600      2.044     -1.418     -1.332     -2.927
 Watches, Clocks   (3.13)     (4.02)     (3.73)     (5.46)     (2.96)    (-2.66)    (-1.48)    (-5.23)

   736, 737        2.860      3.525      3.307      5.861      2.305     -1.157     -1.071     -2.666
 Machine Tools     (4.63)     (4.05)     (4.66)     (6.54)     (5.06)    (-2.13)    (-1.14)    (-4.95)

       786         2.246      2.911      2.692      5.246      1.690     -1.772     -1.686     -3.281
     Trailers      (3.19)     (4.42)     (3.38)     (5.72)     (2.53)    (-2.61)    (-1.59)    (-4.39)

       724         3.078      3.743      3.524      6.078      2.522     -0.939     -0.853     -2.449
 Textile Machin.   (3.62)     (4.20)     (4.64)     (5.56)     (3.71)    (-1.81)    (-0.87)    (-5.06)

       741         1.814      2.479      2.260      4.814      1.258     -2.204     -2.118     -3.713
  Refrig. Equip.   (2.77)     (2.65)     (3.09)     (6.38)     (3.36)    (-2.68)    (-1.72)    (-4.78)

      898          -0.307     0.358      0.139      2.693     -0.863     -4.324     -4.238     -5.834
 Music. Instrum.   (-0.35)    (0.32)     (0.14)     (3.65)    (-1.37)    (-3.80)    (-2.77)    (-5.26)

      723          -0.729     -0.064     -0.283     2.271     -1.285     -4.747     -4.661     -6.256
 Constr. Machin.   (-1.19)    (-0.10)    (-0.51)    (3.69)    (-2.11)    (-4.57)    (-3.79)    (-5.25)

      721          0.473      1.138      0.919      3.473     -0.083     -3.544     -3.458     -5.054
  Farm Machin.     (0.76)     (1.34)     (1.33)     (4.91)    (-0.17)    (-3.61)    (-2.56)    (-5.06)

      895          1.046      1.711      1.492      4.046      0.490     -2.972     -2.886     -4.481
  Pens, Pencils    (1.28)     (1.61)     (1.64)     (7.20)     (0.77)    (-2.42)    (-1.80)    (-3.53)


                                                                                               40
Notes to Table 6a:

The sample of exporting and importing countries is identical to that in Table 5a. The only
change is that the measure of relative exporter size is relative exporter market potential (instead
of relative exporter GDP).




                                         Table 6b:
                                Summary of Regression Results

                                             High-Transport Cost Industries
                        Transport costs in top 15%                   Transport costs in next 20%
Low-Transport         No. of Share of regressions with             No. of Share of regressions with
Cost Industries       Cases       β>0          p-value<0.1         Cases       β>0       p-value<0.1

All industries          39        0.077            0.077               65       0.892         0.754

Average size            18        0.077            0.077               30       0.933         0.733
 in bottom 25%
Average size            21        0.000            0.000               35       0.857         0.771
 in next 25%

Transport costs         21        0.077            0.077               35       1.000         1.000
 in bottom 15%
Transport costs         18        0.000            0.000               30       0.767         0.467
 in next 20%


Notes: This table summarizes the regression results in Table 6a. It follows the same format as
Table 5b.




                                                                                                41
                 Summary of Regression Results with Expanded Importer Sample

                      Table 7a: Relative GDP as Measure of Exporter Size
                                             High-Transport Cost Industries
                        Transport costs in top 15%                  Transport costs in next 20%
Low-Transport         No. of Share of regressions with            No. of Share of regressions with
Cost Industries       Cases       b>0          p-value<0.1        Cases      b>0       p-value<0.1

All industries          39        0.872           0.744              65        0.585        0.369

Average size            18        0.889           0.778              30        0.567        0.300
 in bottom 25%
Average size            21        0.857           0.714              35        0.600        0.429
 in next 25%
Transport costs         21        0.810           0.667              35        0.486        0.343
 in bottom 15%
Transport costs         18        0.944           0.833              30        0.700        0.400
 in next 20%

                 Table 7b: Relative Market Potential as Measure of Exporter Size

                                                 High-Transport Cost Industries
Low-Transport           No. of Share of regressions with        No. of Share of regressions with
Cost Industries         Cases    b>0 p-value<0.1                Cases       b>0    p-value<0.1

All industries           39      0.308      0.205                   65       0.877        0.723

Average size
 in bottom 25%           18      0.333      0.333                   30       0.900        0.767
Average size
 in next 25%             21      0.286      0.095                   35       0.857        0.686
Transport costs
 in bottom 15%           21      0.286      0.286                   35       0.914        0.829
Transport costs
 in next 20%             18      0.333      0.111                   30       0.833        0.600

Notes: For both tables, the specification and sample of exporting countries is identical to that in
Tables 5 and 6. The only change is that the sample of importing countries is now enlarged to be
the 58 countries with the highest total value of manufacturing imports in 1990. The sample for
each regression is 5115 observations on exporter-pair, importing-country combinations



                                                                                                  42
                                   Table 8: Sensitivity Analysis

                                  High-Transport Cost Industries
                            Transport costs in top 15%      Transport costs in next 20%
   Low-Transport        No. of Share of regressions with No. of Share of regressions with
   Cost Industries      Cases    β>0      p-value<0.1    Cases     β>0       p-value<0.1

   Sample with 7
  Largest Importers
        GDP               39     0.897         0.744           65       0.615         0.323
  Market Potential        39     0.154         0.077           65       0.938         0.738

  Sample with Rich
   Exporters Only
       GDP                39     0.769         0.385           65       0.523         0.277
  Market Potential        39     0.410         0.205           65       0.846         0.677

Alternative λ Values
for Market Potential
        λ=1               39     0.077         0.077           65       0.892         0.785
      λ=0.84              39     0.077         0.077           65       0.892         0.754

 Alternative Market
 Potential Measure        39     0.897         0.718           65       0.662         0.369

Notes: This table summarizes the results from sensitivity analysis. This table shows, for each case,
the fractions of regressions with a positive coefficient estimate on relative exporter size and with a
positive coefficient estimate that is statistically significant at the 10% level. The 7-importer sample
has U.S., Germany, Japan, France, U.K., Italy and Canada with 597 observations. The rich-exporter
sample has 762 observations and the following exporter pairs: Australia-New Zealand, Canada-
United States, and all pair wise combinations of the set, Austria, Belgium-Luxembourg, Denmark,
Finland, France, Germany, Great Britain, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway and Sweden. The
alternative market potential measure sets a country’s distance to itself equal to 1.




                                                                                                    43
44
                           1




                          .75
Cumulative Distribution




                           .5




                          .25




                           0
                                   .5         1         1.5        2          2.5       3   3.5
                                               Relative Log GDP, Exporter Pairs

                                         Figure 2: Distribution of Relative Exporter GDP
                           1




                          .75
Cumulative Distribution




                           .5




                          .25




                           0
                                        .25           .5           .75              1       1.25
                                               Relative Log MP, Exporter Pairs

                                Figure 3: Distribution of Relative Exporter Market Potential (MP)




                                                                                                    45
