                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            THE CASE AGAINST BOARD VETO IN CORPORATE TAKEOVERS


                                        Lucian Arye Bebchuk


                                         Working Paper 9078
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9078


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      July 2002




William J. Friedman and Alicia Townsend Friedman Professor of Law, Economics, and Finance, Harvard
Law School; Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research and Center for Economic Policy
Research. E-mail: bebchuk@law.harvard.edu; website: http://www.law.harvard.edu/faculty/bebchuk/. For
helpful conversations and comments, I am grateful to Oren Bargil, Lisa Bernstein, Victor Brudney, John
Coates, Alma Cohen, Allen Ferrell, Jesse Fried, Oliver Hart, Marcel Kahan, Louis Kaplow, Martin Lipton,
Mark Roe, Steve Shavell, Leo Strine, Guhan Subramanian, and participants in a workshop at Harvard Law
School and in The University of Chicago Law Review Symposium on Management and Control of the
Modern Business Corporation. I also wish to thank the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and
Business at Harvard Law School for its financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Lucian Arye Bebchuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the
source.
The Case Against Board Veto in Corporate Takeovers
Lucian Arye Bebchuk
NBER Working Paper No. 9078
July 2002
JEL No. G30, G34, K22


                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper argues that once undistorted shareholder choice is ensured -- which can be done by
making it necessary for hostile bidders to win a vote of shareholder support -- boards should not have
veto power over takeover bids. The paper considers all of the arguments that have been offered for board
veto -- including ones based on analogies to other corporate decisions, directors' superior information,
bargaining by management, pressures on managers to focus on the short-run, inferences from IPO
charters, interests of long-term shareholders, aggregate shareholder wealth, and protection of
stakeholders. Examining these arguments both at the level of theory and in light of all available empirical
evidence, the paper concludes that none of them individually, nor all of them taken together, warrants a
board veto. Finally, the paper discusses the implications that the analysis has for judicial review of
defensive tactics.




Lucian Arye Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1545 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu
                                                  TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION.................................................................................................................1

I. PREREQUISITE: ENSURING UNDISTORTED SHAREHOLDER CHOICE ...........................8

      A. Ensuring Undistorted Choice via Voting ....................................................8
      B. Can Preventing “Structurally Coercive” Bids Ensure Undistorted
         Choice? .............................................................................................................9
      C. Alternative Ways of Introducing Voting...................................................11
      D. Arrangements with Voting and No Board Veto ......................................12

II. THE CASE AGAINST BOARD VETO .............................................................................15

      A. Alternative Normative Perspectives ..........................................................16
      B. The Target Shareholders’ Perspective: Costs of Board Veto ..................18
             1. Ex Post Agency Costs........................................................................................... 18
             2. Ex Ante Agency Costs .......................................................................................... 20
      C. The Target Shareholders’ Perspective: Arguments for Board Veto ......22
             1.   Analogies to other Corporate Decisions................................................................ 22
             2.   Inefficient Capital Markets ................................................................................... 24
             3.   Directors’ Superior Information ........................................................................... 26
             4.   Bargaining by Management ................................................................................. 34
             5.   Dangers of Short-Term Focus............................................................................... 38
             6.   Executive Compensation to the Rescue................................................................. 41
             7.   Inferences from IPO Charters............................................................................... 44
      D. The Perspective of Long-Term Shareholders............................................47
      E. The Perspective of Aggregate Shareholder Wealth .................................47
      F. The Perspective of Stakeholders .................................................................49
             1. Expanding Discretion to Benefit Stakeholders ..................................................... 50
             2. Are Boards Good Agents of Stakeholders? ........................................................... 51
             3. The Tenuous Link between Stakeholder Protection .............................................. 53
                and Board Veto ...................................................................................................... 53
             4. Protecting Stakeholders or Protecting Managers? ............................................... 55
      G. Implementation within Existing Case Law...............................................55

CONCLUSION ..................................................................................................................57

APPENDIX: THE TAKEOVER OF WILLAMETTE ...............................................................58

      A. Did Willamette’s Incumbents Deliver Value for Shareholders? ............58
      B. Should Willamette-type Stalling Be Permitted? .......................................62
                                     INTRODUCTION

    In the last thirty years, takeover law has been the subject most hotly de-
bated by corporate law scholars. During this period, takeover law has un-
dergone many changes and much development, receiving the frequent at-
tention of both legislators and courts. State legislators have been busy adopt-
ing a variety of antitakeover statutes. Courts have been busy developing a
rich body of takeover doctrine. And an army of lawyers and investment
bankers has been busy improving and practicing techniques of takeover de-
fense and attack.
    A central issue in the debate has been whether boards should have
power to block unsolicited acquisition offers. To some scholars, such power
is a serious impediment to efficient corporate governance.1 To others, a
board veto is, on the contrary, necessary for effective corporate governance.2
Whereas opinions on the role of boards in corporate takeovers differ greatly,
there is wide agreement about the importance of this subject for corporate
governance and for the allocation of corporate assets.3
    The aim of this paper is to present the case against board veto over take-
over bids. Board veto could be justified in the absence of an undistorted
choice by shareholders—that is, a choice reflecting their judgment on
whether acceptance of the acquisition offer would serve their collective in-
terest.4 However, such an undistorted choice can be secured by appropriate
mechanisms, especially ones based on shareholder voting.


    1 For an early work taking this view, see Frank H. Easterbrook and Daniel R. Fischel,
The Proper Role of a Target’s Management in Responding to a Tender Offer, 94 Harv L Rev 1161
(1981). Whereas Easterbrook and Fischel argued that management should remain com-
pletely passive in the face of a takeover bid, other works that were opposed to board veto
at the time took the view that management should be permitted to solicit competing offers
but not to block any bids. See Lucian Arye Bebchuk, The Case for Facilitating Competing Ten-
der Offers, 95 Harv L Rev 1028, 1054–56 (1982); Ronald J. Gilson, A Structural Approach to
Corporations: The Case against Defensive Tactics in Tender Offers, 33 Stan L Rev 819 (1981).
    2 For an early work taking this view, and starting the takeover debate of the 1980s, see
Martin Lipton, Takeover Bids in the Target’s Boardroom, 35 Bus Law 101, 103 (1979).
    3 See William T. Allen, Jack B. Jacobs, and Leo E. Strine, The Great Takeover Debate: A
Meditation on Bridging the Conceptual Divide, 69 U Chi L Rev _ (2002) (suggesting that the
“great takeover debate” reflects a fundamental struggle between competing models of the
corporation and corporate governance). But see Marcel Kahan and Edward B. Rock, How I
Learned to Stop Worrying and Love the Pill: Adaptive Responses to Takeover Law, 69 U Chi L Rev
_ (2002) (arguing that the takeover debate has lost much of its practical significance due to
developments in executive compensation schemes).
    4 Thus, when shareholders exercise undistorted choice, an acquisition offer will suc-
ceed if and only if the shareholders view the offered acquisition price as higher than the



                                              1
     In the presence of a mechanism ensuring shareholders’ undistorted
choice, I argue, boards should not have a veto power over acquisitions be-
yond the period needed for the board to put together alternatives for share-
holders’ consideration. In the course of my analysis, I examine the full array
of arguments that supporters of board veto have made over the years. I also
use and rely on the substantial body of empirical evidence that has accumu-
lated since the debate on the subject started. Concluding that board veto is
undesirable, at least in the absence of explicit shareholder authorization to
the contrary, I also discuss how takeover law should best proceed given its
established structure and principles.
     Part I of this paper discusses arrangements needed to ensure undis-
torted shareholder choice. In the absence of any such arrangements, argu-
ments for board veto could be based on collective-action problems that
could lead shareholders to tender even if they view remaining independent
(at least for the time being) as best. Such collective-action problems, how-
ever, can be effectively addressed without providing boards with a veto
power. One approach that has received considerable support is to block
“structurally coercive” bids,5 but such an approach, I show, is not an effec-
tive instrument for securing undistorted choice. A better approach for this
purpose is “the shareholder voting approach” that makes it necessary for
hostile bidders to win a vote of shareholder support. Such a vote would
provide a genuine reflection of shareholders’ preferences regarding the ac-
quisition offer.6
     There are different ways, some better than others, to introduce winning
a shareholder vote as a formal or practical condition for a takeover. Many
existing arrangements, both in the United States and Europe, have intro-


target’s independent value. The concept of undistorted choice in the face of an acquisition
offer was introduced and analyzed in Lucian Arye Bebchuk, Toward Undistorted Choice and
Equal Treatment in Corporate Takeovers, 98 Harv L Rev 1695 (1985) (hereinafter Bebchuk, Un-
distorted Choice), Lucian Arye Bebchuk, The Pressure to Tender: An Analysis and a Proposed
Remedy, 12 Del J Corp L 911 (1987) (hereinafter Bebchuk, Pressure to Tender), and Lucian
Arye Bebchuk, The Sole Owner Standard for Takeover Policy, 17 J Legal Stud 197 (1988) (here-
inafter Bebchuk, Sole Owner Standard).
    5 See Ronald J. Gilson and Reinier Kraakman, Delaware’s Intermediate Standard for De-
fensive Tactics: Is There Substance to Proportionality Review?, 44 Bus Law 247, 265 (1989).
    6 For a formal model that demonstrates the advantages of shareholder voting over
tender decisions, see Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Oliver Hart, Takeover Bids versus Proxy
Fights in Contests for Corporate Control, Harvard Olin Discussion Paper No 336 (2001), avail-
able online at <http://papers.ssrn.com/id=290584>. I also argued for requiring bidders to
win a vote or some other vote-like test as a condition for an acquisition in Bebchuk, Undis-
torted Choice, supra note 4, at 1695; Bebchuk, Pressure to Tender, supra note 4, at 911; and
Bebchuk, Sole Owner Standard, supra note 4, at 197.



                                             2
duced voting as such a condition. In the United States, most states have con-
trol share acquisition statutes that make it practically necessary for a bidder
to win a vote in order to gain control.7 Furthermore, in most states, boards
may install and maintain poison pills that prevent an acquisition. The power
to maintain pills implies that a hostile bidder would be able to gain control
over incumbents’ objections only if the bidder first won a ballot box victory
to replace the incumbents with directors that would redeem the pill.
     In my view, once a mechanism that ensures an undistorted choice by
shareholders is in place, the board should not be able to veto an acquisition
beyond the period necessary for preparing alternatives for shareholder con-
sideration. The board should not use its powers either to deny shareholders
access to a vote beyond such a period or to impede bids that have won a
shareholder vote of support.
     However, boards in most companies around the United States have
some significant veto power that enables them to block for a substantial pe-
riod of time an offer that could (or even did) win a vote of shareholder sup-
port. Some of this veto power comes from the interaction of the power to
maintain pills with some antitakeover charter provisions (the large majority
of which had been adopted before their antitakeover significance could have
been recognized by shareholders). The combination of a poison pill and a
staggered board, which exists in a majority of publicly traded firms, is espe-
cially powerful in providing boards with a veto power.8 Incumbents’ advi-
sors keep coming up with new ideas for strengthening incumbents’ veto
power.9 The push to expand and protect board veto over corporate acquisi-
tions has been much helped by state legislators and courts.
     Supporters of board veto have put forward a wide array of arguments in
support of their position. They have used these arguments to suggest that
boards should have the power to block acquisition offers at least for a sub-


   7 See Grant Gartman, State Takeover Laws §§ A-2 to A-3 (Investor Responsibility Re-
search Center 2000).
   8 See Lucian Bebchuk, John Coates IV, and Guhan Subramanian, The Anti-Takeover
Power of Classified Boards: Theory, Evidence and Policy, 54 Stan L Rev (forthcoming 2002). This
work provides a theoretical account and an empirical confirmation of the powerful anti-
takeover force of staggered boards. It also reports that 58 percent of the firms in a sample of
about 2,400 publicly traded firms had staggered boards. The discussion of staggered
boards in this paper, and the proposal discussed below for not allowing directors with a
staggered board to maintain a pill after losing one election over a bid, are largely based on
this work.
   9 See, for example, Quickturn Design Systems, Inc v Shapiro, 721 A2d 1281, 1287–88 (Del
1998) (describing how the board of Quickturn first adopted a “dead hand” pill and subse-
quently replaced it with a “deferred redemption” pill).



                                              3
stantial period of time. Indeed, in the view of the most well-known and
powerful defender of the board veto position, the best regime would have
directors elected for five-year terms and granted largely absolute power
over acquisition offers made in the five years between elections.10
    Part II of this paper presents the case against board veto. Whereas schol-
ars opposed to board veto have analyzed and relied on the agency problems
involved in such veto, they have not attempted thus far to provide a full
analysis of the array of arguments marshaled by supporters of board veto.
This paper seeks to fill this gap and to offer such an analysis. I begin by dis-
cussing the agency problems arising from board veto and the empirical evi-
dence indicating that these problems are likely to be substantial. Then, to
evaluate whether these agency problems are outweighed by some counter-
vailing benefits, I identify and assess all of the arguments that have been
made over the years in favor of board veto. I examine each argument both at
the level of theory and in light of all existing empirical evidence. As will be
discussed, a significant amount of relevant empirical work has been done in
recent years, and it enables a better assessment of the issues than was possi-
ble earlier.
    I start with an argument in favor of board veto that is based on an anal-
ogy to other corporate decisions. Boards have power over other corporate
decisions, and this arrangement is commonly viewed as working well.
Therefore, supporters of board veto argue that, in the absence of strong rea-
sons to treat the takeover context differently, providing boards with the
power to make decisions in the takeover context should be expected to be
beneficial as well. There are strong reasons, however, to treat the takeover
context differently.
    In particular, the agency problem is more severe in the takeover context.
Furthermore, in the takeover context we have the option, which is not viable
or practical in most other corporate contexts, of letting shareholders decide.
Indeed, the case against board veto in takeovers is not only consistent with,
but in fact reinforces, the case for board power over other corporate deci-
sions: the absence of board veto in takeovers provides a safety valve against
management’s straying from shareholders’ interests in other corporate con-
texts.
    Another argument made in favor of board veto is that, because capital
markets are not informationally efficient, board veto is necessary to protect
shareholders during periods in which shares trade at “depressed” levels
significantly below their fundamental value. The presence of such pricing


   10 See Martin Lipton and Steven A. Rosenblum, A New System of Corporate Governance:
The Quinquennial Election of Directors, 58 U Chi L Rev 187, 224 (1991).



                                          4
inefficiencies, however, only implies that companies should have complete
freedom at any given point in time to choose whether to reject a premium
offer and remain independent. This position does not imply by itself that
boards rather than shareholders should make such decisions.
     Supporters of board veto do argue that, because directors have superior
information, shareholders would be better off if boards were to decide
whether an offered price exceeds the target’s fundamental value. Not pro-
viding boards with veto power, however, hardly implies that directors’ in-
formation would be unused. Boards could still communicate their informa-
tion, or at least their recommendation, to the shareholders. When directors
recommend rejecting an offer that shareholders otherwise would be inclined
to take, shareholders would have to decide whether to defer to the directors’
view. In making this decision, shareholders would weigh both the possibil-
ity that directors might have superior information and the concern that di-
rectors might have self-serving reasons for preferring independence. Share-
holders would try to reach the best decision, given the circumstances of each
case, on the question of whether to defer.
     Thus, providing boards with veto power implies that, instead of letting
shareholders decide whether to defer to directors’ view of the offer, defer-
ence would be mandated. In today’s capital markets, such paternalistic
hands-tying is unlikely to benefit shareholders. Mandated deference should
not be expected to produce for shareholders better results overall than let-
ting shareholders decide for themselves whether to defer. Furthermore, the
evidence does not support the view that, when boards defeat offers,
shareholders on average benefit, either in the short run or in the long run.
     Yet another argument made in favor of board veto concerns its effects on
premia in the event of an acquisition. Boards, it is argued, can use their veto
power to extract higher premia for shareholders. Having a regime of share-
holder voting and no board veto, however, does not imply that management
cannot engage in substantial bargaining. Lawyers can and do bargain for
their client, for example, even though they generally have no veto power
and the client is free to accept settlement offers. Similarly, a regime with
shareholder voting and no board veto is consistent with significant bargain-
ing by management on shareholders’ behalf for a long period of time, pro-
vided only that shareholders are content to have management continue bar-
gaining and do not elect to intervene to take management’s bargaining
mandate away. Furthermore, whatever extra bargaining lever management
might obtain from board veto might be used not to extract a higher premium
but rather to obtain a better treatment for management. The empirical evi-
dence has not identified any significant positive effects of board veto on
takeover premia and, furthermore, indicates that managers are willing to ac-



                                      5
cept lower premia for shareholders in acquisitions providing more favorable
treatment of managers.
    In addition to the arguments noted above, I also examine arguments
based on a concern that takeovers pressure managers to focus on short-term
results, on the possibility of designing executive compensation schemes to
neutralize the negative effects of board veto, and on potential inferences
from charter provisions adopted by firms going public. My conclusion is
that none of the arguments made in favor of board veto, nor all of them
combined, provides a basis for concluding that board veto serves target
shareholders.
    Concluding that board veto is undesirable from the perspective of target
shareholders, I turn to examine the question from other perspectives. In par-
ticular, I discuss whether the case for board veto becomes stronger if it is
evaluated from (i) the perspective of targets’ long-term shareholders, (ii) the
perspective of aggregate shareholder wealth (incorporating the effects of
board veto on bidders’ shareholders), and (iii) the perspective of all corpo-
rate constituencies (incorporating effects on targets’ stakeholders). I con-
clude that board veto is unwarranted when examined from any of these
perspectives.
    Because of the importance in the debate of arguments based on stake-
holder interests, I pay significant attention to such arguments. Even assum-
ing that stakeholders should get some protection beyond the one accorded
by their contracts, I argue, support for board veto would not follow; such a
veto would not be a good way to address this concern. The overlap between
managers’ and stakeholders’ interests is hardly such that the former could
be relied on to use their powers to protect the latter.
    Therefore, those concerned about providing extra protection to stake-
holders in corporate acquisitions should focus on acquisitions in general,
rather than on hostile acquisitions, and should seek arrangements tailored to
address this concern. Concerns about stakeholders do not provide a good
basis for expanding the discretionary power of boards in the hope that this
would somehow work to the benefit of stakeholders. The debate over board
veto, I suggest, does not involve a choice between shareholders and stake-
holders but rather a choice between more and less power to managers.
    Part II ends by discussing the implications of the analysis for the judicial
review of defensive tactics. In other work I do some exploring of the best de-
sign, starting from a clean slate, of a regime of undistorted choice and no
board veto. Here, however, I limit myself to discussing how a move toward
such a regime could be accomplished by courts taking as given the basic
structure of existing doctrine. In particular, existing doctrine subjects the use
of defensive tactics in general and poison pills in particular to a requirement



                                       6
of proportionality to the threat posed, and the analysis below can inform
how this requirement is interpreted. In particular, a substantial reduction in
board veto power would be achieved by a doctrine that, at least in the ab-
sence of explicit shareholder authorization to the contrary, incumbents pro-
tected by a staggered board should not be allowed to continue maintaining a
poison pill after losing one election fought over an acquisition offer.
    Finally, the Appendix to this paper provides a detailed analysis of the
recent takeover case of Willamette on which Martin Lipton relies in his re-
sponse to this paper. I show that, in contrast to Lipton’s suggestions, the
story of the Willamette takeover does not weaken the case against board
veto. Indeed, I argue, it would be valuable for target shareholders if the type
of stalling done by Willamette’s incumbents were not permitted in the fu-
ture.
    Before proceeding, I wish to note two related issues that my analysis
will put aside. I will focus on analyzing the nature of the optimal default ar-
rangement concerning board veto. Although I will discuss what inferences
can be made with respect to this question from IPO charters, I will not exam-
ine in this work the extent to which opting out of the default arrangement
should be permitted and, if permitted, what should be required for such opt-
ing out to be valid.11 Second, I will put aside the question, relevant for both
the United States and Europe, of whether the provision of the default ar-
rangement should be done at the federal or state level.12 Although these two
questions are important, my subject can be adequately analyzed without
getting into them, and thus I will focus on whether, at least in the absence of
appropriate shareholder authorization to the contrary, it would be desirable
for boards to have veto power in corporate takeovers.


    11 Other work in which I discuss these questions include Lucian Arye Bebchuk and As-
saf Hamdani, Optimal Defaults for Corporate Law Evolution, 96 Nw U L Rev 489 (2002);
Lucian Arye Bebchuk, Limiting Contractual Freedom in Corporate Law: The Desirable Con-
straints on Charter Amendments, 102 Harv L Rev 1820 (1989); Lucian Arye Bebchuk, The De-
bate on Contractual Freedom in Corporate Law, 89 Colum L Rev 1395 (1989).
    12 I discuss this question in other work, including Lucian Arye Bebchuk, Federalism and
the Corporation: The Desirable Limits on State Competition in Corporate Law, 105 Harv L Rev
1435 (1992); Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Allen Ferrell, A New Approach to Takeover Law and
Regulatory Competition, 87 Va L Rev 111 (2001); Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Allen Ferrell, Fed-
eral Intervention to Enhance Shareholder Choice, 87 Va L Rev 993 (2001); Oren Bar-Gill, Michal
Barzuza, and Lucian Arye Bebchuk, A Model of State Competition in Corporate Law, working
paper (2001), available online at <http://papers.ssrn.com/id=275452>; Lucian Arye
Bebchuk and Assaf Hamdani, Vigorous Race or Leisurely Walk: Reconsidering the Debate on
State Competition in Corporate Law, 112 Yale L J (forthcoming 2002); Lucian Arye Bebchuk
and Allen Ferrell, On Takeover Law and Regulatory Competition, 57 Bus Law (forthcoming
2002).



                                              7
                     I. PREREQUISITE: ENSURING UNDISTORTED
                              SHAREHOLDER CHOICE

                     A. Ensuring Undistorted Choice via Voting

     One reason that could be given for granting boards a veto power is a
concern that shareholders facing a takeover bid might be unable to exercise
an undistorted choice. In the absence of any restrictions on bidders, share-
holders might be pressured to tender. The pressure-to-tender problem is by
now familiar to students of takeovers, and it can thus be described with
brevity.13 In deciding whether to tender, each shareholder will recognize
that its decision will not determine the fate of the offer. The shareholder
therefore will take into account the scenario in which the bid is going to suc-
ceed regardless of how the shareholder acts. Whenever the expected post-
takeover value of minority shares is lower than the bid price, this scenario
will exert pressure on the shareholder to tender. As a result, shareholders
might tender, and a takeover might occur, even if most shareholders do not
view a takeover as being in their collective interest.
     The pressure to tender is most visible and conspicuous in the case of
partial, two-tier bids. In Unocal, the landmark takeover case, the potential
coercive effect of such a bid was held to pose a substantial threat that justi-
fied strong defensive measures.14 Although the pressure to tender is most
visible in such cases, it is in no way limited to them. It can be shown to exist
also when bids are for all shares, and when no second-step, low-value
freezeout is expected, as long as the expected post-takeover value of minor-
ity shares is lower than the bid price.15
     The approach for addressing the distorted choice problem that I favor is
one based on using a voting or vote-like mechanism. Under this approach,
the problem is addressed by enabling each shareholder to express separately
its preferences with respect to the following two questions: (i) whether it
prefers a takeover to take place; and (ii) whether it prefers that its shares be
acquired in the event that a takeover takes place. The pressure-to-tender
problem essentially results from the fact that even shareholders who wish to


   13 For a full account of this problem, see Bebchuk, Undistorted Choice, supra note 4, at
1717–33; Bebchuk, Pressure to Tender, supra note 4, at 917–31. For a formal model of the
problem, see Bebchuk and Hart, Takeover Bids versus Proxy Fights in Contests for Corporate
Control, supra note 6; Lucian A. Bebchuk, A Model of the Outcome of Takeover Bids, Harvard
Law School Program in Law and Economics Discussion Paper No 11 (1985).
   14 Unocal Corp v Mesa Petroleum, Inc, 493 A2d 946, 956 (Del 1985).
   15 See Bebchuk, Undistorted Choice, supra note 4, at 1735–42; Bebchuk, Pressure to Tender,
supra note 4, at 925–27.



                                             8
answer question (i) in the negative (that is, who prefer that a takeover not
take place) might tender and thereby support the bid because of their inter-
est in giving a positive answer to question (ii) to ensure that their shares are
acquired in the event of a takeover.
     A voting mechanism provides a “clean” way of enabling shareholders to
express separately their preferences on issues (i) and (ii). Consider any pro-
cedure under which: (1) shareholders vote or otherwise express their prefer-
ences on whether a takeover should take place; (2) the bidder is permitted to
gain control only if a majority of the shareholders express their support for a
takeover; and (3) in the event that the offer wins such majority support, all
shareholders—regardless of whether they supported a takeover—receive a
genuine opportunity to get their pro rata fraction of the total acquisition
price. Under such a procedure, because voting against the offer would im-
pose no penalty on the voting shareholder in the event of a takeover, share-
holders’ votes would solely reflect their preferences concerning whether a
takeover should take place. As a result, the bid will obtain the necessary vote
of shareholder support only if most shareholders indeed view a takeover as
beneficial.

              B. Can Preventing “Structurally Coercive” Bids Ensure
                                Undistorted Choice?

     As I have said, having a vote-like mechanism in place would be the best
way of ensuring undistorted choice. Before turning to discuss alternative
versions of a voting requirement, however, I wish to consider briefly an al-
ternative approach based on restricting the form that bids may take. In par-
ticular, some influential cases and commentators identified distorted choice
with the presence of a bid that is “structurally coercive.”16 On this view, in
the face of a bid that is “structurally noncoercive”—in particular, a cash bid
for all shares with a back-end (that is, a planned freezeout for remaining
shares) in cash and at the bid price—shareholders can be expected to exer-
cise undistorted choice.
     Although I do not favor this approach to addressing the pressure-to-
tender problem, I wish to stress at the outset that Part II’s analysis of the case
against board veto should still be wholly relevant to readers who do favor
this approach. The analysis in that Part suggests that, once a mechanism en-
suring undistorted choice is in place, having a board veto is undesirable. If a
person favors ensuring undistorted choice by preventing structurally coer-


   16 See City Capital Associates Ltd Partnership v Interco, 551 A2d 787, 797 (Del Ch 1988);
Gilson and Kraakman, supra note 5, at 274.



                                             9
cive bids and is also persuaded by Part II’s analysis, then this person should
support a regime combining a prohibition on structurally coercive bids with
no board veto.
     Having made this point, let me turn to explaining why prohibiting
structurally coercive bids does not ensure undistorted choice as effectively
as would shareholder voting.17 Consider a shareholder that must decide at
the present time whether to tender to a $100-per-share bid that, in the event
of success, is supposed to be followed in four months by a freezeout at $100
per share. Supposing that the relevant discount rate of return for this share-
holder is 6 percent a year—that is, 2 percent for four months—the freezeout
consideration has a present value of $98. Although the $2 difference between
the present value of the bid price and the freezeout consideration is small,
and thus might appear at first sight of little practical significance, it will
likely weigh heavily in the shareholder’s considerations. The reason is that
(i) the scenario in which the shareholder is going to be pivotal has a smaller
likelihood than (ii) the scenario in which the offer is going to succeed regard-
less of how the shareholder acts. And in considering the latter scenario (ii), a
2 percent difference is sufficient to make tendering clearly preferable; many
financial decisions are influenced by a 2-percent or even smaller difference.
     In theory, distortions could be eliminated by ensuring perfect equality—
rather than merely rough equality—between the values of the bid price and
the freezeout consideration. If such perfect equality were ensured, and if the
transaction costs of tendering were zero,18 then deciding shareholders would
be able to ignore the scenario in which the bid is going to succeed regardless
of their decision, since the outcome for them in this scenario would be ex-
actly the same regardless of how they act. However, such “knife’s edge”
conditions of perfect equality are practically unattainable.
     It might be thought initially that the necessary conditions can be at-
tained by requiring that the freezeout price be equal to the bid price plus in-
terest. The discount rates of target shareholders, however, are likely to vary
considerably and each shareholder’s rate might be unobservable. Thus, no
interest rate could be set to ensure for all shareholders equality between the


   17 The argument below builds on Bebchuk, Undistorted Choice, supra note 4, at 1740–42;
Bebchuk, Pressure to Tender, supra note 4, at 944–47.
   18 Transaction costs are relevant because, if the bid consideration and the freezeout con-
sideration were exactly equal, then holding out would be preferable for shareholders for
whom tendering involves some non-negligible transaction costs (which is the case for
many retail investors). Assuming the bid is conditional on gaining control, not tendering
would save these transaction costs in the scenario in which the bid is going to fail and
shares are going to be returned, and by hypothesis would make no difference in the sce-
nario in which the bid is going to succeed.



                                             10
values of the bid and the freezeout consideration. The decisions of all share-
holders for whom such equality is not assured, would be distorted—either
in favor of tendering (in case the present value of the freezeout consideration
is lower than the bid price) or in favor of holding out (otherwise). Thus, the
practical inability of attaining the knife’s edge conditions of perfect equality
renders the considered approach incapable of removing from shareholders’
decision-making the scenario in which the bid is going to succeed regardless
of the shareholder’s decision. Because this scenario is commonly more likely
than the scenario in which the shareholder is going to be pivotal, even small
deviations from perfect equality might distort outcomes in a big way.
     In contrast, voting provides a robust way of ensuring that shareholders’
expressed preferences would be solely based on their judgment of how the
acquisition price compares with the target’s independent value. Under the
voting approach, in the scenario in which the bid is going to succeed regard-
less of a shareholder’s decision, a shareholder’s voting decision would not
affect the shareholder’s interests, because all shareholders would have an
opportunity to get their pro rata fraction of the acquisition price. This en-
sures that distortions always would be removed completely from the share-
holder’s decision-making.

                      C. Alternative Ways of Introducing Voting

    Thus far I have spoken abstractly about the benefits of having a voting
or vote-like mechanism. Choosing a particular version requires making a
number of procedural choices. I explore elsewhere the considerations rele-
vant for the optimal design of the voting procedure. In early work, for ex-
ample, I discussed an arrangement under which tendering shareholders
may tender approvingly or disapprovingly and the bidder may proceed
only if a majority of shareholders tendered approvingly.19 For the purpose of
this paper, however, choosing the particular parameters of an optimal vot-
ing procedure is not necessary. It still might be useful to give some con-



   19 See Bebchuk, Undistorted Choice, supra note 4, at 1747–52. An arrangement of this
kind was incorporated into Israel’s new corporate code following a proposal by Professor
Uriel Proccacia (the code’s chief designer) and myself. See Lucian Bebchuk and Uriel Proc-
cacia, Corporate Acquisitions, 13 U Tel Aviv L Rev 71 (1988). Another “clean” version of a
voting mechanism would allow merger proposals to be initiated and brought for a share-
holder vote not only by the board but also by (a sufficient number of) shareholders. See
Bebchuk and Hart, Takeover Bids vs. Proxy Fights in Contests for Corporate Control, supra note
6, at 24; Lucian Arye Bebchuk, The Allocation of Power between Managers and Shareholders,
working paper (Nov 2001).



                                             11
creteness to the idea of a voting mechanism by briefly noting some voting
arrangements that are in place.
     As noted in the Introduction, many states have control share acquisition
statutes that practically make it necessary for a hostile bidder to win a vote
in order to gain control.20 Under such statutes, a buyer of a large block of
shares may not vote these shares unless such voting is approved by a vote of
the other shareholders. This arrangement greatly discourages bidders from
purchasing a large block without obtaining in advance a shareholder vote of
approval for their being able to vote the purchased shares. Under the stat-
utes, bidders may ask for a shareholder meeting to vote on this matter, and
the meeting must take place within a certain period (which in most states is
fifty-five days) following such a request. Although the vote formally would
be on whether the bidder would be able to use the voting power of shares
acquired through its bid, the vote essentially would be a referendum on the
offer.
     Also, and perhaps most importantly for an analysis of the takeover land-
scape in the United States, the development of poison pills practically made
the winning of a vote a necessary condition for a hostile takeover. In the
presence of a poison pill, buying shares beyond a certain limit (which is
commonly in the range of 10–20 percent) would be so costly as to make the
buyer regret its purchases. Because directors usually can maintain a pill as
long as they are in office, a hostile takeover would require that the bidder
first replace the directors through a ballot box victory with directors that
would redeem the pill. The voting, again, would not be formally on the offer
but rather on the election of directors. But the vote would be practically a
referendum on the offer; the voting on directors would decide the fate of the
offer, would be understood as such, and would be determined by share-
holders’ judgments concerning the offer.

                D. Arrangements with Voting and No Board Veto

    In the presence of a voting mechanism ensuring an undistorted share-
holder choice, I argue, the board should not have veto power beyond the pe-
riod necessary for exploring and preparing alternatives for shareholders’
consideration. I will refer to such a regime as one of shareholder voting and
no board veto. The absence of board veto implies, in particular, that direc-
tors should not be able to use their powers (i) to block a bidder’s access to a
vote beyond the above preparatory period, (ii) to frustrate or distort the out-



  20 See Gartman, supra note 7.



                                      12
come of the vote, or (iii) to block a takeover that has gained the needed vote
of shareholder support.
     There are, again, procedural choices that must be made in designing
such a regime. For example, how long should the preparatory period be?
Should this period be uniform or be determined on a case-by-case basis?
How should a vote be triggered? I examine these questions in other work,
which explores the possible alternatives and the best design, starting from a
clean slate, of such a regime.21 Below I will put aside such questions because
my focus is on the general policy comparison between a regime with and
without board veto.
     What I wish to emphasize, however, is that poison pills are not necessar-
ily inconsistent with a regime of voting and no board veto. As explained, a
pill might serve merely as an instrument for requiring the bidder to win a
vote of shareholder support. As long as the board cannot deny the bidder
access to such a vote for too long, and as long as the victory in such a vote
would result in redemption of the pill, we would have a regime of share-
holder voting and no board veto.
     To illustrate, let us consider Wachtell, Lipton’s second-generation pill.
The first generation of pills, one of which was approved in Moran,22 did not
impede a buyer’s gaining control but only a second-step freezeout. In 1987,
Wachtell, Lipton recommended to its clients adopting a “second generation”
type of pill with a “flip-in” provision making it prohibitively costly for hos-
tile bidders to cross a 20-percent-ownership threshold.23 Because the Moran
decision was partly based on the threat of abusive freezeouts, the designers
of the new pill sought to “decrease concerns regarding judicial acceptance”
of the flip-in24 and to address “shareholder democracy and fiduciary duty
arguments.”25 To this end, the designers of the new pill added to its terms a
procedure under which “qualified” bidders would be able to obtain a special
shareholder meeting within ninety to one hundred and twenty days from



    21 Bebchuk and Hart, supra note 6; Bebchuk, The Allocation of Power, supra note 19.
    22 See Moran v Household International, Inc, 500 A2d 1346, 1357 (Del 1985).
    23 See Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen & Katz, client memorandum, A Second Generation Share
Purchase Rights Plan (July 14, 1987) (“Wachtell, Lipton memo”) (describing the features and
rationale of the proposed new type of pill). See also Martin Lipton, Corporate Governance in
the Age of Finance Corporatism, 136 U Pa L Rev 1, 69–71 (1987) (same).
    24 Lipton, supra note 23, at 70 (“[T]o decrease concerns regarding judicial acceptance,
the new pill provides that, under certain circumstances, a special shareholders meeting will
be held to determine whether the pill should be redeemed.”).
    25 See Wachtell, Lipton memo, supra note 23.



                                            13
their request, and a majority vote in this meeting against the pill (that is, in
favor of the offer) would lead to the pill’s redemption.
     Much water has gone under the takeovers bridge since 1987. In contrast
to what designers of the second-generation pill expected at the time, the de-
velopment of Moran by subsequent cases did not insist on the safety valve of
a shareholder option to vote to redeem the pill in a special meeting. As a
consequence, the special meeting procedure was dropped from the terms of
subsequent generations of pills and is no longer in use. But the second-
generation pill is worth noting as an example of a pill-produced regime of
shareholder voting and no board veto. Had courts elected to require that
special meeting procedures be included as a condition for pills’ validity, as
pill designers had thought courts might elect to do, the prevailing regime
would have been one of shareholder voting and no board veto.
     While existing pills do not generally include provisions that enable
shareholders to vote to redeem the pill, board veto could be limited or elimi-
nated by courts placing limits on how long a board may maintain a pill. As
noted, a majority of publicly traded firms have staggered boards, with a
majority of such staggered boards adopted before the developments in take-
over jurisprudence that made them so potent. If a board with a staggered
structure could maintain the pill indefinitely, a hostile bidder would have to
win two elections, one year apart, to gain control. As a result, staggered
boards currently provide incumbents with a great deal of power to block
bids. This veto power could be much reduced by requiring boards that lose
one election over a bid to redeem the pill. Such a requirement would prevent
boards from using a staggered board-poison pill combination to block an of-
fer that enjoys shareholder support beyond the next annual election.26 How
courts could move toward a regime of shareholder voting and no board
veto, taking as given the existing structure of takeover doctrine, is a topic to
which I shall return in Part III.G.
     Finally, I wish to emphasize that having a regime of shareholder voting
and no board veto does not at all imply that, in the event that a bidder
emerges, shareholders would generally be forced to participate in voting
and possibly have to do it more than once. Such a regime can be easily de-
signed so that shareholders would not have to vote as long as they are not
interested in accepting the offer. Consider an arrangement in which the
board may maintain a pill and in which, furthermore, the board may be re-
moved once a bidder obtains written consents from a majority of the share-
holders (or obtains in some functionally equivalent way a vote of approval
from a majority of the shareholders). In such a case, if the shareholders do


  26 This approach is put forward in Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian, supra note 8.



                                          14
not wish to take the bidder’s offer, the bidder’s emergence and the presence
of a regime with shareholder voting and no board veto would not require
the shareholders to take any action; they simply would refrain from giving
their written consents to the bidder. Thus, shareholders would need to take
some action only if and when they conclude that the offer would be worth
taking.

                          II. THE CASE AGAINST BOARD VETO

     On the view that I label the “board veto” view, boards should have the
power to block acquisition offers, at least for a significant period of time be-
yond what would be necessary for preparing alternative plans and commu-
nicating them to the shareholders. I already noted some of the arrangements
that currently provide incumbents with substantial veto power. The ubiqui-
tous staggered board does so whenever directors can maintain a poison pill
as long as they remain in office. Similarly, when boards adopt dead-hand
pills or slow-hand (delayed-redemption) pills,27 as they may for sure in some
states and possibly in others, boards can completely block, or at least greatly
impede, a bid that otherwise would likely win. My interest in this main part
of the paper, however, is not in the particulars of veto-providing arrange-
ments but rather in the general question of whether a board veto regime is
desirable.
     Although the board veto view has other supporters,28 it is most closely
associated with Martin Lipton. As inventor of the “poison pill,” Lipton made
a great practical contribution to incumbents’ ability to defend the corporate
citadel. In his various writings on the subject, which span more than twenty
years, Lipton has put forward a wide array of reasons for why incumbents
should have substantial veto power over acquisitions.29 Below I attempt to

    27 For example, Virginia allows dead-hand pills, the most lethal, see Chesapeake Corp v
Shore, 771 A2d 293, 322 (Del Ch 2000), and Maryland permits slow-hand pills, see James
Hanks, Something Old, Something New: Maryland’s Unsolicited Takeovers Act, 3 M&A L 12, 12–
18 (1999).
    28 See, for example, Margaret M. Blair and Lynn A. Stout, A Team Production Theory of
Corporate Law, 85 Va L Rev 247, 305 (1999).
    29 These writings start with Martin Lipton’s 1979 article, Takeover Bids in the Target’s
Boardroom, supra note 4, and the most recent work preceding this paper is Martin Lipton
and Paul Rowe, Pills, Polls, and Professors: A Reply to Professor Gilson, New York University
Working Paper CLB-01-006 (2001), available online at <http://www.stern.nyu.edu/clb/>.
Some of the other important pieces in this series are Martin Lipton, Takeover Bids in the Tar-
get’s Boardroom: A Response to Professors Easterbrook and Fischel, 55 NYU L Rev 1231 (1980);
Lipton, supra note 23; and Lipton and Rosenblum, supra note 10. Lipton responds to this
paper’s analysis in Martin Lipton, Pills, Polls, and Professors Redux, 69 U Chi L Rev _ (2002).



                                              15
consider all of the arguments put forward by Lipton and by other support-
ers of board veto.

                        A. Alternative Normative Perspectives

     An important premise for any policy analysis is the normative objective
in light of which outcomes are evaluated. What counts and what does not
count as a benefit depends on the normative perspective used. An examina-
tion of the arguments by supporters of board veto reveals that more than
one normative perspective has been used.30 Because I wish to consider the
full range of possible arguments for board veto, I will examine the board
veto question from each of the four different normative perspectives that
have been invoked in the literature.31 It would be worthwhile to describe
briefly at the outset each of these perspectives.
     (1) The perspective of target shareholders: The rules governing defensive
tactics are often analyzed from the perspective of target shareholders. From
this perspective, the rules that should govern target boards are those that
would best serve the shareholders of these companies. These rules are those
that informed and rational shareholders of these companies would have
wished to adopt ex ante. In defending board veto from this perspective,
supporters have argued that such veto power benefits target shareholders.
     (2) The perspective of targets’ long-term shareholders: Supporters of board
veto sometimes draw a distinction between short-term shareholders, which
do not plan to hold shares for long and therefore focus on short-term re-
turns, and long-term shareholders, which plan to keep holding their shares
and focus on long-run returns. Target boards, supporters of board veto
sometimes argue, should give greater weight to the interests of the targets’


I discuss some arguments made in Lipton’s response in the Appendix to this paper.
    30 See Allen, Jacobs, and Strine, supra note 3, at _ (observing that there are different
strands in the board-veto camp (referred to by the authors as “the entity model”)).
    31 By examining the subject from these four normative perspectives, I attempt to re-
spond to the challenge posed by Allen, Jacobs, and Strine, supra note 3, at _, who suggest
that the participants in the takeover debate “seem to be talking past each other” because
their arguments are based on fundamentally different objectives and normative perspec-
tives.
    I used a similar strategy in Bebchuk, supra note 1, and in Lucian Arye Bebchuk, The Case
for Facilitating Competing Tender Offers: A Reply and Extension, 35 Stan L Rev 23 (1982). These
articles took issue with Easterbrook and Fischel’s arguments against all restrictions on
takeovers, including those restrictions that would be necessary to facilitate auctions. I ar-
gued that auctions are desirable when evaluated either from the perspective of target
shareholders or from the perspective of total shareholder wealth—the two perspectives
that Easterbrook and Fischel invoked in their own work.



                                              16
long-term shareholders.32 These supporters also believe that there is some
divergence of interest between these two categories of investors in the take-
over context.
     (3) The perspective of total shareholder wealth: Another normative perspec-
tive is that of aggregate shareholder wealth, which combines the wealth of
targets’ shareholders and acquirers’ shareholders.33 The use of this perspec-
tive might be justified on grounds that most target shareholders hold diver-
sified portfolios and therefore prefer rules that would maximize aggregate
shareholder gains rather than gains to targets.34 Alternatively, the use of this
perspective might be justified on grounds that, in setting takeover rules, so-
ciety should not seek rules that benefit target shareholders but rather ones
that increase the total value of the corporate sector.
     (4) The perspective of all corporate constituencies: Supporters of board veto
have also argued that it would serve the interests of nonshareholder con-
stituencies, such as employees, suppliers, host communities, and so forth.35
Therefore, another perspective that I will use to evaluate board veto is that
of the aggregate wealth of all corporate constituencies, including both share-
holders and stakeholders.
     Supporters of board veto have not generally taken a clear position on
which perspective is the decisive one. Indeed, because they have not con-
ceded that board veto is undesirable from any one of the above four per-


   32 See, for example, Lipton, supra note 4, at 36 (“[T]hose who choose to invest for the
long-term are surely deserving of management consideration.”). Compare Allen, Jacobs,
and Strine, supra note 3, at _ (discussing the concern that a regime of shareholder choice
would let “short-term” stockholders cause a sale of the corporation for a “one-time profit”).
   33 Allen, Jacobs, and Strine, supra note 3, at _, discuss this perspective and view it as po-
tentially more favorable to board veto than the perspective of target shareholders. The per-
spective of total shareholder wealth was also used in the early work of Easterbrook and
Fischel. See, for example, Easterbrook and Fischel, supra note 4, at 1175 (“Even resistance
that ultimately elicits a higher bid is socially wasteful [because] [a]lthough the target’s
shareholders may receive a higher price, these gains are exactly offset by the bidder’s pay-
ment and thus by a loss to the bidder’s shareholders.”).
   34 See Allen, Jacobs, and Strine, supra note 3, at _; Frank H. Easterbrook and Daniel R.
Fischel, Auctions and Sunk Costs in Tender Offers, 35 Stan L Rev 1, 7–9 (1982) (arguing that
shareholders, who do not know whether their firm will be a target, a bidder, or a by-
stander, are best off under the legal or contractual rule that maximizes total shareholder
wealth). For a critique of this basis for using the perspective of aggregate shareholder
wealth, see Bebchuk, supra note 4, at 27–30.
   35 See, for example, Lipton, supra note 4, at 105–06; Lipton, supra note 23, at 36–39; Blair
and Stout, supra note 28, at 287. See also Allen, Jacobs, and Strine, supra note 3, at _ (“Judges
presented with a takeover case, are unavoidably aware that interests of more than stock-
holders are usually at stake.”).



                                               17
spectives, they have not had to make such a choice. Invoking several norma-
tive perspectives provides these supporters with fallback positions—even if
board veto were identified as undesirable for target shareholders, they could
retreat to the view that such veto would be justified from the perspective of
long-term shareholders. And even if board veto were identified as undesir-
able for any significant group of target shareholders, they could still retreat
to defending it on grounds of aggregate shareholder wealth or the aggregate
wealth of all corporate constituencies.
     I will not attempt in this paper to resolve which normative perspective
should guide the design of takeover rules. Rather, my thesis is that there is
no good basis for board veto from any one of the above four perspectives. I
begin by examining board veto in Parts II.B and II.C from the standard, con-
ventional perspective of target shareholders: Part II.B discusses the costs of
board veto from this perspective; Part II.C then examines each one of the ra-
tionales that have been offered for board veto from this perspective. After
concluding that board veto is not in the overall interest of target sharehold-
ers, I turn to examine in Parts II.E, II.F, and II.G whether the case for board
veto becomes stronger if one evaluates it from the perspectives of long-term
shareholders, aggregate shareholder wealth, and the aggregate wealth of all
corporate constituencies, respectively; I find that it does not.

             B. The Target Shareholders’ Perspective: Costs of Board Veto

1.    Ex Post Agency Costs

    Although the ex post agency problem is a serious one, it is conceptually
simple and thus can be described with brevity. The takeover context is one
in which managers’ and shareholders’ interests often diverge. Managers
might lose their control and the private benefits associated with it. To use
the language of Unocal, the takeover context confronts us with “the omni-
present specter that a board may be acting primarily in its own interests.”36
    Thus, whenever a bid is made, the divergence of interest gives rise to
potential agency costs. First and most importantly, managers might elect to
block a beneficial acquisition in order to retain their independence. Sec-
ondly, managers might use their power to extract not a higher premium for
their shareholders but rather personal benefits for themselves. I will refer to
these problems as “ex post” agency problems because they are ones that
arise after a bid is made. I will discuss later ex ante agency costs, that is, ad-
verse effects on incentives and behavior prior to the making of any bids.


     36 Unocal, 493 A2d at 954.



                                         18
     Lipton and Rowe recently argued that the absence of legal cases con-
demning incumbents’ standing behind pills is evidence that directors have
in fact used their powers responsibly; the absence of such cases, they believe,
indicates that the “pill has been used; it has not been abused.”37 But the ab-
sence of such court cases does not indicate whether shareholders have been
hurt. Once judicial standards are established, incumbents can be expected
not to deviate from them. Thus, absence of violations merely indicates that
incumbents and their advisers can predict what actions would withstand ju-
dicial scrutiny.
     Whereas the incidence of judicial condemnation does not provide a test
for the presence of agency costs, there is other evidence that these costs are
significant. To start with, the evidence indicates that, in the event that in-
cumbents use their veto power to defeat bids, shareholders end up worse off
compared with the scenario in which the bid would have been accepted.
Studies indicate that, when target managers defeat offers, shareholders on
average experience a significant stock market loss. For example, Cotter and
Zenner found that when offers are defeated shareholders suffer a 21 percent
decline in their stock price.38
     It might be objected, however, that incumbents’ resistance should be
evaluated by its effects on shareholders’ wealth in the long-term rather than
short-term. In a recent empirical study on staggered boards, Coates, Subra-
manian, and I therefore studied how the defeat of bids affected shareholders
when evaluated from a long-term perspective.39 We examined hostile bid
cases during the period 1996–2000 in which targets remained independent.
We found that, evaluated thirty months after the bid’s announcement, the
shareholders of targets remaining independent were on average substan-
tially worse off compared with the scenario in which the bid would have
been accepted. To illustrate, in the period we studied, we estimated that the
average return to target shareholders during the thirty months following the



   37 Lipton and Rowe, supra note 29, at 19.
   38 See James F. Cotter and Marc Zenner, How Managerial Wealth Affects the Tender Offer
Process, 35 J Fin Econ 63, 86 (1994).
   39 See Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian, supra note 8, section IV.C. Note that this evi-
dence indicates that, even compared with a state of affairs in which all these companies
would have been acquired, the instances of bid rejection and remaining independent pro-
duced on average significant losses to shareholders. The losses produced by defeating bids
might have been even greater in comparison to a state of affairs in which shareholders
would have made choices whether to reject the offer. To the extent that shareholders would
have rejected some bids in this state of affairs, those bids that were relatively less attractive
would have been more likely to be rejected.



                                               19
offer was 54 percent higher for targets that were acquired than for targets
that remained independent.
     Additional evidence of the agency problem is provided by studies exam-
ining the circumstances in which incumbents are likely to resist bids. An
early study by Walkling and Long indicated that the probability of a hostile
reaction by incumbents is negatively related to the effect of the acquisition
on managers’ financial interests.40 Subsequently, Cotter and Zenner found
that managers are more likely to resist offers when they have smaller hold-
ings (and their interests thus overlap less with those of the shareholders).41
     Finally, the presence of ex post agency costs is also suggested by evi-
dence that managers might be willing to trade off premia to shareholders for
personal benefits. A recent study by Hartzell, Ofek, and Yermack found that
target CEOs are willing to accept lower acquisition premia in transactions
that involve an extraordinary personal treatment (such as special payments
to the CEO at the time of the acquisition or high-ranking managerial post in
the buyer).42 Another study by Wulf indicated that, in merger negotiations,
CEOs are willing to trade off higher acquisition premia in exchange for bet-
ter managerial positions in the merged firm.43

2.   Ex Ante Agency Costs

   Board veto also produces agency costs ex ante, before any takeover at-
tempts occur. Management generally acts against the background of the pos-


    40 See Ralph A. Walkling and Michael Long, Agency Theory, Managerial Welfare, and
Takeover Bid Resistance, 15 Rand J Econ 54, 67 (1984).
    41 See Cotter and Zenner, supra note 28.
    42 See Jay Hartzell, Eli Ofek, and David Yermack, What’s in It for Me?: Personal Benefits
Obtained by CEOs Whose Firms Are Acquired at 21, working paper (2000), available online at
<http://papers.ssrn.com/id=236094>.
    43 See Julie Wulf, Do CEOs in Mergers Trade Power for Premium?: Evidence from “Mergers
of       Equals”,        working       paper       (2001),        available       online      at
http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/show_paper.cfm?id=1009.
    Some of the famous takeover cases nicely illustrate the weight that CEOs give in take-
over negotiations to their managerial position in the merged firm. In Paramount Communi-
cations, Inc v Time Inc, 571 A2d 1140 (Del 1989), one of the sticking points in the negotiations
was which managerial team would be more dominant following the combination of Time
and Warner. See id at 1144 (recounting how, before the merger, the consensus among
Time’s board members was that “a merger of Time and Warner was feasible, but only if
Time controlled the board of the resulting corporation”). In QVC v Paramount, 635 A2d
1245 (Del Ch 1993), Herb Wachtell argued for QVC that, in seeking to facilitate an acquisi-
tion by Viacom, Paramount’s CEO was motivated by his desire to become CEO of Para-
mount/QVC. See id at 1248 (noting “Mr. Davis’s insistence that he become CEO”).



                                              20
possibility that a takeover bid will be made. In the absence of a board veto,
the takeover threat provides managers with an important source of incen-
tives to serve shareholders. Better performance by management makes it less
likely that a takeover bid will be made or that it will succeed.
     Conversely, by eliminating or reducing the threat posed by a takeover,
board veto provides managers with security that in turn could produce sig-
nificant agency costs. With a veto power, managers might contemplate that,
even if they perform poorly and a takeover bid follows, their power will en-
able them either to retain their control or at least to extract a good deal for
themselves. Either way, the presence of a board veto eliminates or much re-
duces any adverse effect that a takeover might otherwise have on managers’
interests. As a result, the takeover threat will lose much of its disciplinary
power. Board veto might thus weaken incentives to avoid managerial slack,
consumption of private benefits, empire-building, and other actions that are
beneficial or convenient for managers but costly to shareholders.
     The evidence indicates that insulation from the threat of a takeover does
indeed have such adverse effects. Studies by Bertrand and Mullinathan and
by Garvey and Hanka found that stronger protection from antitakeover
statutes causes increases in managerial slack.44 Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick
found that companies whose managers enjoy more protection from take-
overs (as measured by a governance index taking into account both corpo-
rate arrangements and state antitakeover provisions) are associated with
poorer operating performance—including lower profit margins, return on
equity, and sales growth.45
     There is also evidence that insulation from takeover threats results in
greater consumption of private benefits by managers. Borokhovich, Brunar-
ski, and Parrino found that managers with stronger antitakeover defenses
enjoy higher compensation levels.46 Bertrand and Mullinathan obtained
similar findings for managers that are more protected due to antitakeover



    44 See Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullinathan, Is There Discretion in Wage Setting?
A Test Using Takeover Legislation, 30 Rand J Econ 535 (1999) (finding that the adoption of an-
titakeover statutes weakened managers’ incentives to minimize labor costs); Gerald T.
Garvey and Gordon Hanka, Capital Structure and Corporate Control: The Effect of Antitakeover
Statutes on Firm Leverage, 54 J Fin 519, 520 (1999) (concluding that antitakeover statutes “al-
low managers to pursue goals other than maximizing shareholder wealth”).
    45 See Paul A. Gompers, Joy L. Ishii, and Andrew Metrick, Corporate Governance and Eq-
uity Prices, NBER Working Paper No 8449 (2001), available online at
<http://papers.nber.org/papers/w8449.pdf>.
    46 See Kenneth A. Borokhovich, Kelly R. Brunarski, and Robert Parrino, CEO Contract-
ing and Antitakeover Amendments, 52 J Fin 1495, 1515 (1997).



                                              21
statutes.47 Finally, Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick found that companies whose
managers enjoy more protection from takeovers are more likely to engage in
empire-building.48

        C. The Target Shareholders’ Perspective: Arguments for Board Veto

1.   Analogies to other Corporate Decisions

    Before examining arguments that “start from first principles,” I wish to
consider first a common and influential claim that is based on an analogy to
other corporate law decisions. Board control, it is argued, characterizes cor-
porate decision-making in general. Indeed, for most corporate decisions,
boards have not only veto power but also the power to make the decision ei-
ther way. When a corporation faces a choice, say, whether to undertake a
major investment in a new plant or a new product, directors have the power
to make the decision, either way, generally without any intervention from
either courts or shareholders. Why should we rely on boards for other cor-
porate choices, supporters of board veto ask, but not for decisions on take-
overs?49 If one accepts that delegation to boards works well in other con-
texts, so the challenge goes, are there any good reasons to view the takeover
context as sufficiently different?
    In fact, there are important differences, which call for a different treat-
ment, between the takeover context and that of corporate decisions such as
the investment decisions noted above. To begin, the concern that managers’
and shareholders’ interests might diverge is greater in the takeover context.
Because managers’ control is at stake in the takeover context, managers’
preferences in this context are likely influenced by their private interests. In
contrast, a divergence of interest is less likely to arise, and if it arises to be of
great magnitude, in corporate contexts such as the considered investment
decision. Therefore, given managers’ common ownership of shares and op-
tions, as well as their general interest in making the shareholders content,
managers will likely focus on enhancing shareholder value in such other
corporate contexts. They might err and therefore make incorrect decisions.



    47 See Marianne Bertrand and Sendhil Mullinathan, Executive Compensation and Incen-
tives: The Impact of Takeover Legislation, NBER Working Paper No 6830 (1999), available
online at <http://papers.nber.org/papers/W6830>.
    48 See Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick, supra note 45, at 31–32.
    49 See Lipton, supra note 2, at 104 (“Takeover bids are not so different from other major
decisions as to warrant a unique sterilization of the directors in favor of direct action by the
shareholders.”).



                                              22
But their decisions are unlikely to be distorted substantially by their private
interests.50
     Second, in other contexts, such as the investment context considered
above, letting the shareholders of a publicly traded company make the deci-
sion is not a viable option. In contrast, in the takeover context, letting the
shareholders decide is a viable and practical option. Experience indicates
that proxy contests conducted over an acquisition offer draw heavy partici-
pation by shareholders. The question remains, of course, whether share-
holders would make good decisions, and I will consider this question below.
But the fact that letting the shareholders make the decision is a viable option
in the takeover context clearly distinguishes it from other contexts.
     Relatedly, deference to boards in the takeover context is not called for by
courts’ reluctance to make business decisions. In other corporate contexts,
where letting the shareholders decide is not an option, complete deference to
boards can be avoided only by relying on judicial scrutiny. Given courts’
limited information, expertise, and resources, the business judgment rule
rightly counsels courts against substantive review of the merits of board de-
cisions. In contrast, in the takeover context, a regime of shareholder voting
and no board veto does not require courts to make business decisions.
Courts need only protect shareholders’ rights to make decisions in certain
circumstances and to prevent managers from blocking such decisions.
     Thus far, I have explained why, if we look at the takeover context and
the investment context each in isolation from the other, the argument for
board control is substantially weaker in the former context than in the latter.
But there is an important interaction between (1) the case against board con-
trol in the takeover context, and (2) the case for board control in the invest-
ment context. Not only is (1) consistent with (2), but, furthermore, (1)
strengthens and reinforces (2). One of the reasons why boards can be left
with control over business decisions is that the possibility of a takeover pro-
vides a safety valve and source of discipline.51 Thus, not having board veto




   50 The reasoning in this paragraph is similar to the one underlying Vice Chancellor
Strine’s recent statement in Chesapeake Corp v Shore, 771 A2d 293, 328 (Del Ch 2000): “It is
quite different for a corporate board to determine that the owners of the company should
be barred from selling their shares than to determine what products the company should
manufacture.” Strine cites, id at 328 n 79, the essay of Norman Veasey, The Defining Tension
in Corporate Governance in America, 52 Bus Law 393 (1997). In this essay, Veasey, although
sympathetic to the board veto view, nonetheless indicates that standard deference and
delegation are inappropriate with respect to “ownership” or “enterprise” decisions.
   51 See Gilson, supra note 1, at 848–52.



                                            23
over takeovers in fact contributes to the case for board control in other cor-
porate contexts.52

2.   Inefficient Capital Markets

     Supporters of the board veto view believe that boards would decide bet-
ter whether any given offer is worth accepting. Consequently, it is argued, it
would be better for shareholders if boards were to make the decision for
them. The argument that boards would decide better has two variants. One
variant, which I will take up first, is based on a rejection of the efficient capi-
tal markets hypothesis and a belief that stock prices might often deviate
from fundamental values. The second variant, which Part II.C.3 will address,
is based on incumbents’ having private information concerning the target’s
value.
     Let us start with the claim that board veto is called for by rejection of the
efficient capital markets hypothesis.53 On this view, board veto can address
situations in which a company’s stock is trading at a “depressed” level be-
low its fundamental value.54 “[M]ust we accept (and make boards accept)
short-term trading value as the sole reference point in responding to take-
over proposals?” supporters of board veto ask.55 A negative answer to this
question, they believe, calls for a board veto.
     There are indeed good reasons to doubt the extent to which market
prices generally reflect fundamental values. The efficient capital market hy-
pothesis has been questioned by a large body of work in financial econom-
ics.56 The recent burst of the Internet bubble has provided a vivid illustration
that stock prices may deviate from fundamental values. As explained below,
however, accepting that capital markets are not generally informationally ef-
ficient, as the Delaware courts have done,57 does not imply that board veto is
desirable.

    52 While the above analysis suggests that the takeover context should be an exception
to the general principle of board control, I do not wish to imply that it must be the only ex-
ception. I discuss the desirable scope of exceptions to board control in Bebchuk, The Alloca-
tion of Powers between Managers and Shareholders, supra note 19.
    53 See, for example, Lipton and Rowe, supra note 29, at 8, 16 (equating opposition to de-
fenses with support for the efficient market theory).
    54 See, for example, Lipton, supra note 2, at 108.
    55 Lipton and Rowe, supra note 29, at 30.
    56 See, for example, Andrei Shleifer, Inefficient Markets (Oxford 2000).
    57 See, for example, Smith v Van Gorkom, 488 A2d 858, 875–76 (Del 1985) (“Using market
price as a basis for concluding that the premium adequately reflected the true value of the
Company was a clearly faulty, indeed fallacious, premise.”).



                                             24
     To be sure, the stock market’s informational inefficiency undermines the
passivity approach of Easterbrook and Fischel, who believe that a takeover
at a premium over the pre-bid market price is bound to increase shareholder
wealth and efficiency.58 Such informational inefficiency also significantly
weakens the case for the auctions approach; some of the likely causes of this
inefficiency, such as limited arbitrage, might also indicate that auctions
might not always fetch a price that equals or exceeds the target’s independ-
ent value.
     Acceptance of informational inefficiencies, however, is consistent with a
regime of shareholder voting and no board veto. In such a regime, targets of
hostile bids will not be necessarily acquired for the highest price that would
be offered for them in a market that might be temporarily depressed. Share-
holders would vote down any premium offer if they believed that, although
significantly above the target’s temporarily depressed price, it falls below
the target’s fundamental value, which would be eventually reflected in mar-
ket prices if the target were to remain independent.59
     That shareholders’ decisions might discriminate in this way is nicely il-
lustrated by comparing shareholders’ reactions to the recent hostile bids for
Shorewood and Willamette, two targets that had substantial antitakeover
protections.60 In both cases, the hostile bidders offered a substantial pre-
mium over the pre-bid market price of the target, though not over its historic
price. In both cases, the board rejected the offer as inadequate on grounds
that the stock market was greatly undervaluing the target’s shares. In the
case of Shorewood, shareholders apparently shared the view that the pre-
mium bid price was below the target’s value, and only 1 percent of the tar-
gets’ shares were tendered to the bidder.61 In contrast, in the case of Wil-
lamette, shareholders took a different view, and the bidder attracted 45 per-




   58 See Easterbrook and Fischel, supra note 1, at 1173–74.
   59 It might be objected that, if shareholders viewed the market price as depressed, they
themselves would keep buying shares, and the price would keep going up. But this argu-
ment ignores risk aversion and liquidity constraints on the part of the shareholders. More
importantly, the critical question is not what shareholders’ views were prior to the bid but
rather what their views will be when making voting decisions. At this point, shareholders
will be able to draw on the information produced by the very making of the bid, the com-
munications and recommendations of the board, and other information produced during
the takeover contest.
   60 See Chesapeake Corp v Shore, 771 A2d 293, 296 (Del Ch 2000); Jim Carlton and Robin
Sidel, Willamette Agrees to Be Bought by Weyerhaueser, Wall St J A3 (Jan 22, 2002).
   61 See Chesapeake, 771 A2d at 314.



                                            25
cent of the shares initially and, after the bid price was raised somewhat, 64
percent of the shares.62
     Thus, shareholders might sometimes accept, and might sometimes re-
ject, claims that a premium offer is inadequate because the pre-bid market
price was highly depressed. Therefore, even if we do not accept short-term
value “as the sole reference point in responding to takeover proposals,”
board veto does not necessarily follow. The question would still remain
who—shareholders or directors—should decide whether a given takeover
proposal is worth accepting. Accepting that capital markets might be infor-
mationally inefficient does not by itself compel or suggest an answer to this
question. To be sure, supporters of board veto might take the additional po-
sition that boards would make such decisions better. This is the claim to
which I shall now turn.

3.   Directors’ Superior Information

    a) The threat of an inadequate offer. Whether a takeover would benefit
shareholders depends on how the offered acquisition price compares with
the target’s value in the event that it remains independent at least for the
time being. This “independent value” of the target includes both the value of
the possibility of remaining independent for the long haul and the value of
the possibility of receiving higher offers later on.63 Because managers might
have superior information about the target, supporters of board veto sug-
gest, managers would be in a better position to estimate the target’s inde-
pendent value. Accordingly, it is argued, shareholders’ interests would be
served by delegating the decision to the board.64
    That managers might sometimes be better informed has been long ac-
cepted by takeover law.65 The Delaware courts have viewed as plausible and


   62 See Robin Sidel, Weyerhaeuser Fails to Win Willamette Mandate, Wall St J A4 (May 22,
2001) (reporting that 45 percent of Willamette’s shareholders tendered into Weyerhaeuser’s
$50-per-share offer); Weyerhaeuser Bid Wins 64% Support in Target Company, Wall St J B8 (Jan
11, 2002) (reporting that the percentage of shares tendered increased to 64 percent follow-
ing the raising of Weyerhaeuser’s bid). A detailed examination of the Willamette case is
provided by the Appendix.
   63 See Bebchuk, Undistorted Choice, supra note 4, at 1700 (defining the target’s independ-
ent value as including the value of the possibility of receiving higher offers in the event
that the current offer is rejected).
   64 See, for example, Lipton, supra note 2, at 115.
   65 See Paramount Communications, Inc v Time Inc, 1989 Del Ch LEXIS 77, *56 (Allen) (“No
one, after all, has access to more information concerning the corporation’s present and fu-
ture condition [than managers].”).



                                             26
legitimate directors’ concern that shareholders might mistakenly view as
adequate an offer that is, in fact, inadequate according to directors’ superior
information.66 The danger that imperfectly informed shareholders will ac-
cept an inadequate offer has been referred to, using a term coined by Ronald
Gilson and Reinier Kraakman, as “substantive coercion.”67
     b) Does informational advantage warrant a board veto? I agree that target
managers often have private information, both hard and soft, that public in-
vestors do not possess. Managers also might have devoted more time and ef-
fort to assessing the body of information about the company that is publicly
available. Managers’ superior information might indicate to them that the
target’s independent value is lower or higher than the level estimated by the
target’s shareholders. The possibility that shareholders will overestimate the
target’s value cannot provide a basis for board veto. But can the possibility
that shareholders will underestimate the target’s value provide such a basis?
As I explain below, the answer is no.68
     Note first that, even accepting that directors sometimes have better in-
formational basis for comparing the bid price and the target’s independent
value, they do not have the best incentives for making the right decision.
Thus, a regime with board veto moves decision-making to a party that
might be better informed but also has worse incentives. Directors might use
their veto power not (or not only) for the intended purpose of blocking in-
adequate offers, but also to block offers that would be beneficial to share-
holders. This concern is real and significant because the claim of offer inade-
quacy is one that incumbents can generally raise, and that would be hard to
falsify, whenever they prefer their independence.69 In contrast, if sharehold-

    66 See, for example, Moore v Wallace Computer, 907 F Supp 1545, 1557 (D Del 1995); Uni-
trin v American General Corp, 651 A2d 1384, 1385 (Del 1994); Paramount Communications, Inc
v Time Inc, 571 A2d 1140, 1153 (Del 1989). In each of these cases, the court expressed con-
cern about shareholders’ decisions being affected by their “ignorance or mistaken belief” as
to the target’s intrinsic value.
    67 Gilson and Kraakman, supra note 5, at 248.
    68 The analysis below responds to the concern expressed by Allen, Jacobs, and Strine,
supra note 3, at _, that those opposed to board veto “seem to give little credit to the fact that
directors have much greater access to information flows respecting business prospects and
values.” Fully accepting this fact, the analysis below shows that it does not undermine the
case against board veto.
    69 As was observed by Vice Chancellor Strine: “It is important to recognize that sub-
stantive coercion can be invoked by a corporate board in almost every situation.” Chesa-
peake Corp v Shore, 771 A2d 293, 327 (Del Ch 2000). Note that the raising of a false claim
cannot be discouraged by fears that even if the claim is not demonstrably false when made,
it will become so down the road. Suppose that managers block an offer of $100 per share on
grounds that the target’s independent value is $120 per share, and suppose that the market



                                               27
ers had decision-making power, they might sometimes be less informed, but
they would never have a reason to reject an offer that they view as beneficial
to shareholders.
     The above discussion indicates that board veto might well be unwar-
ranted even if we assumed that directors’ superior information would go to-
tally unused in a regime of shareholder voting and no board veto. Such a re-
gime, however, would not imply that directors’ superior information would
generally be wasted. It only would preclude directors from blocking offers
on grounds that they have such information. But such information could
and would likely be used as a basis for directors’ communications and rec-
ommendations to shareholders.
     To begin, following the making of an offer, directors can and often do
provide shareholders with new information, sometimes backed by invest-
ments bankers’ opinions, about the target’s independent value and how it
compares with the offered price. Such communications might close or sig-
nificantly reduce whatever information gap existed between management
and public investors prior to the offer.
     Of course, in some circumstances, incumbents might be unable to com-
municate the information underlying their high estimate of value because
business considerations require secrecy70 or because the information is diffi-
cult to disclose credibly.71 In such cases, incumbents can still communicate to
the shareholders their estimate for the target’s value and their recommenda-
tion to reject the offer.
     In the face of such a communication from directors, rational sharehold-
ers can be expected to balance two considerations. On the one hand, they
will recognize that directors might be better informed; that shareholders are
imperfectly informed about the target’s value hardly implies that they are
unaware that this is the case. This consideration would weigh in sharehold-
ers’ decision-making in favor of deferring to the directors.


price three years down the road will be $90 per share. Managers still will be able to defend
their earlier estimate: The $120 per share estimate was accurate at the time it was made,
they will argue, but it was an expected-value estimate; the price after three years has fallen
below this expected value because uncertainty has been resolved unfavorably.
   70 See, for example, Shamrock Holdings, Inc v Polaroid Corp, 559 A2d 278 (Del Ch 1989). In
this case, the target’s largest asset was a patent litigation claim. The court accepted that dis-
closures about this claim might compromise the target’s bargaining position in the litiga-
tion. Id at 290.
   71 In some cases, managers have argued that information cannot be passed on effec-
tively to shareholders because they would have difficulty comprehending it or would get
confused. See, for example, Chesapeake, 771 A2d at 332 (discussing the concern expressed by
Shorewood with respect to “the risk of shareholder confusion”).



                                               28
     On the other hand, shareholders will also take into account considera-
tions that weigh against deferring to the directors. First, directors might
have self-serving reasons for preferring independence. Furthermore, like
other humans, the directors might make mistakes and might suffer from a
cognitive-dissonance tendency to view favorably both their own past per-
formance and the course of action serving their interests. As Chancellor Wil-
liam Allen wisely remarked in Interco: “[H]uman nature may incline even one
acting in subjective good faith to rationalize as right that which is merely per-
sonally beneficial.”72
     In balancing these considerations, shareholders will consider various
circumstances of the particular case facing them. Among other things,
shareholders might take into account the following factors: their own esti-
mate of the target’s value (if it is just below the bid price, for example, the
risk of deferring to the board is small); how likely the managers are to have
private information of substantial import for the target’s value (which in
turn might depend on the nature of the company’s business); and the esti-
mated magnitude of management’s divergence of interest (the more shares
the managers hold, for example, the smaller the likely divergence of manag-
ers’ and shareholders’ interests).
     It is worth noting that in a regime with no board veto, managers that
view the target’s independent value as significantly higher than the bid price
might elect to take steps that would credibly signal that their recommenda-
tion is indeed based on their genuine estimate of the target’s value. For ex-
ample, managers could so signal by committing themselves, in the event
that the bid fails, to spend some of their own funds to purchase from the
company at the bid price some specified number of shares and hold them for
a specified period of time. Such an investment would be profitable if and
only if the target’s independent value exceeded the bid price. Accordingly, a
commitment to make such an investment would provide a credible signal
that managers genuinely view the target’s independent value so favorably.
Under a regime with no board veto, managers might elect to make such a
commitment when they believe remaining independent would be indeed
beneficial.73

    72 City Capital Associates Partnership v Interco, 551 A2d 787, 796 (Del Ch 1988).
    73 It is worth connecting this point to the recent observation made by Vice Chancellor
Strine that current doctrine allows managers to make fundamental decisions for the com-
pany’s owners, “yet the directors bear no risk if they erroneously block a premium offer
and the stock price drops.” Chesapeake, 771 A2d at 328. While current doctrine does not re-
quire or encourage taking such risks, a shareholder-voting regime might induce managers
to take some such risks—in the way outlined above—when they genuinely believe that the
offer is inadequate.



                                            29
     In any event, after balancing the considerations for and against deferring
to the directors, rational shareholders might sometimes conclude that defer-
ence would be best on an expected-value basis, and might sometimes reach
the opposite conclusion. Of course, shareholders might not always get it
right. But given that their money is on the line, shareholders naturally
would have incentives to evaluate the tradeoff as well as possible.74
     In contrast, a board veto regime mandates deference to the directors as a
general rule. A board veto regime and a shareholder voting regime would
produce different outcomes only in those cases in which shareholders would
elect not to defer if the decision were left with them. Thus, to prefer a board
veto regime one would have to believe that—due to ignorance of their im-
perfect information, irrationality, or hubris—shareholders would be making
the wrong choice in most of these cases. That is, one would have to believe
that shareholders’ decision-making on whether to defer would be so flawed
that tying shareholders’ hands and mandating general deference to boards
would make shareholders better off.
     Although target shareholders are often less informed than management
about the target’s value, there is little reason to view shareholders as un-
aware of this state of affairs or as likely to ignore it out of hubris, irrational-
ity, or otherwise. Target shareholders do not seem to be a group for which
paternalistic hands-tying is warranted. As the United States Supreme Court
stated in Basic Inc v Levinson, management should not “attribute to investors
a child-like simplicity.”75
     The substantial presence of institutional investors makes paternalistic
mandating of deference especially unwarranted. Institutions are likely to be
aware of the informational advantage that management might have, and
they appear capable of making reasonable decisions on whether deferring to
the board would be best overall. Some institutional investors conduct their
own analysis, and some rely on proxy-advisory firms such as Institutional
Investors Services, which researches questions put to a shareholder vote and
recommends to institutions how to vote.76 There is little reason to believe


   74 Note that in deciding whether to defer, shareholders will be in the same situation as
many parties who must decide whether to defer to an agent who has greater expertise. Be-
cause we expect such parties to have incentives to trade off the costs and benefits of defer-
ence as well as possible, we generally believe that such parties would be better off if they
were allowed to make the decision rather than required to defer to the expert agent.
   75 Basic, Inc v Levinson, 485 US 224, 234 (1988), quoting Flamm v Eberstadt, 814 F2d 1169,
1175 (7th Cir 1987).
   76 See, for example, Northrop Grumman Gains ISS Endorsement for TRW Special Meeting,
PR Newswire (Apr 18, 2002) (reporting that ISS, the “Nation’s leading independent proxy
advisory firm, endorsed a vote in favor of allowing Northrop Grumman’s bid for TRW to



                                             30
that the decisions of institutional investors on whether to defer would be so
poor that mandating deference would be preferable to letting them make
such decisions.77
    Finally, voting shareholders can hardly be regarded as a group that is
excessively reluctant to defer to managers. Indeed, the normal patterns of
corporate voting indicate that shareholders, including institutions, com-
monly display a great deal of deference to management’s views. Thus, if
anything, there are grounds for concern that voting shareholders might be
excessively deferential. But that is, of course, not a reason to mandate defer-
ence. When circumstances would lead shareholders to overcome the ten-
dency to defer to management, imposing deference on them would be
unlikely to be beneficial.78
    In assessing the arguments for and against board veto, Allen, Jacobs,
and Strine wonder “whether shareholders have sufficient information and
appropriate incentives to determine, equally or more competently than di-
rectors, whether the corporation should be sold.”79 On the view that I put
forward above, however, the important question is not who can better judge
whether the company should be sold, but rather who should decide whether
deference will be given to the more informed but possibly conflicted direc-
tors. Shareholders have the best incentives to make this decision in a way
that would serve their interests, and they should be permitted to make it.
    c) Some evidence. It is worth noting that the case against mandated defer-
ence is supported by the existing evidence. When incumbents defeat offers,
shareholders experience on average a significant decline in stock value,80 a



proceed”).
    77 In Chesapeake, 771 A2d at 328, Vice Chancellor Strine rhetorically asks: “If stockhold-
ers are presumed competent to buy stock in the first place, why are they not presumed
competent to decide when to sell in a tender offer after an adequate time for deliberation
has been afforded them?” I would replace the second clause in this question with “why are
they not presumed competent to decide whether to defer to directors’ recommendation to
reject the offer after an adequate time for directors’ communications and shareholders’
deliberation?”
    78 See, for example, Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Allen Ferrell, supra note 12, at 995–96. In
this work, we defend a proposal to allow shareholders to vote to opt into a different take-
over regime against a critique by Stephen J. Choi and Andrew T. Guzman, Choice and Fed-
eral Intervention in Corporate Law, 87 Va L Rev 961, 985–86 (2001). Responding to Choi and
Guzman’s claim that voting shareholders display deference to managers, we argue that
such deference implies at most that shareholders might use their voting power less often
than optimal but not that they should not have this power.
    79 Allen, Jacobs, and Strine, supra note 3, at _.
    80 See Cotter and Zenner, supra note 38, at 86.



                                             31
pattern that is consistent with the proposition that mandating deference
makes shareholders worse off.
     To be sure, supporters of board veto can rightly object that this evidence
does not fully respond to their claim because it refers to short-term results.
On their view, investors’ possible underestimation of a target’s long-term
value is the very reason for board veto, and short-term declines in stock
price thus do not rule out the possibility that the defeat of offers by incum-
bents ultimately pays off. As already noted, the staggered boards study
done by Coates, Subramanian, and myself examined long-term returns and
found no such long-term payoff. To the contrary, we found that thirty
months after the bid announcement, the shareholders of targets that
remained independent obtained on average a significantly lower value than
they would have obtained had the board agreed to be acquired.81
     d) Judicial screening of inadequate offer claims. In response to the above
analysis, it might be suggested that board veto should not be allowed when
directors simply assert that the offer is inadequate but should be permitted
when they provide a particularized analysis in support of their view that the
target’s value is substantially higher than the bid price. This approach was
put forward in an influential article by Gilson and Kraakman.82 Recognizing
the potential for abuse from allowing board veto based on mere assertions of
offer inadequacy, Gilson and Kraakman suggested allowing such veto only
when such assertions are judged (by a court) to be sufficiently substantiated
and weighty. On their view, requiring such a particularized and substantial
showing would screen out the instances in which board veto would be
undesirable.
     Chancellor Allen’s famous opinion in Interco indeed subjected claims of
offer inadequacy to judicial scrutiny. In that case, Allen did not permit a
board to veto an offer of $74 per share in order to pursue a business plan
that an investment banker estimated would produce a value of “at least” $76
per share. Confronting these numbers, Allen found the threat of offer inade-
quacy to be too mild to justify a board veto.83 He left open, however, the
possibility that the threat of substantive coercion could justify a veto in other
circumstances, such as a case in which the company’s investment banker
would provide an estimated independent value greatly exceeding the offer
price.
     Consider a “screening” rule under which courts will permit a board veto
if: (1) directors provide a particularized analysis—say, in the form of an in-

  81 See Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian, supra note 8.
  82 See Gilson and Kraakman, supra note 5, at 271.
  83 Interco, 551 A2d at 799.



                                         32
vestment banker opinion—of their estimated target value in the event of bid
rejection; and (2) this estimated value or range of values is substantially
higher than the offer price. Imposing such limits on claims of offer inade-
quacy clearly would eliminate some (and possibly the worst) cases of abuse.
However, this rule would still provide an unnecessary “safe harbor” for of-
fer inadequacy claims. It would be better to let shareholders rather than
courts engage in the screening of such claims.84
    Consider a target that was trading at $70 per share and received a hostile
bid of $100 per share. Suppose that management subsequently put together
an alternative business plan, and that the company’s investment banker
provided an opinion giving an estimated range of $120 to $130 per share (in
present value terms) for the value that the target will have if it remains in-
dependent. Should blocking of the offer by the board be permitted (as the
considered screening rule would do)?
    Note that, in a regime of shareholder voting and no board veto, the
$100-per-share bid would not necessarily win. The shareholders might be
persuaded by the board’s recommendation and the investment banker’s
opinion and might vote to reject the offer. In the absence of a board veto,
however, voting shareholders might also decide not to accept the board’s
recommendation to remain independent. With due respect to investment
bankers’ opinions, their estimates are hardly money in the bank.85 There is
substantial room for discretion in financial estimates, and two analysts who
use standard and accepted methodologies may reach very different esti-
mates.86 Furthermore, the investment banker hired by management might
have an incentive to help it as long as the banker would not have to bear re-



   84 Evaluating the overall approach suggested by Interco and by Gilson and Kraakman, I
view it as too lax in the respects discussed in this Part and as insufficiently restrictive in the
respects discussed earlier. As discussed in Part I.B, I do not accept the Allen-Gilson-
Kraakman view that a cash offer with a back-end at the same price ensures undistorted
shareholder choice. In my view, such an offer can still produce collective-action problems,
and undistorted choice should be ensured by requiring bidders to win a shareholder vote.
In any circumstances in which undistorted shareholder choice is ensured, however, the Al-
len-Gilson-Kraakman willingness to accept some substantive coercion claims as justifying
board veto is, in my view, unwarranted.
   85 For a detailed analysis of the problems involved in relying on investment bankers’
opinions, see Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Marcel Kahan, Fairness Opinions: How Fair Are They
and What Can Be Done about It?, 1989 Duke L J 27. See also Interco, 551 A2d at 799 (“[I]t is in-
contestable that the Wasserstein Perella value is itself a highly debatable proposition.”).
   86 See Bebchuk and Kahan, supra note 85, at 29–37. See also Interco, 551 A2d at 799 (dis-
cussing the big difference between the estimates offered by the investment banker hired by
the target’s management and the one hired by the plaintiff in the case).



                                               33
putational costs; thus, the banker would have an incentive to come out with
the highest estimate that can be justified using legitimate methodologies.87
     Compared with a regime of shareholder voting and no board veto, the
screening rule would produce different outcomes only in those cases in
which shareholders otherwise would elect to accept the bid notwithstanding
the board’s recommendation and the investment banker’s opinion. In such
cases, however, why should deference to the directors and their investment
banker be imposed on shareholders, as the screening rule would do? Essen-
tially, a regime of shareholder voting and no board veto does not imply that
there would be no screening of boards’ inadequacy claims but rather that
shareholders would be the ones doing the screening. The factors that courts
would weigh under the screening rule might well be ones that would also
guide the shareholders’ screening decisions. The critical point, however, is
that there is no reason to have the courts rather than shareholders screen
boards’ claims of offer inadequacy.
     Thus, although at first sight the screening rule seems consistent with the
tendency of courts to defer to business decisions made by market partici-
pants, it is not. If courts were to decide whether directors have a sufficiently
substantiated case that remaining independent would be worthwhile, they
would be substituting their judgment on this question for that of the share-
holders. Given that courts do not have any clear advantage over sharehold-
ers in assessing offer inadequacy claims, courts should not take such deci-
sions away from shareholders.88

4.   Bargaining by Management

    a) Premia obtained with and without board veto. Thus far, I have focused on
the possible benefits of board veto in those cases in which it would lead to
target independence. I now turn to claims that such power might produce
benefits in those cases in which an acquisition takes place by increasing

    87 Note that there is a form of investment banker backing that voting shareholders
would find quite credible. Suppose that the investment banker in the considered case not
only opined that the target would have a value of $120 to $130 per share in the event of re-
maining independent but also made a commitment to purchase, in the event that the target
remains independent, a substantial number of shares for $120 per share. Such a commit-
ment might well get substantial weight in shareholders’ decision-making. As long as the
banker simply puts forward an estimate of $120 to $130 dollars per share, however, the
possibility that rational shareholders will elect not to rely on this estimate is a realistic one.
    88 Interco, 551 A2d at 796, itself warns of “the danger that . . . courts—in exercising
some element of substantive judgment—will too readily seek to assert the primacy of their
own view on a question upon which reasonable, completely disinterested minds might dif-
fer.”



                                               34
premia. Even if the increased likelihood of independence produced by board
veto were undesirable, it might be argued, board veto could still be desirable
overall because of its effect on premia.
     Management’s bargaining is possibly beneficial, it is argued, because
target shareholders are dispersed and therefore unable to bargain effec-
tively. If management is given veto power, it could act as a single and effec-
tive bargaining agent on behalf of the shareholders. Therefore, so the argu-
ment goes, board veto enables managers to extract through bargaining a
higher price—and thus a larger fraction of the surplus produced by the ac-
quisition—than shareholders would obtain otherwise.89 Note that an in-
creased premium at the expense of the acquirer would not count in an
evaluation from the broader perspective of aggregate shareholder wealth.
This perspective will be considered, however, in Part II.E. For now, we are
evaluating board veto from the perspective of target shareholders, and
higher premia do count as a benefit for these shareholders.
     There are reasons, however, to doubt the presence, or at least the signifi-
cance, of the bargaining advantage that a board veto regime is claimed to
have. To begin, a regime of shareholder voting and no board veto is consis-
tent with substantial bargaining by management on behalf of the sharehold-
ers. Such a regime would merely imply that shareholders would have the
power, if they so chose, to take the bargaining mandate from management.
Thus, the difference between a board veto regime and a regime with share-
holder voting and no board veto is only that the former grants management
an irreversible mandate to bargain whereas the latter gives management a
mandate to bargain that is reversible.90
     Consider a principal who has an agent conducting some negotiations on
the principal’s behalf. Even if the principal retains the power to take the
mandate away from the agent, as is often the case, the agent can bargain on
the principal’s behalf. Lawyers, for example, bargain on behalf of clients,
sometimes ferociously, even though clients are generally free, if they so


    89 See, for example, René M. Stultz, Managerial Control of Voting Rights, Financing Poli-
cies, and the Market for Corporate Control, 20 J Fin Econ 25 (1988). See also Interco, 551 A2d at
798 (“[A]n active negotiator with power, in effect, to refuse the proposal may be able to ex-
tract a higher or otherwise more valuable proposal.”).
    90 Note some similarity between the argument in Part II.C.4 that a regime with share-
holder voting and no board veto is consistent with managers’ contributing bargaining
skills and the argument in Part II.C.3 that such a regime is consistent with managers’ con-
tributing their informed estimates. In both cases, my claim is that such a regime does not
require forgoing all that management has to offer. Rather, such a regime mainly gives
shareholders a choice whether to accept management’s claims that it has better information
or that it can obtain more value through bargaining.



                                               35
choose, to accept an offer from the other side against their lawyer’s recom-
mendation. That clients are free to do so, however, hardly implies that they
generally would; clients can and often do refuse to accept any offer not rec-
ommended by their lawyer.
    In a regime of shareholder voting and no board veto, when a board
takes the view that it would be desirable to keep bargaining and not to ac-
cept the outstanding offer, shareholders would weigh various considera-
tions. They might defer to the board and take no action to remove manage-
ment’s bargaining mandate and to accept the offer that is on the table. But
they also might sometimes choose to take away the bargaining mandate and
to accept the bidder’s offer if they conclude that management’s recommen-
dation is likely the product of self-serving reasons or cognitive bias. In mak-
ing such explicit or implicit decisions, shareholders would take into account
the various circumstances of the case they face.
    To be sure, it is theoretically possible that the optimal strategy for share-
holders would be to tie their own hands and give management an irreversi-
ble mandate to bargain. But it is far from clear that this is the case. Indeed, in
other contexts in which principals have agents bargain on their behalf, prin-
cipals commonly grant their agents only a reversible mandate. Principals
generally do not deprive themselves of the power to take the mandate away
from the agent should they conclude at some point that this would best
serve their interests.
    Furthermore, in examining the question whether an irreversible bargain-
ing mandate is the optimal strategy in the context of corporate takeovers, we
should take into account that this context is one afflicted by significant
agency problems. Given the agency problems, such a mandate might have
two adverse effects. First, management might use an irreversible mandate
not to extract a higher premium but rather to prevent a takeover altogether.
Under a regime with a reversible mandate, shareholders would be able to
limit such an abuse either by taking the bargaining mandate from manage-
ment at some point or by refraining from doing so only if management con-
strains itself by committing to a price it would accept if offered.91
    Second, managers might use an irreversible bargaining mandate not to
block an acquisition altogether or to extract a higher premium for share-
holders, but rather to extract some significant private benefits for them-
selves. For example, managers might use their power to bargain for an at-

   91 Consider our example, and suppose that the acquirer’s current offer is $120 per
share. If managers are concerned that shareholders might take away the bargaining man-
date from them because of shareholders’ concerns that the managers might be seeking an
indefinite delay, managers might state that they would agree to a price of $140 per share if
offered.



                                            36
tractive role in the post-takeover entity. Any concessions made by the bidder
toward management’s personal interests might come at the expense of the
value that the bidder would be willing to offer shareholders.
     b) Some evidence. The discussion above suggests that, at a theoretical
level, it is far from clear that a board veto should be expected to increase
substantially, or even at all, the acquisition premia paid to target sharehold-
ers. Given that the question cannot be fully resolved at the level of theory, let
us turn to the available evidence.
     Supporters of board veto argue that the evidence shows that such veto
has a substantial positive effect on premia.92 They rely on early studies by
Georgeson & Company that found an association between poison pills and
higher premia in acquisitions.93 Comment and Schwert, in a more systematic
study, also found an association between pills and premia.94
     As recent work by Coates shows, however, the findings of the above
studies provide no basis for inferring that the presence of pills produces
higher premia due to the bargaining power provided by pills.95 Because
every company can install a pill overnight, having the pill already in place
does not affect the power that management would have to block a hostile
bid should it occur. Both companies with and without pills in place have
pills available to them if needed to block a bid. Thus, the difference in pre-
mia found in the above studies between these two types of companies could
not have resulted from the bargaining advantage of pills. The difference in
premia presumably reflected whatever differences in characteristics and cir-
cumstances led firms to make different choices whether to install a pill or
keep it on the shelf.
     Because companies with a pill already installed do not stand out in
terms of managers’ power to block bids, they do not enable testing the im-
pact of board veto on premia. In contrast, as noted, effective staggered
boards do provide managers with especially strong defenses, and they thus
present an opportunity for such testing. In our study of staggered boards,

    92 See, most recently, Lipton and Rowe, supra note 29, at 24–25.
    93 See Georgeson & Co, Inc, Poison Pill Impact Study (Mar 31, 1988); Georgeson & Co,
Inc, Poison Pill Impact Study II (Oct 31, 1988).
    94 See Robert Comment and G. William Schwert, Poison or Placebo?: Evidence on the De-
terrence and Wealth Effects of Modern Antitakeover Measures, 39 J Fin Econ 3 (1995).
    95 See John C. Coates IV, Takeover Defenses in the Shadow of the Pill: A Critique of the Scien-
tific Evidence, 79 Tex L Rev 271, 337 (2000); John C. Coates IV, Empirical Evidence on Struc-
tural Takeover Defenses: Where Do We Stand?, 54 U Miami L Rev 783, 794–96 (2000). For an
acceptance of Coates’ critique by well-known practitioners, see R. Franklin Balotti and J.
Travis Laster, Professor Coates Is Right: Now Please Study Stockholder Voting, 54 U Miami L
Rev 819, 835–37 (2000).



                                                37
Coates, Subramanian, and I found that, controlling for other company and
bid characteristics, managers armed with effective staggered boards ob-
tained increases in premia that were small and statistically insignificant.96
Our findings suggest that, even if further work does find that staggered
boards produce some statistically significant benefits in terms of higher
premia, these benefits would be unlikely to be sufficiently large to provide a
basis for board veto.
     There is also evidence that, in using their bargaining power, managers
sometimes advance their interests at the expense of shareholders’ premia. As
noted earlier, recent studies found that target CEOs are willing to accept
lower acquisition premia in transactions that involve an extraordinary per-
sonal treatment, such as special payments to the CEO at the time of the ac-
quisition or high-ranking managerial posts in the buyer.97
     Finally, before turning to arguments for board veto based on ex ante ef-
fects, it is worth noting that, in the staggered board study discussed above,
we tried to estimate the overall effect of board veto on the expected returns
to target shareholders following the making of a bid. As noted, we found
that effective staggered boards produced substantial costs by increasing the
likelihood of remaining independent—but only small and statistically insig-
nificant benefits in terms of premia. Putting the various effects together, we
estimated that, during the 1996–2000 period of our study, effective staggered
boards reduced the expected returns of target shareholders on the order of
8–10 percent.98

5.   Dangers of Short-Term Focus

    Thus far, I have concluded that, given that there is a bid on the table,
shareholders’ interests would not be well served by boards’ having a veto
power. But this does not end our inquiry. It remains to explore whether
board veto is beneficial due to its ex ante effects on managers’ incentives and
behavior.
    Supporters of board veto have suggested that the threat of hostile take-
overs forces managers to focus on short-term results and thereby discour-
ages investments, such as investments in research and development, that

   96 See Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian, supra note 8.
   97 See Hartzell, Ofek, and Yermack, supra note 42; Wulf, supra note 43.
   98 See Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian, supra note 8. In his response to this paper,
Lipton, supra note 29, argues that the recent takeover of Willamette demonstrates that stag-
gered boards produce substantial increases in premia for target shareholders. The Appen-
dix to this paper, however, provides a detailed analysis of this case and shows that such an
inference cannot be drawn from it.



                                            38
would bear fruit only in the longer run.99 Indeed, during the corporate gov-
ernance debates of the 1980s, supporters of board veto argued that the short-
term bias produced by takeovers was one of the reasons why the United
States economy was performing less well than Germany and Japan, where
corporate managers were largely insulated from unsolicited offers.100 This
particular concern about the consequences of takeovers is presumably no
longer with us, but the basic claim underlying it should be taken seriously.
     At the level of theory, there is no question that, when managers’ inside
information is not fully observable to public investors, managers’ concern
about short-term results might distort their decisions. It is worth noting,
however, that the direction of the distortion is ambiguous and depends on
the type of information that is unobservable to investors. Jeremy Stein de-
veloped models in which the level of investment in long-term projects is un-
observable, an assumption that seems especially fitting for investments of
time and effort by management.101 In these models, should a takeover bid
occur, shareholders deciding on it would not be able to observe the level of
investment in long-term projects. As a result, the threat of an unsolicited bid
discourages investment in such projects.
     Another model, developed by Lars Stole and myself, analyzes the case
in which the level of investment in long-term projects is observable but its
quality or expected profitability is not.102 This assumption might well fit
most cases of capital investments in long-term projects made by firms. Un-
der this assumption, the threat of unsolicited offers leads to excessive invest-
ments in long-term projects. Should a control contest arise, shareholders will
be able to observe such investments. Furthermore, a higher level of invest-
ment will signal managers’ confidence in the profitability of this investment,
and this signaling effect provides incentives to invest excessively.
     In any event, whichever direction distortions are expected to take in any
given set of circumstances, the prospect of a takeover bid undoubtedly can,
in theory, distort the level of long-term investments. For designing legal pol-
icy, however, the important question is whether these distortions are of suf-
ficient magnitude to justify providing boards with veto power. Neither the
theory nor the available empirical evidence supply a basis for believing this


   99 See Lipton and Rosenblum, supra note 10, at 205–14; Lipton, supra note 2, at 115–16.
   100 See Lipton and Rosenblum, supra note 10, at 218–22.
   101 See Jeremy C. Stein, Efficient Capital Markets, Inefficient Firms: A Model of Myopic Cor-
porate Behavior, 104 Q J Econ 655 (1989); Jeremy C. Stein, Takeover Threats and Managerial
Myopia, 96 J Polit Econ 61 (1988).
   102 See Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Lars A. Stole, Do Short-Term Managerial Objectives
Lead to Under- or Over-investment in Long-Term Projects?, 48 J Fin 719 (1993).



                                              39
to be the case. The evidence on the existence of such distortions is mixed,
with ambiguous results with respect to the sign of the effect of board veto on
R&D expenditures.103
     Furthermore, even assuming that board veto does have beneficial ex
ante effects on investments in long-term projects, it must be taken into ac-
count that, as discussed in Part II.B, board veto also has significant ex ante
costs. By removing or weakening the potential disciplinary force of the take-
over threat, board veto might increase managerial slack, empire-building,
consumption of private benefits, and so forth. Furthermore, as discussed
earlier, there is evidence that these ex ante costs are pervasive and poten-
tially significant.
     Supporters of board veto have provided no reasons for believing that
whatever ex ante effects board veto has on long-term investments will be
sufficiently positive to outweigh the significant negative ex ante effects of
board veto that have been discussed earlier. Indeed, as I now turn to note,
the evidence that is available supports a conclusion that the overall effect of
board veto is negative. To begin, Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick found a sig-
nificant association between stronger antitakeover protections and lower
stock market valuation (as measured by Tobin’s Q).104 According to their
study, throughout the 1990s, companies with stronger antitakeover protec-
tion had a lower Tobin’s Q, with the effect becoming more pronounced as
the decade proceeded.105
     Furthermore, there is evidence that the passage of the strongest anti-
takeover statutes—the ones most capable of significantly enhancing boards’
veto power over unsolicited offers—was accompanied by a significant de-
cline in the stock price of the companies incorporated in these states. Massa-
chusetts companies significantly declined in value when Massachusetts
adopted a statute making staggered boards the default arrangement under
state law.106 Companies incorporated in Pennsylvania or Ohio significantly


    103 See Mark Johnson and Ramesh P. Rao, The Impact of Antitakeover Amendments on
Corporate Financial Performance, 32 Fin Rev 659 (1997); William N. Pugh, Daniel E. Page, and
John S. Jahera, Jr., Antitakeover Charter Amendments: Effects on Corporate Decisions, 15 J Fin
Rsrch 57 (1992); Lisa K. Meulbroeck, et al, Shark Repellents and Managerial Myopia: An Em-
pirical Test, 98 J Polit Econ 1108 (1990).
    104 See Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick, supra note 45, at 34.
    105 This evidence is consistent with early evidence found by Morck, Shleifer, and
Vishny on the association of managerial entrenchment with lower Tobin’s Q. See Randall
Morck, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, Alternative Mechanisms for Corporate Control,
79 Am Econ Rev 842 (1989).
    106 See Robert Daines, Do Staggered Boards Affect Firm Value?: Massachusetts and the
Market for Corporate Control, working paper (2002); L. Mick Swartz, The Massachusetts Classi-



                                             40
declined in value when these states passed statutes enabling a “disgorge-
ment” of bidders’ “short-term” profits.107 In general, the overwhelming ma-
jority of event studies on the adoption of state antitakeover statutes found
either no price reactions or negative price reactions. 108

6.   Executive Compensation to the Rescue

    The preceding discussion in this Part has paid much attention to the po-
tential divergence of interest between managers and shareholders in the face
of a takeover. It can be argued, however, that the potential agency problems
of a board veto regime could be addressed by an appropriate design of ex-
ecutive compensation schemes. When such schemes are designed to reward
managers sufficiently in the event of an acquisition, so the argument goes,
they can neutralize managers’ private interests in preventing a takeover. In-
deed, Kahan and Rock suggest that executive compensation schemes have
already sufficiently developed in this way to produce a healthy and well-
functioning acquisitions market.109 On their view, even though board veto
(which they do not endorse) might be undesirable by itself, the compensa-
tion schemes that market participants have adopted provide a countervail-
ing force, neutralizing any adverse effects that the presence of veto power
otherwise would have, and produce a good equilibrium.
    I agree that, given the introduction of veto power, appropriate compen-
sation schemes can improve matters. But even though such schemes can


fied Board Law, 22 J Econ & Fin 29 (1998).
    107 For studies documenting the negative impact of the passage of the Pennsylvania
statute, see L. Mick Swartz, The 1990 Pennsylvania Anti-Takeover Laws: Should Firms Opt Out
of Anti-takeover Legislation?, 11 J Acct, Audit, & Fin 223 (1996); Jonathan M. Karpoff and
Paul H. Malatesta, State Takeover Legislation and Share Values: The Wealth Effects of Pennsyl-
vania’s Act 36, 1 J Corp Fin 367, 368 (1995); Samuel H. Szewczyk and George P. Tsetsekos,
State Intervention in the Market for Corporate Control: The Case of Pennsylvania Senate Bill 1310,
31 J Fin Econ 3 (1992). For a study documenting the negative impact of the passage of the
Ohio statute, see Michael Ryngaert and Jeffrey Netter, Shareholder Wealth Effects of the 1986
Ohio Antitakeover Law Revisited: Its Real Effects, 4 J L, Econ, & Org 373, 383 (1988).
    108 See, for example, Jonathan M. Karpoff and Paul H. Malatesta, The Wealth Effects of
Second-Generation State Takeover Legislation, 25 J Fin Econ 291 (1989) (reporting that forty
second-generation statutes adopted in twenty-six states had, on average, a –0.29 percent
impact on stock prices). For surveys of these many studies, see Roberta Romano, The Genius
of American Corporate Law 60–75 (AEI 1993); Gartman, supra note 7, at Appendix C.
    109 See Kahan and Rock, supra note 3, at _. For an early work on the potential benefits
of golden parachutes and other acquisition-related benefits in providing incentives, see
Charles R. Knoebler, Golden Parachutes, Shark Repellents, and Hostile Tender Offers, 76 Am
Econ Rev 155 (1986).



                                               41
ameliorate the negative effects of board veto, there is reason to doubt that
they have eliminated these effects or, indeed, that they could have done so.
     Let us start with the ex post problem of ensuring that, in the event of a
bid, managers use whatever veto power they have in the interest of share-
holders. It is quite difficult, if not impossible, to design compensation
schemes that eliminate divergence between managers’ and shareholders’ in-
terests and thus ensure that managers exercise their veto power in share-
holders’ interests.
     Consider managers confronted with a takeover bid, and suppose that, at
this time, the private cost to the managers of losing their control is C. Sup-
pose also that, according to the managers’ compensation arrangements, the
managers will receive in the event of a takeover a monetary benefit of G.
Clearly, as long as G is lower than C, managers’ private interests would fa-
vor maintaining independence, and the danger of managers’ using their veto
power to block beneficial acquisitions would remain.
     This conclusion, however, does not imply that optimal incentives could
be secured by setting G at a very high level. If G is pushed to a level higher
than C, managers’ incentives would be distorted in favor of selling the com-
pany.110 Could one take the view that managers’ incentives to sell can never
be excessive? Certainly not in an inquiry exploring whether a board veto
could be justified. Such an inquiry must start from the premise that not all
premium acquisitions would be beneficial to shareholders; otherwise, there
would be at the outset no point to having a board veto.
     Thus, for a compensation scheme to induce optimal decisions by man-
agers facing an offer, the scheme must produce in each and every case that
might emerge a monetary acquisition benefit G that would exactly equal C.
That seems exceedingly difficult to do. To begin, even if G were to be deter-
mined on an ad hoc basis ex post, given the circumstances in place, difficul-
ties would arise from the fact that C is hardly observable. Furthermore, ex
ante, when compensation schemes are set, and when the particular circum-
stances that would arise in the future are uncertain, it seems impossible to
set the scheme in a way that the produced G would always be equal to the
value that C would take.111

   110 The possibility that compensation arrangements that reward acquisitions might
lead to distorted managerial choice in favor of acquisitions is also noted by Ehud Kamar,
Managerial Change-in-Control Benefits and Takeovers at 1–3, working paper (2002).
   111 The analysis above indicates that, even if boards were setting compensation
schemes at arm’s length with sole concern for maximizing shareholder value, boards
would be unable to design schemes that would fully align the interests of managers and
shareholders in the face of a takeover bid. It is worth noting, however, that there are rea-
sons to question whether compensation schemes are generally set to maximize shareholder



                                            42
     Indeed, the evidence discussed earlier indicates that compensation
schemes have not solved thus far the agency problems arising from manag-
ers’ veto power. Consider, for example, the findings of the study by Coates,
Subramanian, and myself that, during the period 1996–2000, managers fac-
ing hostile bids and armed with ESBs used them to reduce the likelihood of
an acquisition without producing significant countervailing benefits in
terms of higher premia. These findings are inconsistent with the view that
executive compensation schemes have eliminated managers’ preference for
remaining independent. A similar observation can be made with respect to
the findings in the studies by Wulf and by Hartzell, Ofek, and Yermack that
managers bargaining in the past decade accepted lower premia in transac-
tions that provided managers with favorable treatment.112 Again, these find-
ings are inconsistent with the view that executive compensation schemes
have produced an alignment of interests between managers and sharehold-
ers in the context of takeovers.113
     Turning from ex post to ex ante, compensation schemes cannot in any
way eliminate the negative ex ante effects of board veto, as Kahan and Rock
themselves recognize.114 To induce managers not to oppose a takeover ex
post, compensation schemes would have to provide managers with mone-
tary benefits in the event of a takeover that would eliminate or sharply re-
duce the adverse effect of a takeover on managers’ private interests. Such
compensation schemes would eliminate, however, the disciplinary force of
the takeover threat. With managers not expecting to be hurt in the event of a
takeover, the prospect of a takeover would no longer provide managers with
ex ante incentives to avoid poor performance that could raise the likelihood
of a takeover.
     In sum, although compensation arrangements can improve matters, tak-
ing as given the presence of board veto, such arrangements cannot eliminate
the adverse effects of such veto. Kahan and Rock might be correct in sug-


value. See generally Lucian Arye Bebchuk, Jesse M. Fried, and David I. Walker, Managerial
Power and Rent Extraction in the Design of Executive Compensation, 69 U Chi L Rev _ (2002).
   112 See note 97 and accompanying text.
   113 Kahan and Rock, supra note 3, at _, point to the large volume of acquisitions as evi-
dence that compensation schemes have produced their hoped-for benefits. This aggregate
data, however, does not establish that such schemes have eliminated the potential distor-
tions arising from managers’ veto power. Among other things, such aggregate data does
not tell us whether all the targets that should have been acquired were acquired (and the
other data discussed above suggests that they might not have been). It also does not tell us
whether the targets that were acquired were bought by the right buyer, for the right price,
and with the right arrangements for managerial succession.
   114 See id at 887.



                                            43
gesting that such arrangements might present the best outcome that share-
holders could have obtained in the past decade given the difficulty of chang-
ing takeover arrangements. Our interest here, however, is in identifying the
best takeover law regime. The possibility of using compensation schemes to
neutralize some of the adverse effects of a board veto regime can make such
a regime less detrimental, but it does not provide a basis for favoring this
regime.

7.   Inferences from IPO Charters

     Having concluded that a direct examination of the merits of board veto
does not provide a good basis for supporting it, I turn to consider whether
its desirability can be inferred from the choices made by firms going public.
Recent empirical evidence that has attracted much attention indicates that
firms going public during the past decade have not designed their charters
to eliminate board veto.115 To start with, no firm is known to have adopted a
charter provision that eliminates or curtails the power of the board to main-
tain a poison pill. Secondly, the majority of firms going public adopted char-
ters provisions, such as ones that establish staggered boards or prevent
shareholders from calling a special meeting or acting by written consent,
that make it difficult for shareholders to replace the board quickly. Re-
searchers examining this pattern have raised the possibility that the adop-
tion of such charter provisions resulted from imperfections in the IPO proc-
ess.116 Researchers have also raised the possibility, however, that this adop-
tion was due to—and thus was evidence of—the positive effects of board
veto on shareholder value.117
     According to a widely held view, firms at the IPO stage have powerful
incentives to adopt arrangements that serve shareholders, and the adoption
of arrangements at this stage thus provides evidence of their optimality.
Whether, when, and to what extent this proposition is valid is a large ques-
tion that I discuss elsewhere118 and that does not need to be resolved for our

    115 See Robert Daines and Michael Klausner, Do IPO Charters Maximize Firm Value?:
Antitakeover Protections in IPOs, 17 J L, Econ, & Org 83 (2001); John Coates, Explaining Varia-
tion in Takeover Defenses: Blame the Lawyers, 89 Cal L Rev 1301 (2001); Laura Casares Field
and Jonathan M. Karpoff, Takeover Defenses of IPO Firms, J Fin (forthcoming Oct 2002).
    116 See, for example, Daines and Klausner, supra note 115, at 86; Choi and Guzman, su-
pra note 78, at 985–86.
    117 See Daines and Klausner, supra note 115, at 84–85; Choi and Guzman, supra note 78,
at 985–86; John Elofson, What If They Gave a Shareholder Revolution and Nobody Came? Poison
Pills, Binding Shareholder Resolutions and the Coase Theorem, working paper (2002) .
    118 I discuss how inefficient IPO provisions might result from inaccurate pricing in



                                              44
purposes. For these purposes, it is sufficient to observe that, even assuming
this proposition to be valid in general, the evidence with respect to charter
provisions contributing to board veto is sufficiently mixed and conflicted to
make the inference under consideration unwarranted.
     To start with, throughout the past decade, shareholders of existing com-
panies have been generally unwilling to vote in favor of amending the char-
ter to include provisions making replacement of the board more difficult.
Once firms realized that shareholders are unwilling to vote for such charter
amendments, boards all but stopped proposing such amendments. From
1986 to 2000, the annual number of such proposals dropped by 90 percent.119
Furthermore, shareholders’ opposition to such arrangements has been re-
flected also in the large and growing support given to precatory resolutions
to dismantle existing staggered boards.120 All this is clearly the opposite of
what is predicted by the view that investors favor charter provisions that fa-
cilitate board veto.
     Secondly, while no firm is known to have adopted in the 1990s a charter
provision that takes from boards the power to maintain pills indefinitely—a
power given to boards by developments in case law and state statutes in the
late 1980s and early 1990s—firms also did not generally adopt charter provi-
sions that provided boards with such power prior to these developments.121
During the 1980s, it often appeared uncertain, if not in some cases unlikely,
that boards would ultimately be given broad permission to maintain pills.
Nonetheless, although boards were actively seeking to enhance takeover
protections, pill-authorizing (or functionally equivalent) charter provisions
generally were not adopted.
     Consider Delaware firms. Between the invention of the pill in 1982 and
the Moran decision in 1985, there was uncertainty as to whether the Dela-
ware courts would permit the use of pills at all. Moran permitted the use of
pills, but left quite open the possibility that boards would be required to re-


Lucian Arye Bebchuk, Freedom of Contract and the Corporation: An Essay on the Mandatory
Role of Corporate Law, Harvard Law School Program in Law and Economics Discussion Pa-
per No 46, (1988); and Bebchuk, supra note 11. I discuss how problems of adverse selection
and signaling might lead to inefficient IPO provisions, including ones providing excessive
protection from takeovers, in Lucian Arye Bebchuk, Asymmetric Information and Corporate
Governance, working paper (2002).
   119 See Michael Klausner, Institutional Shareholders’ Split Personality on Corporate Gov-
ernance: Active in Proxies, Passive in IPOs at 3–4, Stanford Law and Economics Olin Working
Paper No 225 (2001), available online at <http://papers.ssrn.com/id=292083>.
   120 The average shareholder vote in favor of such proposals was 52.7 percent in 2000.
See id at 3.
   121 See, for example, Elofson, supra note 117, at 47.



                                            45
deem pills in some circumstances, and Interco made the possibility of court-
ordered redemption of pills a real one. It was only with the Time decision in
1990 that boards could have gained confidence that they would have a
broad and open-ended power to maintain pills. Still, prior to 1990, Delaware
firms had not been adopting, either when going public or through charter
amendments, pill-authorizing (or functionally equivalent) charter provi-
sions.
     A similar point can be raised with respect to firms incorporated in states
other than Delaware. In most states, the validity of pills was in doubt until
the passage of pill endorsement statutes in the late 1980s.122 Still, prior to the
adoption of these statutes, firms incorporated in those states generally did
not adopt, either when going public or through a charter amendment, pill-
authorizing (or functionally equivalent) charter provisions.
     The absence in the 1980s of proposals for amending charters of existing
firms to include such provisions was presumably due to the expectation that
shareholders would not vote for such proposals. For this reason, boards and
their advisers placed their hopes on the validation by courts or legislators of
pills that managers unilaterally adopted. Managers lobbied state legislatures
to adopt pill endorsement statutes instead of lobbying shareholders to ap-
prove functionally equivalent charter amendments, presumably because
managers did not expect shareholders would approve such measures.
     Could supporters of board veto dismiss the above patterns by claiming
that shareholders’ unwillingness to vote for certain charter provisions re-
flects their preferences less well than their willingness to purchase shares at
IPOs of firms with such charter provisions? Even if IPO choices were as-
sumed to provide better evidence, there would still remain the question why
firms going public between 1982 and 1990 did not include pill-authorizing
(or functionally equivalent) provisions in their IPO charters. Thus, even if
we were to put aside evidence based on voting decisions and to focus solely
on IPO choices, the evidence on how board veto has been viewed by partici-
pants in IPOs would be rather mixed.
     It follows that one cannot infer from IPO choices that board veto is gen-
erally the arrangement favored by shareholders. Not being able to infer
which arrangement is optimal from such evidence, we should seek to iden-
tify it through direct examination. The examination conducted in this Part
has shown that shareholders’ interests likely would be best served by a re-
gime of shareholder voting and no board veto.




  122 See Gartman, supra note 7, at § A8.



                                            46
                 D. The Perspective of Long-Term Shareholders

    Because supporters of board veto have stressed the interests of long-
term investors—those that choose to invest in the target for the long haul—it
is worth considering whether a case for such veto can be made from the per-
spective of such investors. To examine this question, we should first note
that most of the factors discussed in this Part do not depend on whether tar-
get shareholders focus on the short-term.
    There is one factor, however, that could be evaluated differently from
the perspectives of long-term and short-term investors and thus needs to be
considered here. Recall the argument that directors may use their power to
block offers when they, but not investors, recognize the target’s fundamental
value to exceed the bid price. In such cases, it might be argued, defeat of the
offer might have a negative effect on shareholder wealth in the short-run but
would deliver value in the long-run as the market would ultimately recog-
nize the target’s true value. Therefore, in such cases, the board’s power to
block offers would benefit those shareholders that would stay with the com-
pany long enough but not short-term shareholders that would sell before the
defeat of the offer would deliver value.
    Thus, if it were the case that shareholders of targets whose directors de-
feat bids and remain independent benefit in the long-run from such resis-
tance, this pattern would have provided support for a board veto from the
perspective of long-term shareholders. As discussed in Part II.C.3, however,
the evidence indicates that, when directors defeat bids and remain inde-
pendent, target shareholders on average lose not only in the short-run but
also in the long-run. Accordingly, the perspective of long-term shareholders
cannot provide a basis for a board veto regime.

              E. The Perspective of Aggregate Shareholder Wealth

    I now turn to examine the perspective of aggregate shareholder wealth.
From this perspective, it is necessary to take into account the effects of board
veto not only on targets’ shareholders but also on bidders’ shareholders.
Does this “broadening” of perspective strengthen the case for a board veto?
As explained below, the answer is no. To the contrary, if anything, inclusion
of the interests of bidders’ shareholders would only make a board veto re-
gime relatively less attractive.
    Examining the set of cases in which bidders make offers, board veto
primarily affects two groups of cases: (i) cases in which the target is acquired
but the presence of board veto affects the premium for which it is acquired;
and (ii) cases in which the target is not acquired due to the presence of board
veto but would have been acquired in the absence of such veto. Let us exam-


                                      47
ine in turn how the evaluation of each of these two effects will be influenced
by also taking into account bidders’ interests.
     Consider the first group of cases, where a board veto does not prevent a
takeover but only influences the acquisition premium. Supporters of such
veto argue that it operates to increase the premia captured by target share-
holders in these cases. This potential benefit was taken into account in the
discussion in Part II.C of the target shareholders’ perspective. From the per-
spective of overall shareholder wealth, however, extracting a higher pre-
mium from the bidder is by itself merely a transfer. Thus, a switch to the
perspective of aggregate shareholder wealth removes from consideration,
rather than enhances, this potential benefit of board veto. To be sure, as ex-
plained earlier, there are reasons to doubt whether, compared with a regime
of shareholder voting and no board veto, a board veto regime enjoys a sig-
nificant bargaining advantage. Clearly, however, excluding potential bar-
gaining benefits, as is required by a switch to the perspective of aggregate
shareholder wealth, cannot be expected to strengthen the case for board
veto.
     Similarly, considering the second group of cases in which the effect of
board veto is to prevent an acquisition, this effect of board veto hardly bene-
fits bidders. Rather, this effect denies bidders an acquisition they were seek-
ing. Again, incorporating the interests of bidders into the objective to be
maximized does not help the case for board veto.123
     Indeed, the above analysis is consistent with earlier work that suggests
that, in the context of corporate control contests, shareholders generally
would prefer to restrict takeovers and proxy contest victories by outsiders
more than what would be optimal once the outsiders’ interests are taken
into account.124 Thus, once we conclude that a board veto regime is not de-


    123 Could it be argued that preventing acquisitions sought by bidders would be in fact
in the interests of bidders’ shareholders because of the evidence that bidders’ shareholders
do not benefit much, if at all, from acquisitions? Even if one takes such a negative view of
acquisitions in general, it hardly follows that it would be desirable to give targets’ boards
veto power in order to save acquirers’ shareholders from their empire-building managers.
Such board veto, of course, would not help acquirers’ shareholders in the more numerous
cases in which targets’ boards agree to be acquired. One concerned about possible empire-
building by acquirers’ managers should focus on other ways for addressing this problem.
    124 See Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Luigi Zingales, Ownership Structures and the Decision
to Go Public: Private versus Social Optimality, in Randall K. Morck, ed, Concentrated Corporate
Ownership 55 (Chicago 2000); Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Marcel Kahan, A Framework for
Analyzing Legal Policy Towards Proxy Contests, 78 Cal L Rev 1071, 1129–34 (1990); Sanford
Grossman and Oliver Hart, Takeover Bids, the Free-Rider Problem, and the Theory of the Corpo-
ration, 11 Bell J Econ 42, 54–57 (1980). For this reason, the perspective of aggregate share-
holder wealth is one that can be expected to be used by those seeking to reduce restrictions



                                              48
sirable from the perspective of target shareholders, it is not surprising that
taking bidders’ interests into account cannot provide a basis for such a re-
gime.

                           F. The Perspective of Stakeholders

    Supporters of board veto also argue that it enables managers to prevent
acquisitions that would harm stakeholders—nonshareholder constituencies
such as employees, suppliers, or debtholders.125 Indeed, a majority of the
states enacted statutes allowing managers responding to a takeover bid to
take into account the interests of stakeholders.126 Supporters of board veto
have used claims about stakeholder interests in the political arena, in the
courts, and in the court of public opinion.
    Acquisitions, whether hostile or friendly, might sometimes adversely af-
fect the interests of stakeholders. Employees might be laid off, creditors’
debt might become riskier, suppliers might be denied a valuable business
partner, communities might lose a corporate headquarters or corporate op-
erations, and so forth. It is desirable, so the argument goes, to have in place
some mechanism that would ensure that stakeholders’ interests would be
taken into account in deciding whether to have a takeover and that these in-
terests would be protected if a takeover does take place. On this view, hav-
ing such a mechanism would not only benefit stakeholders but also would
ex ante be in the interest of shareholders; specifically, it would encourage ex
ante beneficial investments and participation on the part of stakeholders.127



on takeovers. Thus, it is not surprising to find it invoked by Easterbrook and Fischel, supra
note 1, at 1161, who used it in arguing for their rule of passivity. Criticizing at the time
Easterbrook and Fischel’s view that higher premia should not count as a benefit, Lipton
characterized this argument as one that “courts—and target shareholders—would find . . .
both peculiar and unpersuasive.” Lipton, supra note 29, at 1235.
    125 See, for example, Blair and Stout, supra note 28, at 253; Lipton, supra note 2, at 130–
31.
    126 See Gartman, supra note 7, at §§ A-6 to A-7. The committee drafting the Revised
Model Business Corporation Act, however, decided that directing directors to consider the
interests of nonshareholder constituencies is undesirable. See Committee on Corporate
Laws, Other Constituencies Statutes: Potential for Confusion, 45 Bus Law 2253, 2270–71 (1990)
    127 See Blair and Stout, supra note 28, at 304–05; Andrei Shleifer and Lawrence H.
Summers, Breach of Trust in Hostile Takeovers, in Alan J. Auerbach, ed, Corporate Takeovers:
Causes and Consequences 33 (Chicago 1988); John C. Coffee, Jr., The Uncertain Case for Take-
over Reform: An Essay on Stockholders, Stakeholders, and Bust-Ups, 1988 Wisc L Rev 435; John
C. Coffee, Jr., Shareholders versus Managers: The Strain in the Corporate Web, 85 Mich L Rev 1
(1986).



                                              49
     Critics of this view have argued that, although takeovers could in theory
impose such harm on stakeholders, the evidence indicates that such losses
are not very common and, furthermore, are small in magnitude relative to
shareholders’ gains when they do occur.128 Critics have also argued that the
law generally should not provide protection to stakeholders beyond what is
called for by their contracts with the corporation. On this view of the critics,
protection of stakeholder interests should be left to contracts between them
and the corporation or to nonlegal sanctions.129 Given this line of response, it
is unsurprising that some observers view the board veto question as one of
shareholders versus stakeholders.130
     Below I will assume for the purpose of discussion that (i) takeovers often
impose significant negative externalities on stakeholders (possibly employ-
ees in particular), and (ii) it is desirable to have some mechanism in place
that protects stakeholders in the event of an acquisition. As I explain below,
even under these assumptions, the case for board veto hardly follows. That
is, fully accepting in my analysis the importance and desirability of protect-
ing stakeholders in acquisitions, I will show that a board veto is a rather
poor way of pursuing this objective, and that this objective thus cannot pro-
vide a basis for a board veto regime.

1.   Expanding Discretion to Benefit Stakeholders

    To begin, it is worth observing that there is no assurance that, if direc-
tors are given veto power, they will exercise it to protect stakeholders. In
theory, one could consider permitting boards to block offers that sharehold-
ers would like to accept only if such blocking would protect stakeholders
and thereby maximize the overall welfare of all corporate constituencies.
Courts, however, would be unable to enforce compliance with such a prin-
ciple.
    Indeed, courts are reluctant to review the merits of board decisions—
even to determine whether they serve the narrower and well-defined inter-
ests of shareholders. For this reason, those opposed to board veto do not
wish to limit it by having courts review board decisions but rather to replace
it with shareholders making the key decisions. Clearly, if directors were in-
structed to maximize the joint welfare of all corporate constituencies, courts

    128 For a review of the evidence, see Ronald Daniels, Stakeholders and Takeovers: Can
Contractarianism Be Compassionate?, 43 U Toronto L J 297, 317–25 (1993); Roberta Romano, A
Guide to Takeovers: Theory, Evidence, and Regulation, 9 Yale J Reg 119, 133–43 (1992).
    129 An excellent discussion of this view can be found in Daniels, supra note 128, at 340–
49.
    130 See Allen, Jacobs, and Strine, supra note 3, at _.



                                             50
would be unable or at least unwilling to enforce compliance with such a
principle. As Oliver Hart observed, a prescription to management to take the
interests of all constituencies into account “is essentially vacuous, because it
allows management to justify almost any action on the grounds that it bene-
fits some group.”131
     Supporters of board veto indeed do not assume or imply that directors
would have to use their power in ways that would protect stakeholders and
that courts would review whether this is done. Indeed, lest there be any
misunderstanding that courts are expected to ensure that directors take
stakeholders’ interests into account, drafters of state constituency statutes
used (in all cases but one) language that authorizes (rather than requires) di-
rectors to take into account the interests of other constituencies.132
     In sum, supporters of board veto wish to give boards discretion with the
aspiration and hope that they would use their discretion to protect stake-
holder interests. In considering how likely this is to happen, we should ex-
amine whether the interests of those granted the discretion are likely to
overlap with the interests of the stakeholders that are supposed to benefit
from this discretion.133

2.   Are Boards Good Agents of Stakeholders?

    Recall the agency problem that played an important role in analyzing
board veto from shareholders’ perspective—the concern that, in the takeover
context, managers are likely to be influenced by their private interests. Even
though managers’ holdings of shares and options create in general some
alignment of managers’ and shareholders’ interests, the takeover context is
one in which managers’ interests are likely to diverge from those of share-
holders.
    Do we have good reasons for expecting managers responding to a take-
over bid to be better agents of stakeholders than they can be expected to be
of shareholders? To begin, note that, in most other corporate contexts, man-
agers’ interests are actually more likely to be aligned with those of share-
holders rather than stakeholders. Whereas managers usually have a signifi-

   131 Oliver Hart, An Economist’s View of Fiduciary Duties, 43 U Toronto L J 299, 303
(1993).
   132 See Committee on Corporate Laws, supra note 126, at 2261–63.
   133 Some supporters of board veto list “managers” as a constituency whose interests
should be taken into account. See Blair and Stout, supra note 28, at 297. One can safely as-
sume that the expanded discretion under consideration would ensure that the interests of
this particular constituency be taken into account. But such an assumption cannot be made
with respect to other constituencies.



                                            51
cant fraction of their wealth in the form of shares and options, they do not
usually have as much of their wealth tied to bondholder or employee
wealth. And managers’ private interests in the takeover context cannot be
cannot be expected to be aligned with the interests of stakeholders.
     To be sure, some correlation between managers’ and stakeholders’ pref-
erences might arise because some acquisitions might be a threat to managers
(who might lose their private benefits of control) and also to employees
(who might lose their jobs) or creditors (who might be harmed by an in-
crease in leverage). But this correlation of interests is likely to be rather lim-
ited; managers’ and stakeholders’ interests can be expected to overlap occa-
sionally but not in general.
     There might well be acquisitions that would be beneficial to stake-
holders—say, when an acquisition by a large and rich buyer would improve
opportunities for employees—but that management might well disfavor for
self-serving reasons. Conversely, there might well be acquisitions that
would disadvantage stakeholders but that management, at least if it is of-
fered a sufficiently good deal for itself, would favor. Finally, in cases in
which an acquisition is likely to occur ultimately, management might use
whatever veto power it has to bargain for better terms not for stakeholders
but rather for itself or even for shareholders.134 In sum, given the limited

   134 Blair and Stout, who support giving boards discretion in general in order to protect
corporate stakeholders, recognize the risk that directors will not use their discretion for the
intended purpose: “[T]o say that directors are free . . . is not the same thing as saying they
will. If directors are despots, why should they be benevolent?” Id at 315. These authors go
on to suggest three aspects of law and culture that are likely to encourage directors to do
the right thing. First, Blair and Stout say, directors have an interest in doing their job well if
they enjoy and want to keep their job. Id. Although this argument might be valid outside
the takeover context, it is inapplicable to the takeover context, where directors’ desire to
keep their jobs is a major basis for concern that they might not use their discretion appro-
priately. Second, Blair and Stout say, corporate law encourages directors to serve share-
holders and stakeholders well by limiting severely their ability to serve their own interests.
Id at 315–16. Again, this argument is not applicable to the takeover context, where the di-
rectors’ interests are by definition strongly implicated.
   The third factor listed by Blair and Stout is corporate cultural norms of fairness and
trust, reinforced by reputational sanctions and the selection to boards of trustworthy indi-
viduals. Id at 316. I doubt that this factor is sufficiently strong to ensure desirable use of
discretion in the takeover context. Apparently, the norm that directors should not impose
great financial losses on their shareholders was not sufficient to prevent Time’s directors
from defeating Paramount’s bid, thereby imposing a great loss on Time’s shareholders. It is
far from clear that cultural norms can induce management to ignore its self-interest in the
takeover context, where managers’ private interests are very much at stake and where act-
ing in the managers’ self-interest can always be defended as needed to protect shareholders
or some other constituency. Indeed, cognitive dissonance might lead managers who would
benefit from remaining independent to develop a genuine (even if mistaken) belief that



                                               52
overlap between managers’ and stakeholders’ interests, there is no basis for
expecting board veto to translate into an effective protection of stakeholders.

3.   The Tenuous Link between Stakeholder Protection
     and Board Veto

     Protection of stakeholders is thus not an objective that a board veto re-
gime can serve well. If one is genuinely concerned about protecting stake-
holders from being harmed by corporate acquisitions, then one presumably
should seek a mechanism that (i) would apply to all or most of the transac-
tions that might have the undesired effects, and (ii) would reasonably target
and address these effects. A board veto is not such a mechanism, on both
counts.
     First, a concern about the effects of acquisitions on stakeholders should
clearly not limit itself to, or even focus on, hostile takeovers. Such takeovers,
which constitute a rather limited fraction of relevant corporate transactions,
are not especially or disproportionately ones that can be expected to harm
stakeholders. Layoffs, for example, might result not only from hostile acqui-
sitions but also from negotiated acquisitions of a company or of a division,
from a change of course following a proxy contest victory by challengers, or
from decisions by incumbents to shut down plants.135 Whereas hostile take-
overs are very important for an analysis focusing on how power is allocated
between managers and shareholders, arrangements designed to protect
stakeholders in corporate transactions have no reason to focus on hostile
takeovers.
     Furthermore, focusing on hostile takeover cases, the effects of board
veto on outcomes in such cases would have little overlap with those desir-
able for stakeholders. If we seek to protect stakeholders, why do so by giv-
ing discretionary power to agents that have their own, very different inter-
ests and somehow hope for the best? One truly concerned with stakeholder
interests should seek remedies that are tied more systematically to the prob-
lems that need to be addressed. For example, one concerned about harms to
employees from acquisition-related layoffs might consider rules that would
give such employees various procedural and substantive rights in the event



their stakeholders would be well served by such independence.
    135 Or from internal decisions to restructure. See, for example, Harry DeAngelo and
Linda DeAngelo, Union Negotiations and Corporate Policy: A Study of Labor Concessions in the
Domestic Steel Industry of the 1980’s, 30 J Fin Econ 3, 10–15 (1991) (providing a detailed ac-
count of the huge cost to employees caused by steel companies’ decisions to reduce capac-
ity during the 1980s).



                                             53
of such layoffs,136 or provide employees and their representatives some say
in corporate decision-making in general or in plant closings or layoffs in par-
ticular,137 or supplement formal contracts between firms and stakeholders
with implied and good faith terms.
     Examining whether a mechanism for extra protection of stakeholders is
necessary and, if so, which of the above or other approaches would be best,
is clearly beyond the scope of this paper on board veto in corporate take-
overs. For our purposes, what is important to recognize is that, if one were
interested in protecting stakeholders rather than finding reasons for board
veto, then it would be far better to address this concern about stakeholders
not with board veto but rather with some approach tailored to this concern
and applicable whenever it arises. Any such approach would likely yield
more benefits to stakeholders, with less harm to the legitimate interests of
target shareholders, than granting boards veto power in the hope that they
would use it to protect stakeholders.
     In sum, the connection between board veto and the goal of protecting
stakeholder interests is rather tenuous. And, indeed, the push for constitu-
ency statutes seems to have come from those seeking to enhance manage-
ment power. Although acquisitions with their effects on stakeholders have
been part of the corporate landscape for a long time, such statutes came into
being only after the rise of hostile bids created a threat to management
power. Furthermore, the majority of state constituency statutes were
adopted as part of a larger wave of antitakeover statutes aimed at impeding
hostile acquisitions.138 In any event, whatever motivated the adoption of
constituency statutes and board veto arrangements, they cannot be reasona-
bly justified as a mechanism for protecting stakeholders.




    136 See Ronald Daniels, Mergers and Acquisitions and the Public Interest: Don’t Shoot the
Messenger, in Leonard Waverman, ed, Corporate Globalization through Mergers and Acquisi-
tions 195 (Calgary 1991) (discussing policies to address such issues, including plant closure
legislation, mandatory successorship rights, and mandatory bargaining); Joseph W. Singer,
The Reliance Interest in Property, 40 Stan L Rev 611, 740–43 (1988) (discussing rules govern-
ing severance payments, advanced notice, and rights of first refusal in connection with
plant closings).
    137 See generally Lawrence Mitchell, ed, Progressive Corporate Law (Westview 1995).
    138 An examination of the data on state antitakeover statutes indicates that, out of the
thirty-one states that have a constituencies statute, all but four also have another type of
second-generation antitakeover statute. See Gartman, supra note 7, Appendix B.



                                             54
4.   Protecting Stakeholders or Protecting Managers?

     I have discussed in detail the arguments based on stakeholder interests
because of their importance in debates on takeovers and in the politics of
takeovers. Once the interests of nonshareholder constituencies are intro-
duced, the growing opposition of institutional investors to takeover defenses
no longer has the weight that it would carry otherwise. Once stakeholders
are brought in, such investors can be viewed as just one constituency out of
several whose interests should be protected.
     Thus, support for board veto can be presented as a rejection of the view
that only shareholders count in favor of the view that stakeholders, espe-
cially employees, count too. Supporters of board veto would like us to ac-
cept that, if stakeholders are to count, then boards should have veto power
to be able to act as the stakeholders’ champion. By casting boards as the
champion of stakeholders, supporters of board veto have been able to boost
significantly the perceived legitimacy and appeal of their position. They also
have sought to cast the debate over board veto as a debate between a nar-
row, shareholder-centered view of the corporation and a broad, inclusive
view of the corporation.139
     The arguments made in this Part question this account of what is at
stake in the board veto debate. Concluding that employees and other stake-
holders must receive some protection beyond the one accorded by their con-
tracts hardly leads to endorsement of board veto. Boards are unlikely to be
good agents of stakeholders in takeovers, at least under the existing rules for
board selection and operation. Support for board veto thus should not be
viewed as support for protecting employees and stakeholders but rather as
support for enhancing the power of boards and managers relative to share-
holders.
     The debate over board veto, then, does not confront us with a choice be-
tween shareholders and stakeholders, with managers as the champion of the
latter. Rather, the choice is between shareholders and managers, with stake-
holders as bystanders. This is what is at stake in the board veto debate.

                    G. Implementation within Existing Case Law

    I now turn to consider briefly implications of the analysis for takeover
case law. As I said, there are different institutional arrangements that can

   139 See Allen, Jacobs, and Strine, supra note 3, at _. In reflecting on the debate over
board veto, they view it as partly involving choice between a shareholder-centered view of
the corporation and a broader, “entity” perspective that incorporates the interests of stake-
holders. See id.



                                             55
produce a regime of shareholder voting and no board veto, and in other
works I explore some of the possible alternatives and the best design, start-
ing from a clean slate, of such a regime.140 Here, however, I focus on examin-
ing how the analysis could inform the future development of takeover law,
taking as given the existing structure of takeover doctrine.
     Delaware law on takeover defenses, which the law of many other states
follows, has established principles that allow boards to adopt and maintain
poison pills. This law, however, also includes principles requiring a propor-
tionate use of defensive measures and attaching much importance to the
shareholder franchise as a safety valve against potential abuse of poison
pills. The considerations identified by my analysis can usefully inform and
guide the implementation and development of these principles. In particu-
lar, the analysis leads me to propose that, at least in the absence of explicit
charter provisions to the contrary, courts should be guided by the following
principles in reviewing takeover defenses:
    (1) Maintaining Pills to Prevent a Takeover Unsupported by a Vote: Subject to
    the conditions below concerning access to and consequences of share-
    holder voting, the board should be permitted to maintain a poison pill
    in the face of a takeover bid even if the bid is “structurally non-
    coercive.”
    (2) Access to a Vote: After a bid is made and a period reasonably suffi-
    cient for the board’s exploring and preparing alternatives for share-
    holder consideration passes, maintaining a pill would be consistent with
    fiduciary duties and thus permissible only if, within a period as short as
    reasonably practical, either: (a) shareholders would have or would be
    given an opportunity to vote (whether in a regularly scheduled meeting,
    a special meeting, or through written consents) to replace some or all of
    the directors; or (b) shareholders would have (by the terms of the rights
    plan) or would be given by the board an opportunity to vote to have the
    pill redeemed.
    (3) Redemption of Pills Following Electoral Defeat: When directors of a
    company with a staggered board lose one election fought over an acqui-
    sition offer, they should not be permitted (absent compelling corporate
    justification) to continue maintaining a pill.
        Furthermore, dead-hand pills, delayed-redemption pills, or any
    other pill terms that, in the aftermath of electoral defeat by incumbents,



   140 See generally Bebchuk and Hart, supra note 6; Bebchuk, The Allocation of Power be-
tween Managers and Shareholders, supra note 19; Bebchuk and Ferrell, supra note 12.



                                           56
    make it impossible, costly, or difficult to redeem the pills should be pro-
    hibited.
    (4) Protecting the Shareholder Franchise: In the face of an unsolicited take-
    over bid, the highest level of judicial scrutiny should be applied to any
    board decisions that might frustrate or distort the outcome of share-
    holder votes that would have an effect on the fate of the offer. Specifi-
    cally, boards should not be permitted (absent compelling corporate jus-
    tification) to adopt defensive bylaws that either: (a) impose supermajor-
    ity requirements on the adoption of shareholder bylaws; or (b) reverse
    shareholder bylaws.
    Some of the above proposals are quite close to existing case law,
whereas others might require some limited change of course. But they are all
ones that would be consistent with, and indeed advance, the existing princi-
ples that defenses be proportionate to the threat posed and that the share-
holder franchise be well protected. They all also would move arrangements
toward a regime of shareholder voting and no board veto. They all would
thus operate to enhance shareholder value and to improve the allocation of
corporate assets.

                                 CONCLUSION

     Supporters of board veto in corporate takeovers have long argued, with
much influence on legislators and courts, that boards should have substan-
tial power to block acquisition offers. This paper has attempted to analyze
the full array of arguments that supporters of board veto have marshaled in
its defense. Examining all of these arguments both at the level of theory and
in light of the substantial body of evidence that has accumulated, I have con-
cluded that board veto is undesirable. This conclusion is reached when the
subject is analyzed from either the perspective of target shareholders or
from any of the other normative perspectives that have been invoked by
supporters of board veto. Once mechanisms to ensure undistorted share-
holder choice are in place, boards should not be permitted to block offers
beyond the period necessary for putting together alternatives for share-
holder consideration. All those with interest in corporate governance—be
they public officials, investors, or students of the subject—should recognize
the substantial costs and limited benefits of board veto.




                                       57
                    APPENDIX: THE TAKEOVER OF WILLAMETTE

     In a response to this paper, Martin Lipton vigorously defends his views
in favor of board veto.141 Lipton forcefully puts forward his concerns that
shareholders not be in any way pressured to accept takeover bids, however
high the premium they offer, and that tender decisions might not reflect well
shareholders’ preferences. As I explained, I share these concerns, which have
led me to support a regime of shareholder voting.
     Lipton continues to maintain, however, that shareholder voting is not
sufficient and that board veto is desirable. He cautions against a regime of
shareholder voting and no board veto by arguing that, whatever the merits
of such a regime, it would constitute a “radical change.”142 As I explained in
this paper, however, there are different ways of obtaining a regime of share-
holder voting and no board veto. Some ways would indeed require a major
legislative change to establish a referendum. However, such a regime could
also be largely implemented by a limited adjustment of the existing juris-
prudence.
     Putting aside the question of whether moves to limit board veto would
constitute a radical change, Lipton maintains that such moves would be det-
rimental to shareholders. Most of the reasons he gives for his position are
ones that he has raised in his earlier work and that my analysis in this paper
already addresses in detail. Below I therefore focus on some new claims that
Lipton makes in his response in connection with the recent takeover of Wil-
lamette, where incumbents stalled the bid for fourteen months. He argues
that (a) the stalling in Willamette illustrates well how board veto delivers
substantial value for shareholders, and that (b) in any event, such stalling
raises at most a theoretical concern. Below I argue (a) that the takeover of
Willamette does not lend support to the case for board veto, and (b) that
prohibiting a Willamette-type stalling would provide valuable and practi-
cally significant benefits.

        A. Did Willamette’s Incumbents Deliver Value for Shareholders?

    My analysis has stressed the costs produced by staggered boards, which
are present in about half of publicly traded companies and provide an im-
portant source of board veto. Lipton responds by offering a detailed discus-




  141 Lipton, supra note 29, at _.
  142 Id at _.



                                     58
sion of the takeover of Willamette and inferring from it that the veto power
produced by staggered boards is actually beneficial for shareholders.143
     The Willamette saga lasted fourteen months. In November 2000, Weyer-
haeuser made an offer of $48 per share for Willamette. Weyerhaeuser raised
its offer to $50 per share in May 2001 prior to conducting a proxy contest.
Weyerhaeuser won this contest in June 2001, replacing a third of Wil-
lamette’s board. Protected by the staggered board, however, incumbents
continued to oppose the bid. In January 2002, Weyerhaeuser raised again the
offered price to $55 per share and attracted 64 percent of the shares to its of-
fer. Later that month, after encountering substantial shareholder resistance
to an alternative deal with Georgia-Pacific, Willamette’s incumbents agreed
to be acquired by Weyerhaeuser for $55.50 per share, which was 16 percent
higher than the initial $48 per share bid. Lipton suggests that this case offers
a good illustration of how a staggered board delivers value for shareholders.
He argues that the case is “no less than a shining example of how a stag-
gered board and a poison pill operate to the benefit of shareholders” and
that arguments against the staggered board-poison pill combination “evapo-
rated” following the stellar success of the board in this case.144
     It is far from clear, however, that the Willamette case is one in which the
board’s ability to stall has provided a substantial benefit for shareholders. To
start with, even assuming hypothetically that $48 per share was the most
that could have been obtained from Weyerhaeuser without massive delay,
an extra 16 percent does not seem to be an especially impressive return on
waiting for fourteen months and bearing in the meantime the risk that the
deal will fall through.
     More importantly, there is no reason to believe that a 16 percent increase
from the $48 initial price required stalling for fourteen months. A bidder’s
initial offer is generally understood not to represent the final price that it
would be willing to pay to acquire the target. Bidders generally keep some-
thing off the table for final negotiations, and they are generally willing to of-
fer somewhat more than the initial bid to get the deal done. Such increases
can be and often are obtained without the need for massive delay and a
staggered board.145 To take a recent example, consider the takeover of Detec-
tion Systems. In October 2000, Bosch Telecom made a $14-per-share bid for
Detection Systems. The board expressed opposition to the bid, and a large
shareholder started a proxy contest to replace the directors in an upcoming


  143 Id.
  144 Id at 1050.
  145 See Detection Systems Inc. Proxy Fight Ends after Bid from Bosch Is Sweetened, Wall St J
A18 (Dec 12, 2000).



                                             59
shareholder meeting. In December 2000, a few days before the scheduled
meeting, the board and the bidder agreed on an acquisition for $18 per
share, 29 percent more than the initial price. This increase in the offer price
was obtained without charter provisions that preclude access to a quick vote
and with a delay of only two months.
     In fact, when Weyerhaeuser made its bid in November 2000, an analyst
predicted that “the two companies will go to the bargaining table by the end
of next week and reach a deal at $55 per share, possibly a tad higher.”146 But
despite the strong signals that investors wanted to have discussions with the
hostile bidder, Willamette’s incumbents kept refusing to enter such discus-
sions, saying that “Willamette is not for sale.”147 This refusal persisted after
Weyerhaeuser stated explicitly in May 2001 that it would raise the offer if
Willamette would negotiate a friendly deal; Willamette did not enter into
discussions to explore what increase in premium Weyerhaeuser would be
willing to offer.148 It is thus not surprising that Institutional Shareholder Ser-
vices, a proxy-advisory firm widely used by institutional investors, offered
the following account when recommending that shareholders vote for Wey-
erhaeuser’s slate in the June proxy contest:
     We believe management has made its position abundantly clear: it is
     simply not interested in selling. But in remaining unyielding towards
     negotiating with Weyerhaeuser, Willamette has shown a high degree of
     disregard for the wishes of its own shareholders.149
     Only in October 2001, eleven months after the initial bid, and two
months after being defeated in a proxy contest that enabled Weyerhaeuser
to replace one-third of the board, did Willamette express willingness to sit
down with Weyerhaeuser to explore how much it would be willing to raise
its bid. However, Willamette subsequently terminated the brief discussion it
held with Weyerhaeuser. Willamette tried to advance instead a controversial
deal with Georgia-Pacific—even after Weyerhaeuser raised its offer to $55
per share—but encountered strong resistance from shareholders who ten-




   146 See Nikhil Deogun, Weyerhaeuser Plans to Make Hostile Bid of $5.4 Billion for Wil-
lamette Industries, Wall St J A4 (Nov 29, 2000) (quoting Deutsche Bank analyst).
   147 See Weyerhaeuser Bid for Rival Willamette Receives a Boost, Wall St J C3 (Feb 2, 2001).
   148 See Sidel, Weyerhaeuser Fails to Win Willamette Mandate, supra note 62, Wall St J at
A4.
   149 Robin Sidel, Deals & Deal Makers: Proxy Adviser Gives Weyerhaeuser Boost on Wil-
lamette Bid, Wall St J C18 (May 23, 2001).



                                             60
dered en masse into Weyerhaeuser’s offer.150 Willamette then agreed to sell
for $55.50 per share.
     It is far from clear that the above tale is a story of a board pursuing a
bargaining strategy aimed at getting top dollar for shareholders. If bargain-
ing for a higher price was the goal of the board, why did the board for
eleven months not even explore with Weyerhaeuser whether it would be
willing to raise its price by at least 15 percent in order to get the deal done?
The facts appear to be at least consistent with a story of management seek-
ing to remain independent, and to avoid a sale to Weyerhaeuser altogether,
and agreeing to be acquired by Weyerhaeuser only under massive pressure
from shareholders. Indeed, some observers have noted that a factor in Wil-
lamette’s resistance to a sale to Weyerhaeuser was animosity on the part of
Willamette’s incumbents toward Weyerhaeuser’s CEO, who previously had
been an executive of Willamette.151
     In any event, even assuming counterfactually that Willamette’s share-
holders substantially benefited from incumbents’ stalling for fourteen
months, there are clearly examples in which shareholders indisputably suf-
fered substantial losses from incumbents’ use of a staggered board to block
an offer for a long time. Consider the well-known case of Circon. U.S. Surgi-
cal made an offer of $18 per share for Circon in August 1996 and subse-
quently won a proxy contest and replaced one-third of Circon’s board. But
Circon’s incumbents used the shield of an effective staggered board and a
poison pill to keep blocking the offer. In June 1998, twenty-two months after
Surgical first made an offer, Surgical withdrew its bid. Subsequently, in Sep-
tember 1998, under pressure from arbitrageurs, Circon sold itself in a
friendly deal for 17 percent less than the original Surgical bid. The Circon
case is certainly not an example of “how a staggered board and a poison pill
operate to the benefit of shareholders.”
     Having discussed two particular cases, however, I wish to stress the lim-
its to how much one can learn from an example, which might or might not
represent the population from which it is drawn. Rather than look at any


   150 See Robin Sidel and Chad Terhune, Willamette Shareholders, Unhappy with Spurn of
Weyerhaeuser, Fear Georgia-Pacific Deal, Wall St J C2 (Jan 18, 2002).
   151 See Jim Carlton and Robin Sidel, Willamette Accepts Weyerhaeuser’s Offer—Deal for
About $6.1 Billion Ends the Takeover Battle—Agrees to be Bought by Weyerhaeuser, Wall St J A3
(Jan 22, 2002) (reporting, among other things, that “animosities were so high that Wil-
lamette Chairman Bill Swindells, who had groomed Mr. Rogel [Weyerhaeuser’s CEO] to
run the company his family co-founded, refused to take Mr. Rogel’s calls”); Jim Carlton,
Weyerhaeuser Bulks Up to Avoid Consolidation Buzz Saw, Wall St J B4 (Jan 24, 2002) (noting the
particularly high tensions between Mr. Swindells and Mr. Rogel in connection with Wil-
lamette’s following a “just say no” defense for fourteen months).



                                             61
particular example, it would be better to focus on more systematic evidence
whenever possible. The staggered boards study by Coates, Subramanian,
and myself, discussed in the paper, provides such evidence for hostile bids
during 1996–2000. And this study indicates that, overall, staggered boards
did not operate in that period to the benefit of target shareholders.

                 B. Should Willamette-type Stalling Be Permitted?

     In June 2001, Weyerhauser’s slate won in elections for one third of Wil-
lamette’s board fought over the subject of an acquisition by Weyerhauser.
Despite the electoral defeat suffered by Willamette’s incumbents—a defeat
that signaled clearly shareholders’ desire that incumbents negotiate with
Weyerhauser—incumbents continued to stall using a poison pill. Incum-
bents in a target with a staggered board like Willamette, I have argued,
should not be permitted to keep blocking an offer after losing one election
for a class of directors conducted over an acquisition offer. Lipton responds
that, even if continued resistance after one electoral defeat were likely unde-
sirable (which he does not accept), it would not present a concern of signifi-
cance. This issue is “largely theoretical,” Lipton suggests, because “[i]n very
few instances has a target with a staggered board suffered a first-round loss
—had a third of the board replaced with the raider’s nominees—and contin-
ued to refuse to surrender its independence.”152 Therefore, on Lipton’s view,
this issue “does not in any way warrant a change in basic corporate law.”153
     However, even though there are only few instances in which incum-
bents lost an election for one third of the board and continued to resist the
acquisition, the effects of the power to do so are not limited to these in-
stances. The decisions of bidders and incumbents in all takeover contests are
taken against the background of their expectations as to what powers in-
cumbents will have down the road. When incumbents are protected by a
staggered board and have the power to keep resisting after losing one elec-
tion, this power would affect outcomes not only when it is actually exercised
but also when it discourages bidders from continuing to pursue the target at
earlier stages of the game. Without an effective staggered board, an electoral
victory guarantees that the bidder will succeed in taking over the target.
When a staggered board is in place, such a victory does not assure success
(as U.S. Surgical painfully learned in its pursuit of Circon). Thus, when a
bidder finds that incumbents are strongly opposed to a takeover, the pres-



  152 Lipton, supra note 29, at _.
  153 Id at _.



                                       62
ence of power to keep stalling after losing one election might lead the bidder
to withdraw without attempting to run in any election.
     Note that the ability to keep resisting after losing one election is what
separates firms with effective staggered boards from firms that do not have
such boards. The evidence indicates that this difference has a significant and
not merely theoretical impact. As noted, targets with staggered boards have
substantially higher odds of remaining independent in the face of a hostile
bid. During the period of 1996–2000, 60 percent of the targets with effective
staggered boards remained independent, but only 34 percent of the targets
without such boards remained independent. This difference was not due to
instances in which a target with a staggered board remained independent af-
ter losing one election; there was only one case in which a spurned bidder
went through a proxy contest and won one election. Rather, spurned bid-
ders generally withdrew at earlier stages, presumably at least in part be-
cause of their expectation that victory in one election would not preclude the
incumbents from continuing to say no.
      The proposed approach—precluding incumbents who lose one election
from maintaining pills—would take away from pills the special antitakeover
power that they have in the presence of a staggered board. Given that about
half of public companies now have staggered boards, a development with
profound effects on the market for corporate control, this approach would
not address an issue that is merely theoretical. Rather, it would substantially
reduce boards’ ability to block offers and would restore the safety valve of
an effective shareholder vote in firms with staggered boards.
     Lastly, the proposed approach should not be viewed, as Lipton argues,
as a “change in basic corporate law.” Lipton stresses that corporate statutes
have long permitted the adoption of staggered boards.154 The proposed ap-
proach, however, would not prevent firms from having staggered boards.
Rather, it would speak to the question of when courts should allow boards
to maintain a poison pill. Although the judicial trend in Delaware has been
to abstain from court-ordered redemption of pills, the Delaware courts have
left open the possibility that such redemption might be ordered when ap-
propriate. Once it is recognized that permitting incumbents to maintain a
pill after an electoral defeat would practically block bidders’ route to a ballot
box victory, limiting incumbents’ power to do so would be an application of
Moran’s principle that pills should not be used in a disproportionate fashion.
In any event, the proposed approach can be hardly viewed as a radical de-
parture from basic corporate law, and it therefore should not be ruled out
regardless of its potential benefits for shareholders.


  154 Id.



                                       63
