                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                CURRENCY RETURNS, INSTITUTIONAL INVESTOR FLOWS,
                      AND EXCHANGE RATE FUNDAMENTALS


                                           Kenneth A. Froot
                                           Tarun Ramadorai


                                          Working Paper 9080
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9080


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002




We thank many people at State Street Corporation and State Street Associates for help in obtaining and
interpreting data; Atindra Barua, John Campbell, Randy Cohen, Frank Diebold, Bernard Dumas, Jeff Frankel,
Rich Lyons, Paul O ’Connell, Andrei Shleifer, Jeremy Stein, Tuomo Vuolteenaho, Joshua White, Seminar
Participants at the Harvard International Economics Seminar, and Seminar Participants at the NBER Spring
IFM Program Meeting for extremely useful comments and discussions; and the Department of Research at
Harvard Business School for research support. All errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Kenneth A. Froot and Tarun Ramadorai. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Currency Returns, Institutional Investor Flows, and Exchange Rate Fundamentals
Kenneth A. Froot and Tarun Ramadorai
NBER Working Paper No. 9080
July 2002
JEL No. G11, G15, F21, F31


                                            ABSTRACT

       We explore the interaction between exchange rates, institutional investor currency flows and
exchange-rate fundamentals. We find that these flows are highly correlated with contemporaneous and
lagged exchange rate changes, and that they carry information for future excess currency returns. This
information, however, is not strongly linked to future fundamentals. Flows are important in
understanding transitory elements of excess returns, which include short-run underreaction and long-run
overreaction. However, flows have a zero or negative correlation with permanent components of excess
returns. We find that measured fundamentals - not flows - seem important in understanding permanent
elements of excess returns. We conclude that investor flows are important for understanding deviations
of exchange rates from fundamentals, but not for understanding the long-run currency values.




Kenneth A. Froot                                                       Tarun Ramadorai
Graduate School of Business                                            Graduate School of Business
Harvard University                                                     Harvard University
Soldiers Field                                                         Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163                                                       Boston, MA 02163
and NBER                                                               tramadorai@hbs.edu
kfroot@hbs.edu
1. Introduction
In the standard ﬁnance paradigm, rational traders know the equilibrium price
implications of public information instantly and eﬀortlessly. Their main activity
is to infer the information set imbedded in prices and then to rationally blend
that information with their own signal. In practice, however, investors don’t
seem to do this. They spend little time or energy backing out the aggregate
information set and weighing it against their own information. Instead, they
spend considerable eﬀort trying to understand what other investors might do.
They seem to believe that exchange rates are driven by investor appetites, ﬂows,
and trading positions, and are only loosely connected with fundamentals.1
    Much empirical evidence to date corroborates this view. Well-known work
by Meese and Rogoﬀ (1983) and many subsequent authors showed that contem-
poraneous, measured fundamentals do not explain exchange rate changes. In
addition, considerable evidence has been building that institutional investor ﬂows
and trading positions matter. Evans and Lyons (2002) ﬁnd that daily interdealer
order ﬂow explains an astonishing 60% of daily exchange rate changes and con-
sequently argue that ﬂows are the proximate cause of exchange rate movements.
Rime (2000) ﬁnds that weekly ﬂows obtained from the U.S. treasury help explain
exchange rate movements. Others, such as Wei and Kim (1997) and Cai, Cheung,
Lee and Melvin (2001) ﬁnd that the positions of large traders explain currency
volatility far better than do news announcements or measures of fundamentals.2
    This ﬂow-centric view — that investor ﬂows cause exchange rate changes through
private information which, when released, permanently and positively impacts ex-
change rate returns — is new.3 Evans and Lyons (2001) ﬁnd no evidence that ﬂows
   1
     See Cheung and Chinn (2000) for survey evidence from practitioners on the importance of
order ﬂow information.
   2
     There is some evidence — most notably from Mark (1995) — that fundamentals and exchange
rates are better linked at longer horizons.
   3
     For equities, the evidence supporting this view is more abundant, but mixed. Froot,
O’Connell and Seasholes (2001) and Froot and Ramadorai (2001) ﬁnd evidence across a broad
number of countries that cross-border equity trades of institutional investors anticipate future
equity index returns after controlling for lagged returns. Seasholes (2001) shows that foreign
investors in two developing countries buy (sell) ahead of good (bad) news on individual stocks.
Cohen, Gompers, and Vuolteenaho (2001) report that institutional investor’s trades take advan-
tage of underreaction in the prices of portfolios of US stocks, and therefore positively anticipate
returns. However, there are also studies that come to the opposite conclusion. Choe, Kho,
and Stulz (2001) ﬁnd almost the reverse in Korea, in that foreign institutional investors’ trades
negatively anticipate future returns in individual stocks. Coval and Moskowitz (1999) ﬁnd that
predict returns, but argue that the strong daily contemporaneous correlation is
a result of intraday information release that is important for exchange rate de-
termination. Presumably, this information concerns future fundamentals, i.e.,
information that has long lasting impacts on excess returns.4       If this view —
we call it the ‘strong ﬂow-centric view’ — holds, investor ﬂows have permanent
impacts on exchange rates.
    There is a weaker version of this, which we refer to as the ‘weak ﬂow-centric
view’. It is that institutional ﬂows contain information about deviations from
fundamental values, rather than about fundamentals per se, and therefore have
only temporary price eﬀects. These eﬀects may include liquidity and transaction
demand price pressures, preference and other demand shocks, etc. They may
play out over relatively short, or longer horizons. For example, several models
try to explain short-term momentum, so that price changes predictably exhibit
short-term positive autocorrelation along with long-term negative autocorrelation,
patterns that have been widely reported in equity prices. Barberis and Shleifer
(2002), Hong and Stein (1999), and Daniel, Hirshleifer, and Subrahmanyam (1998)
argue that long-run reversals may result from trend-chasing investors following
transitory rules of thumb.
    Of course, contemporaneous positive correlation between ﬂows and returns
may not be evidence of either the strong or weak ﬂow-centric views. Flows
may passively respond to fundamental information, rather than reveal it, as in
Brennan and Cao (1997). Institutions may tend to buy contemporaneously with
or subsequent to positive currency changes. The ﬂows may contain no information
about fundamentals or about deviations from fundamentals that are useful for
forecasting prices. For example, ﬂows may respond with a lag to news and have
no ability to predict future price changes. We call this third perspective the
‘fundamentals-only view’: ﬂows have no ability to predict future exchange rates
or future innovations in expected future fundamentals.
    In this paper we attempt to assess these three views of investor ﬂows: the
strong ﬂow-centric view, the weak ﬂow-centric view, and the fundamentals-only
view. In doing so, we explore the relationship between institutional investor
purchases of foreign exchange, exchange rates, and basic measures of currency
fundamentals. By calculating innovations in cumulated expected future funda-
US mutual fund stock selection is better when companies are geographically close to the fund
manager.
   4
     Evans and Lyons (2001) ﬁnd evidence that news announcements eﬀect exchange rates di-
rectly and indirectly through order ﬂow.


                                             2
mentals, we can extract measures of permanent and temporary exchange rate
shocks. This decomposition allows us to better understand how ﬂows inter-
act with both the fundamentals-driven permanent component and the transitory
component of exchange rate returns.
    Given that our high frequency foreign exchange ﬂow data are relatively new,
we ﬁrst examine the behavior of currency ﬂows and the contemporaneous bivariate
relationship between ﬂows and returns. Much as in Evans and Lyons (2002), we
ﬁnd this relationship to be quite strong. Our daily ﬂows exhibit a correlation with
daily excess returns of about 30%. This is quite signiﬁcant, but far smaller than
that measured for the yen and DM by Evans and Lyons (2002). The diﬀerences
may be due to our much longer and broader data sample and/or to the character
of our ﬂows.5 We also ﬁnd that the ﬂow/return correlation rises strongly with
the horizon over which ﬂows and returns are calculated. The correlations appear
to peak at about 45% for major currencies at horizons of about a month. They
then decline with horizon rapidly thereafter, falling to zero and then actually
below zero at long horizons.
    These preliminary facts suggest two things. First, unlike previous work on
foreign exchange, there appear to be statistically and economically important
non-contemporaneous correlations between returns and ﬂows.           Positive non-
contemporaneous correlations are the only way to explain such large and sig-
niﬁcant changes in correlation with horizon. Either returns must be forecasting
future ﬂows (i.e., trend-chasing or positive-feedback trading), or ﬂows must be
forecasting future excess returns (i.e., anticipation), or both. Second, it would
appear that the impact of ﬂows on prices has a substantial transitory component.
While the long-horizon decline in contemporaneous correlation is somewhat sta-
tistically imprecise, we ﬁnd strong evidence that the correlation between ﬂows
and returns declines with horizon. Any impact of ﬂows on returns is transitory
in nature.
    To go further, we need to account for the dynamic interaction of ﬂows, returns,
and measures of fundamentals and to extract measures of permanent exchange
rate changes from the data. We use a vector autoregression and the Campbell-
Shiller return decomposition to break excess currency surprises into a permanent
component — shocks to the excess cashﬂow paid by a currency — and a transitory
   5
   Naturally, the nature of the ﬂow data may explain this diﬀerence in correlation. Our data
come from the dollar value of trades of international institutional investors, whereas Evans and
Lyons (2002) use the total count of interbank transactions made by the active counterparty.




                                               3
component — shocks to expected returns.6
    Perhaps surprisingly, we ﬁnd that expected return news (the transitory compo-
nent of excess currency returns), has an estimated variance between 3 and 9 times
as large as the variance of cashﬂow news (the permanent component of excess
returns). Most of this variation comes from ﬂuctuations in long-horizon expected
returns; the variance of short-horizon expected returns is by comparison small, at
between 10% and 50% of the variance of cashﬂow news. This follows from the fact
that the small expected returns generated by fundamentals are highly persistent,
so that a small change eﬀectively cumulates over time and causes large capital
gains or losses. Studies of stock index data by Campbell (1991) and others, also
ﬁnd that the variance of expected return news exceeds that of cashﬂow news.
This is in contrast to studies of individual stocks by Vuolteenaho (2002) and Co-
hen, Gompers, and Vuolteenaho (2001), which use the same decomposition, but
ﬁnd that expected return news is considerably less variable than cashﬂow news.
    We also ﬁnd that, conditional on good cashﬂow news, currencies appreciate
initially and then continue to earn excess returns over the short run (deﬁned
here as up to 30 trading days). In this sense, exchange rates exhibit short-
run underreaction. The magnitude of underreaction averages about 10% of the
initial cashﬂow shock and is robust to the combination of ﬂows and fundamentals
we use to deﬁne cashﬂow shocks. This underreaction ﬁnding is quite similar
in spirit to the momentum eﬀects found in equity markets by Jegadeesh and
Titman (1993) and Rouwenhorst (1998).7 In addition, we ﬁnd that from a longer-
horizon perspective, currencies overreact. Approximately one-third of the initial
appreciation decays over time, with the decay principally due to a decline in real
interest diﬀerentials. This ﬁnding is similar to overreaction results in the equity
markets found by DeBondt and Thaler (1985) and Jegadeesh and Titman (2001),
among others.
    Next, we ﬁnd substantial evidence of trend-chasing, in that, over the short-run,
institutional investor ﬂows respond positively to a surprise currency appreciation.
On average, a 1% surprise appreciation results in a 0.37-standard deviation inﬂow
over 30 trading days, for the major currencies in our sample. For the same sample,
over 30 days, a 1% appreciation generated entirely by cashﬂow news results in a
   6
     For the derivation of the return decomposition in the context of stocks, see Campbell and
Shiller (1988) and Campbell (1991).
   7
     Equities, however, appear to have a considerably stronger underreaction eﬀect. For indi-
vidual stocks, Vuolteenaho (2002) ﬁnds underreaction equal to approximately 40% of cashﬂow
shocks.



                                              4
1.17-standard deviation inﬂow. Both of these are consistent with the usual trend-
chasing interpretation. However, we also ﬁnd that a 1% appreciation associated
with a negative short-run expected return shock results in an outﬂow over 30
trading days.8
    In other words, trend-chasing in ﬂows occurs in response to improved percep-
tions of fundamentals. When an appreciation signals that short-run investment
opportunities have declined, trend-reversing, not trend-chasing, occurs. Thus,
institutional investors appear to exploit the short-run underreaction behavior of
the exchange rate.9
    However, this exploitation unravels for longer-term overreaction. We ﬁnd
that investor currency purchases are most sensitive to an appreciation generated
by lower long-term expected returns; a 1% appreciation from this source results
in a 0.60 - standard deviation inﬂow over 30 trading days, for the major countries.
Investors seem to get the trees, but miss the forest, in that their inﬂows come in
advance of short-term underreaction, but also in advance to what appears to be
longer-term overreaction.
    After accounting for the under- and over-reaction eﬀects, we ﬁnd strong evi-
dence that current permanent exchange rate shocks are correlated with increases
in current and expected future real interest diﬀerentials. Thus, much as in Mark
(1995) and Clarida and Gali (1994), we ﬁnd evidence contrary to Meese and Rogoﬀ
(1983): excess returns both forecast and respond contemporaneously to changes in
observed fundamentals.10 However, because transitory exchange rate changes are
relatively large, evidence for this correlation is not apparent in directly observed
returns, which combine the transitory and permanent components. Only the
permanent component of current exchange rate shocks appears to be positively
correlated with innovations in fundamentals.
   8
      This outﬂow is quite large — equivalent to 46 standard deviations — because a negative shock
of 100 bp to short-run expected returns is very large, given the much smaller standard deviation
of expected returns.
    9
      This result has been found by Cohen, Gompers and Vuolteenaho (2001) and Froot and
Ramadorai (2001) in equity data. Rather than using a VAR to distinguish temporary and
permanent eﬀects, Froot and Ramadorai (2001) use closed-end country fund discounts and
underlying fund NAVs. They ﬁnd that an increase in NAV results in trend-chasing but that an
increase in the closed-end fund discount results in trend-reversing.
  10
      One distinction between our work and much previous long-horizon work on explaining ex-
change rates is that we use exchange rate changes in excess of the interest diﬀerential (i.e., excess
currency returns rather than currency changes). Interest diﬀerentials usually account for only
a small portion of return variation over short horizons, but over long horizons they are much
more important.


                                                 5
    Taken together, these ﬁndings are not supportive of the strong ﬂow-centric
view. There is little evidence that ﬂows proxy for innovations in cumulated
expected future fundamentals. Flows do not forecast and are not forecasted by
changes in real interest diﬀerentials, especially at long horizons. As a result,
ﬂows and measures of fundamentals are not very strongly related. Of course, this
shouldn’t be interpreted to mean that institutional investors pay no attention
to fundamentals. Rather, changes in expected fundamentals appear to aﬀect
institutional investors and their counterparties rather symmetrically, creating few
opportunities to trade proﬁtably (based on our information set).
    At short-horizons, the bulk of the evidence points toward the weak form of
the ﬂow-centric view. Flows contain limited information about short-term fun-
damentals, but mostly it appears that they contain information about follow-on
short-term future demand. They do indeed contain some form of information,
however, as they are useful for forecasting future excess returns. At longer-
horizons, however, current and short-term inﬂows are contrarian indicators for
returns. Current inﬂows predict long-horizon outﬂows and negative long-horizon
excess returns. This is evidence that demand shocks and their associated price
impacts are transitory. Finally, looking at the permanent shocks — which is the
longest horizon in a sense — we ﬁnd that a fundamentals-only story is most pow-
erful. At long horizons, fundamental shocks and currencies are highly correlated,
whereas ﬂows and currencies are not.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the ﬂow
data and the relationship between contemporaneous ﬂows and returns at various
horizons. Section 3 introduces our VAR methodology and associated return
decomposition. Section 4 then discusses the results and interpretation of our
estimates. Section 5 concludes.

2. The bivariate behavior of flows and returns
2.1. Foreign exchange transactions data
Our cross-border FX transactions data come from State Street Corporation. State
Street is the largest US master trust bank and one of the world’s largest global
custodians. It has approximately $7 trillion of assets under custody. State Street
records all transactions in these assets, including cash, underlying securities, and
derivatives.
   The foreign exchange data records transactions conducted in 111 currencies by


                                         6
13,230 funds. In our sample we ﬁlter out currencies classiﬁed by the IMF as being
pegged or ﬁxed as well as currencies whose transaction ﬂows are relatively sparse
on a daily basis. This leaves 19 country / currency areas: Australia, Canada, Eu-
roland, Japan, New Zealand, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, UK, Mexico, Indone-
sia, Korea, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand, Poland, India and South
Africa. Pre-euro, Euroland ﬂows represent aggregates across the 11 Euroland
countries and they are paired with the Deutsche mark prior to the introduction
of the euro.
    Our sample begins January 1, 1994 and continues through February 9, 2001,
covering 1,855 days for the 19 countries. There are 6,402,392 transaction records
during this period, after cleaning and removing test transactions.
    All transactions for a given trade date report future value amounts bought and
sold. However, in order to aggregate trades, we need to calculate present values
of these amounts. Our valuation methodology and additional data information
can be found in Appendix I below.
    Table 1 presents some descriptive statistics for the ﬂow data. It shows the
number of transactions per currency and the mean and standard deviation of
absolute ﬂows expressed in US dollars. Clearly, the transactions are heavily
weighted toward the major currencies, both in terms of the number of trades and
the mean absolute net daily ﬂow. Within the major countries, the Euro and yen
ﬂows run at about three times the ﬂows for Australia, Canada and Switzerland.
Flows are considerably smaller for other countries, with the possible exception of
Sweden and New Zealand.
    Table 1 also reports ﬂow and excess currency return autocorrelations. Flows
are strongly autocorrelated, with autocorrelation coeﬃcients averaging approxi-
mately 20% for the major currencies and even higher for some of the other Asian
currencies. However, these autocorrelations are not as large as those observed in
daily equity ﬂows, perhaps because foreign exchange markets are more liquid than
markets for individual equities.11 Return autocorrelations, as expected, are very
low. Finally, Table 1 reports the correlation of daily ﬂows with the log percentage
change in each currency’s exchange rate change against the US dollar. For most
of the major currencies, these correlations are in the 30%-40% range.
  11
     Froot, O’Connell, and Seasholes (2001) ﬁnd that the daily autocorrelation of cross-border
equity transactions (aggregated to a country level) are often 30% and higher.




                                              7
2.2. A naive approach
As a ﬁrst step, we establish some basic facts about the behavior of ﬂows and the
correlation between currency ﬂows and returns. We start with a simple regression
of log foreign exchange excess returns on ﬂows:

                           rt,j (K) = α̂ + β̂Ft,j (K) + ε̂t,j ,                   (2.1)
                   PK
where rt,j (K) =     k=1 rt+1−k,j , is the k-period cumulated log excess return on
currency j, rt,j is the excess return on the jth currency measured against an
                                                          P
appropriate basket of currencies (see below), Ft,j (K) = K   k=1 ft+1−k,j /σ(fj ) is the
cumulated normalized US-dollar ﬂow into currency j, and σ(fj ) is a normalization
of currency-j ﬂows based on own standard deviation. The normalization helps
ensure comparability of ﬂows across countries.
    Our raw excess currency returns are measured against the US dollar. However,
the US-dollar return against, say, the Swiss franc, is not really the appropriate
exchange rate change to compare with net US dollar purchases of Swiss francs.
This is because many of the ﬂows into Swiss francs are funded — directly or
indirectly — with Euros, pounds, and so forth. As a result, we might expect
inﬂows to most strongly aﬀect the value of the Swiss franc against some basket of
currencies, where the basket weights would reﬂect the composition of currencies
sold to ﬁnance the inﬂow. Unfortunately, it is impossible to observe the basket
weights directly, since a single Swiss-Euro transaction may be eﬀected through
several transactions, with the US dollar serving in each of them as vehicle currency.
As an alternative approach, we estimate the weights from the slope coeﬃcients
in a regression of excess Swiss franc returns on excess returns of the pound, euro,
yen, and Australian dollar (where all excess returns are measured in terms of US
dollars). We then use the residuals from this regression as our measure of excess
returns on the Swiss franc. We employ this methodology for all currencies except
those of Canada, the UK, Japan, Australia, and Euroland.
    The regression in equation (2.1) allows us to measure the β and ρ (correlation
coeﬃcient) of returns and ﬂows for any horizon, for any individual country, and for
the entire panel. We employ overlapping return windows to maximize the amount
of information available. Standard errors are estimated through a Monte Carlo
procedure performed under the null hypothesis that ﬂows and returns are i.i.d.
and have the empirically-observed daily contemporaneous correlation. Appendix
II contains a description of our Monte Carlo procedure.


                                            8
2.3. Results from the naive approach
Country-by-country estimates of equation (2.1) are reported in Table 2.12 Not
surprisingly, Table 2 shows that ﬂows are strongly correlated with exchange rate
changes. Correlation coeﬃcients in daily data average just under 30% and reach
as high as 38% (for the pound). Table 2 also shows that the correlations increase
for every currency from the daily to the 20-day horizon. The correlations reach
as high as 53% for the euro and 56% for the yen. The increase in correlation
with horizon is important. It requires substantial positive non-contemporaneous
cross-correlation to be present. Indeed, the non-contemporaneous eﬀects seem
particularly strong, in that the correlations increase very substantially with hori-
zon, especially for smaller countries such as Mexico, Poland, South Africa, Sweden,
Singapore, and Taiwan.
    Interestingly, as horizons increase beyond 20 or 60 days, the correlations fall
for every currency, often by a large amount. Indeed, the correlations become
negative for two of the currencies we deem to be ‘major’ (Euroland and Canada),
and for 10 of the 19 currencies overall. While the statistical signiﬁcance of each
of these numbers is very much in doubt, the preponderance and magnitude of
the decline in correlations suggests that much of the medium-term comovement
of exchange rates with ﬂows is not permanent. The positive association between
ﬂows and exchange rates appears to be largely transitory.
    In addition to the correlation, it is interesting to examine the slope coeﬃcients
of returns projected on ﬂows. A coeﬃcient of 1.0 implies that a $100 million
dollar net inﬂow into a currency is on average associated with a 1 basis point
appreciation. The coeﬃcients for the majors on average indicate that a $100 mil-
lion dollar net inﬂow results in an appreciation of approximately 11.5 basis points.
(This is about twice the size of the 5 basis point response found by Evans and
Lyons (2002)). Euroland, Switzerland, and Canada have the lowest coeﬃcients
whereas Australia, Japan, and the UK have the highest. These numbers cannot
properly be interpreted as measures of liquidity or of price impact because there
is no presumption that causality runs from ﬂows to returns. While many market
microstructure models attempt to model price impact, relatively few treat ﬂow as
endogenous.13 Nevertheless, causality could run entirely or partly from prices to
  12
     The country-by-country results in Table 2 do not use ﬂows normalized by standard deviation.
Under these circumstances, it is more informative to use the dollar value of individual country
ﬂows as the regressor.
  13
     An important exception is Brennan and Cao (1997). They provide a model in which
international investors purchase foreign assets in response to good news, thereby inducing a


                                               9
ﬂows.
     It is interesting to note that the slope coeﬃcients show virtually no evidence
of an increase with horizon. The increase in the correlation coeﬃcient is there-
fore oﬀset by an increase in the relative variability of ﬂows. Because ﬂows are
positively autocorrelated and returns are less so, we should expect this eﬀect.
However, it is interesting that a complete oﬀset of the change in correlation coef-
ﬁcient implies that exchange rates respond similarly to expected and unexpected
ﬂows.
     Next, we investigate the longer-horizon features of the data in more detail.
To gain additional degrees of freedom, we normalize ﬂows as shown in equation
(2.1) and stack the regression across our 19 exchange rates. This obviously gives
us far more power at longer horizons. By using the full panel, we can measure
holding horizons of up to 1,855 days, or almost 7.5 years. The results for the
ﬂow-return correlation coeﬃcient are depicted in Figure 1 for both the major
currencies and the full sample. The x-axis is in log terms, running from 1-day
horizons (100 days) to 1,855-day horizons (greater than 103 days). The ﬁgure
shows the point estimates and 90% conﬁdence intervals. The conﬁdence intervals
are derived from the Monte Carlo exercise described in Appendix II. They are
computed under the null hypothesis that ﬂows and returns are each i.i.d., with
a daily contemporaneous correlation given by the actual observed daily panel
correlation.
     The results in Figure 1 provide very strong statistical evidence of both patterns
observed more tentatively in the country-by-country regressions. First, there is
statistically signiﬁcant non-contemporaneous positive correlation of ﬂows and re-
turns at horizons from 2 to 70 trading days for the majors and about 3 to 40
trading days for all currencies. Note that the standard-error bands in the ﬁgure
are drawn based on the observed contemporaneous correlation of one-day ﬂows
and returns (28% for the majors and 9% for all currencies). Transcendence of
these bands therefore indicates statistically signiﬁcant non-contemporaneous cor-
relation. Thus, at medium-term horizons, ﬂows must either positively anticipate
returns or positively trend-follow them.
     Second, beyond these medium-term horizons, the overall correlation begins to
fall, crossing zero at about 300 trading days for both the major currencies and the
entire sample. This is the point where the positive daily correlation is just oﬀset
by the negative non-contemporaneous correlations. Put diﬀerently, at a horizon
of about 1.2 years, there is approximately no correlation between currency ﬂows
positive correlation between current ﬂow and return.


                                             10
and returns. At these horizons, the non-contemporaneous correlation is already
statistically negative since the dashed line crosses the lower conﬁdence bound.
Furthermore, at horizons of about 800-1,000 days, the data show a statistically
negative overall ﬂow/return correlation. That is, in the full sample of currencies,
the dashed line falls beneath the lower conﬁdence bound by approximately the
magnitude of the one-day ﬂow/return correlation.
    This suggests that currencies that rose in the medium term amidst inﬂows
declined over the longer term back to where they began, and perhaps even further.
Naturally, much of this negative correlation is being generated by the cross-section,
rather than the time series aspects of the panel. In the limit, at the longest
horizon we can estimate, 1,855 days, the result is purely cross-sectional. Countries
receiving larger net ﬂows over this horizon tend to earn smaller excess returns than
those receiving smaller net ﬂows.
    One interpretation of these facts is that the impact of ﬂows on currencies
is transitory. Any information contained in ﬂows is not about fundamentals
per se. By the law of iterated expectations, and assuming that deviations of
exchange rates from levels implied by fundamentals are stationary, innovations in
fundamentals have permanent exchange rate impacts.
    Overall, it is clear that there is important predictability of returns by ﬂows
and/or of ﬂows by returns. Moreover, this predictability is complex, in that it
must have substantially diﬀerent features at short vs. long horizons. Does this
imply positive predictability of returns at short horizons and negative predictabil-
ity at long horizons? Is it instead evidence that ﬂows, not returns, are predictable
in this way? To explore this, we need a more sophisticated platform to disen-
tangle the implications of the naive approach in Figure 1. We will also need to
add some measures of fundamentals into the estimation. At longer-horizons, it is
especially important to understand the extent to which ﬂows contain information
about fundamentals and vice versa.

3. VAR specification
In the analysis so far, we have focused on the simple bivariate relationship between
ﬂows and FX returns. We now want to explore how ﬂows interact with both
returns and fundamentals.
    In order to ﬂesh out these interactions, we need to condition exchange rate
changes on innovations to fundamentals and to ﬂows. We begin with a standard
VAR which includes a return equation, a ﬂow equation, and at least one other

                                         11
equation in variables that are useful for forecasting returns and future currency
cashﬂows.

                                 zt = Γzt−1 + ut .                            (3.1)

As usual, this speciﬁcation is general as to the number of lags in the VAR, as zt
and the companion matrix, Γ, allow for arbitrary lag lengths (see Campbell and
Shiller, 1987). We will assume that Γ is constant across currencies, and that the
covariance matrix, E [ut u0t ] = Σ, allows for contemporaneous correlation of the
residuals across currencies.
    In our application, the equations include an excess return equation, a real
interest rate diﬀerential equation, a real exchange rate equation, and a ﬂow equa-
tion. We also considered breaking up the real interest diﬀerential equation into
two equations of interest diﬀerentials and inﬂation diﬀerentials, in order to allow
the dynamics of the processes to diﬀer. We include these equations to pick up
several aspects of exchange rate behavior. First, both interest diﬀerentials and
real exchange rates are widely noted as informative about excess returns. Second,
there is evidence that ﬂows and long-run real interest diﬀerentials help explain
real exchange rates.
    The VAR impulse response allows us to identify how shocks aﬀect cumulative
expected innovations. Speciﬁcally, the innovation in cumulative expected future
changes k ≥ 1 periods forward is given by Φ(k)ut , where


                          Φ(k) = (Γ − Γk+1 ) (I − Γ)−1 .                      (3.2)

We pick out cumulated expected changes in any VAR variable by premultiplying
by the appropriate selection vector. For example, the innovation in the cumulated
expectations of the ﬁrst variable, excess foreign exchange returns, is given by
e10 Φ(k)ut where

                                      £            ¤
                              e10 =       1 0 ... 0 .                         (3.3)

Analogously, the innovation in cumulated expectations£  of the second
                                                                 ¤     variable,
currency inﬂows, is given by e20 Φ(k)ut , where e20 = 0 1 ... 0 .
    The total impulse response from a shock to exchange rate returns is the sum
of the innovation in cumulative expected future return changes, e10 Φ(k)ut , plus
the shock itself, e10 ut , or

                                           12
                              e10 Ψ(k)ut ≡ e10 (Φ(k) + I) ut ,                  (3.4)

where Ψ(k) = Φ(k) + I.
   As in the previous section, horizons will be important here. For inﬁnite
horizons, we can express the cumulative innovation matrices as Ψ = Ψ(∞) and
Φ = Φ(∞).14 Also the cumulative innovations beginning in period k + 1 can be
expressed as Ψ − Ψ(k) and Φ − Φ(k), respectively.

3.1. Campbell return decomposition
We can go further with the interpretation of the total impulse response of ex-
cess returns using the return decomposition of Campbell and Shiller (1988) and
Campbell (1991). To see this, note that the log excess return on foreign exchange
is equal to the change in the log real exchange rate plus the log real interest rate
diﬀerential:

                     rt+1 = (δ t+1 − δ t ) + (i∗t − π ∗t+1 ) − (it − π t+1 ),   (3.5)

where δ is the value of the log real exchange rate deﬁned in terms of USD per
unit of foreign exchange, i and i∗ are, respectively, the continuously compounded
one-period USD and foreign currency riskless interest rates, and π and π∗ are
analogous continuously compounded rates of inﬂation.
    Solving this equation forward, subject to expectations based on time-t infor-
mation, we have that the log real exchange rate is the sum of expected future
real interest diﬀerentials (e.g., real cash ﬂows), less cumulated log expected excess
returns:
                                         ∞
                                         X
                                  δt =         Et (dt+i − rt+i ),               (3.6)
                                         i=1

where dt is the real interest diﬀerential between times t − 1 and t, dt = i∗t−1 −
π ∗t − (it−1 − π t ). In solving equation (3.5) forward, we impose the terminal
condition limi→∞ Et δ t+i = 0, assuring convergence. This implies that, in the long
run, purchasing power parity holds in expectation. An appreciation away from
purchasing power parity can occur either because of high future real interest dif-
ferentials or low required returns. This real appreciation decays over time, either
 14
      Here, Φ = Φ(∞) = Γ(I − Γ)−1 , and Ψ = Ψ(∞) = Φ(∞) + I, as before.

                                                 13
through a decay in the cumulated future real interest diﬀerential (due to negative
innovations in cumulated future nominal interest rates or positive innovations in
cumulated future expected inﬂation),or through an increase in expected future
returns.
   Using equations (3.5) and (3.6), we can write the unexpected one-period return
as the sum of the innovations in expected future real interest diﬀerentials and
excess currency returns:
                                                   ∞
                                                   X
                  rt+1 − Et (rt+1 ) = (Et+1 − Et )   (dt+i − rt+1+i ).             (3.7)
                                                   i=1

    This equation diﬀers from Campbell’s in that the return decomposition im-
plied by equation (3.5) is exact, not approximate. The approximation in the case
of equities occurs because dividends are additive to cash ﬂow, so that log returns
can be written in terms of log prices and log dividends only by approximation.
In the exchange rate example, however, cash ﬂow accretion (interest) occurs pro-
portionally, and, therefore, the log return is exactly additive in log real interest
diﬀerentials and log real exchange rate changes. An alternative interpretation
for equation (3.7) is that it represents a decomposition of excess currency returns
into a permanent and transitory component as in Beveridge and Nelson (1981).
Changes in future expected excess returns generate temporary ﬂuctuations, as the
current impact of a future change creates an equal and opposite movement in the
currency.
    Examining equation (3.6) above, we note the decomposition of the real ex-
change rate into cumulated future real interest diﬀerentials and future expected
return innovations holds with perfect foresight. It also holds under expectations
formed rationally subject to any information set, since equation (3.7) involves
application of the law of iterated expectations. We therefore have considerable
leeway in positing variables that aﬀect expected returns and/or cashﬂows.
    Equation (3.7) expresses unexpected excess currency returns as the diﬀerence
between “cashﬂow” news and “expected-return” news. Cashﬂow newsP             is the in-
novation in the present value of future interest diﬀerentials, (Et+1 − Et ) ∞  i=1 dt+i .
It can be thought of as the excess currency return that would prevail at a given
time if expected future currency
                            P       returns were held constant. Expected return
news, which is (Et+1 − Et ) ∞  i=1 t+1+i , is the innovation in the exchange rate that
                                  r
is attributable to a change in required returns, holding expected future cashﬂows
constant. Naturally, an increase in future expected returns, given      P cashﬂows,
results in a current depreciation. Deﬁning ν cf,t = (Et+1 − Et ) ∞        i=1 dt+i and


                                           14
                      P∞
ν er = (Et+1 − Et )    i=1 rt+1+i   , equation (3.7) can therefore be written as:
                                     e10 ut = ν cf,t − ν er .                       (3.8)
A surprise appreciation of a currency is associated either with an increase in
expected future real interest diﬀerentials given required returns, or a decrease in
required future returns given real interest diﬀerentials.
    The decomposition in equation (3.8) is useful for several purposes. First, it is
interesting in itself to perform the simple variance decomposition of excess cur-
rency returns into cashﬂow and expected return components. In equities, Camp-
bell and Shiller (1988) and Campbell (1991) decompose the variance of aggregate
returns, ﬁnding that expected return news dominates cashﬂow news in the post-
war period. Vuolteenaho (2002) performs a similar exercise for individual stocks.
However, he ﬁnds that for individual stocks, expected return news is less than half
as large as cashﬂow news. Whereas information about expected returns is dom-
inant for equity aggregates, it is relatively less important for individual stocks.
The relationship between expected return volatility and cashﬂow volatility is less
studied for currencies. Campbell and Clarida (1987) decompose excess returns
into changes in the long-run real exchange rate and long-run real interest diﬀer-
entials. However, they assume that changes in expected returns are perfectly
correlated with changes in real interest diﬀerentials.
    Second, the decomposition yields an alternative interpretation of the total im-
pulse response for returns from the VAR, e10 Ψut . According to the decomposition
in equation (3.8) above, the permanent component of currency surprises, cashﬂow
news, is ν cf,t = e10 ut + ν er,t . Expected return news, ν er , emerges directly from
the VAR, we have that ν er,t = e10 Φut . This then implies that cashﬂow news is
given by


                                       ν cf,t = e10 Ψut ,                           (3.9)
i.e., the total return impulse response. In other words, cashﬂow news is the
exchange rate innovation that occurs when expected returns are held constant; it
is observed by adding back all future expected return innovations to the current
return shock.

3.2. VAR relationships
Using the VAR and the return decomposition, we address a number of questions
about the relationship between currencies, ﬂows, and fundamentals. The VAR is

                                               15
also very well suited to address these questions at any horizon we choose. This
is particularly important given the striking role horizon appears to play in the
ﬂow/return evidence above.
    First, how important are expected return shocks vs. cashﬂow shocks in the
decomposition of the variance of currency excess returns? The variance of excess
returns is given by


                            σ 2f x = σ 2cf + σ 2er − 2ρcf,er σ cf σ er ,    (3.10)

or, equivalently, in the notation above,

                e10 Σe1 = e10 ΨΣΨ0 e1 + e10 ΦΣΦ0 e1 − 2e10 ΨΣΦ0 e1.         (3.11)

When useful, we can further decompose the right-hand side by distinguishing
between cumulated innovations in expected returns, Φ, over short horizons (k
days or less) and long horizons (k + 1 days on).
    Second, the variance decomposition in equation (3.10) can be used to answer
the question: how much does the currency move given a 1% cashﬂow shock?
Vuolteenaho (2002) interprets this coeﬃcient as a measure of overreaction. That
is, if the currency appreciates by less than 1%, there is “underreaction” (i.e.,
the cashﬂow shock is greater than the currency innovation because of a positive
correlation with future expected returns); if the currency appreciates by more than
1%, there is “overreaction” (e.g., the cashﬂow shock is smaller than the currency
innovation because of a negative correlation with future expected returns). From
the decomposition in equation (3.11), the overreaction coeﬃcient is given by:


                             (e10 Φ(k)ΣΨ0 e1) (e10 (Φ − Φ(k)) ΣΨ0 e1)
             β over = 1 −                    −                              (3.12)
                               e10 ΨΣΨ0 e1           e10 ΨΣΨ0 e1
Given that cashﬂow shocks are the residual from a model of expected returns, any
measurement error in that model biases the residuals toward the simple excess
return. This creates a bias in β over toward 1, instead of the typical bias toward
zero.
   Third, once we have determined the extent to which currencies under and/or
overreact, we can inquire about the ﬂow response. For example, suppose that the
currency initially underreacts to cashﬂow news. We want to know whether the
ﬂows exploit this underreaction by buying in the short run. Suppose, however,

                                                16
that over the longer run, currencies overreact to cashﬂow news. At some horizon,
the currency must cease appreciating and begin depreciating. Do the ﬂows also
exploit this overreaction, by eventually beginning to sell?
   Finally, the estimates from the earlier, naive approach are related to those
derived in this section. We clarify that relationship in Appendix III below.

3.3. The relationship of flows with returns
There are many ways to look at the data which emerge from the VAR and return
decomposition. Table 3 provides a relatively parsimonious means of summarizing
the comovement of ﬂows and returns. The ﬁrst row shows innovations in ﬂows.
The second row reports the present value of cumulated ﬂow innovations through
period k, where expected ﬂows are computed from the VAR. The third row is
similar, but cumulates only those innovations from period k + 1 on. The fourth
row is the sum of the previous three rows. The four columns are analogous,
reporting the excess return shock, and its components, short-term expected return
innovations, long-term expected return innovations, and the sum of the previous
three. Notice that the fourth (and last) column also corresponds to the cashﬂow
innovations in equation (3.8).
    Table 3 incorporates many of the relationships discussed in the literature.
First is the contemporaneous comovement of unexpected ﬂow and return, e10 Σe2,
often termed “price impact”. We use that term for convenience only; we do not
presume or require that causality runs in any particular direction. Second, is
the anticipation eﬀect, the covariance of the present value of cumulated expected
return innovations and ﬂows. Here there is the presumption of causality — in at
least in the sense of Granger — running from ﬂow to return. We report both short-
term (ST) and long-term (LT) anticipation eﬀects. Third, the decomposition
allows investigation of what we call “total price impact”, i.e., the contemporaneous
comovement of the exchange-rate change holding expected returns constant with
unexpected ﬂow.
    The second and third lines relate the short-term and long-term innovations
in the present value of expected future ﬂows to current excess returns, short-
and long-term expected return innovations, and cashﬂow innovations. In the
ﬁrst column, the standard term, “trend chasing,” signiﬁes the response of future
expected ﬂow innovations to current unexpected returns. While trend chasing is
easy to measure, it is a somewhat blunt way of characterizing investor ﬂows. We
decompose trend chasing into the covariance of expected future ﬂow innovations


                                        17
with expected return innovations (ST and LT “expectational comovement”) versus
the total ﬂow response to changing cashﬂows (“cashﬂow chasing”).
   To scale the covariances in Table 3 while preserving additivity across rows
and columns, we divide each measure by (e10 Σe1e20 Σe2)1/2 , the product of the
innovation standard deviations.

4. VAR estimation
Several issues arise in the implementation of our VAR at a daily frequency. First,
since we are interested in lower-frequency dynamics, we want to add many lags.
In order to determine the optimal lag-length, we run a model selection test using
the Schwartz Bayes criterion. The results indicate that 65 daily lags were opti-
mal in our four variable VAR. To ensure tractability and better out-of-sample
behavior, we then impose continuity restrictions on the coeﬃcients. Speciﬁcally,
we aggregate lags of 2-5, 6-10, 11-21, 22-43, and 44-65 days, essentially forcing the
coeﬃcients within each aggregation to be identical. In this way, we hope to detect
predictability on a monthly frequency, in a manner similar to studies that might
run VARs on monthly data only. The second issue concerns the measurement of
our interest diﬀerentials. Overnight interest rates are frequently not observed. As
a compromise, we use weekly rates, eﬀectively assuming that the term structure
is ﬂat between one day and one week.
    Third, inﬂation data are monthly. Given that there is no good ﬁx for this, we
simply assume that monthly inﬂation occurs smoothly through the month. Since
inﬂation shocks are highly persistent, this is not a terrible assumption. However,
if, for example, there is a once-and-for-all mid-month surprise increase in the
domestic price level, we will not correctly match the timing of the inﬂation shock
with the daily data on exchange rates, ﬂows, and interest rates. With respect to
inﬂation shocks, we will therefore blur cause and eﬀect in the sense of Granger.
In order to better align the CPI’s with their announcement dates, we lag their
entry into the information set by two weeks.
    Fourth, we restrict the coeﬃcients on lags past the ﬁrst of the real exchange
rate to be zero in our VAR. There is no need to include these extra terms; they
do not aﬀect the results, which is expected given that the real exchange rate is
very highly persistent. To avoid unnecessary complications, we eliminate these
terms from our speciﬁcation.
    Finally, we calculate all standard errors using the delete-1 jackknife method-
ology of Shao and Wu (1989) and Shao (1989). To compute the jackknife for a

                                         18
panel over time period T for an estimator θ̂, we form T − 1 delete-1 jackknife θ̂−i ’s
by √
   deleting one cross-section at a time. The estimated standard error of θ̂ is given
as T − 1 times the standard deviation of the θ̂−i ’s. The jackknife estimator,
besides being nonparametric, has the added advantage of being heteroskedasticity
and autocorrelation consistent. Standard errors were also computed using the
delta method, and the results are comparable.

4.1. Results
Our ﬁrst result concerns the variance decomposition of currency excess returns,
shown in Table 4. For the major countries, we ﬁnd that expected return shocks
are considerably larger than cashﬂow shocks. Naturally, this is dominated by
longer-term expected return shocks, which alone are 377% of cashﬂow shocks.
By comparison, short-term expected return shocks are only about 2% of cashﬂow
shocks. Expected return shocks become more important once we include emerg-
ing markets in the panel. For all countries together, long-term and short-term
expected return shocks become 689% and 29%, respectively, of cashﬂow shocks.
Either way, expected return shocks appear to dominate at long horizons, whereas
cashﬂow shocks dominate at short horizons.15
    Our second result is an estimate of the under/over-reaction of exchange rates
to cashﬂow shocks. Figures 2a and 2b depict the impulse response of cumulative
excess returns to a 50 basis point cashﬂow shock from the VAR. Both graphs
show that the exchange rate appreciates immediately in response to the good
cashﬂow news. However, the full appreciation does not occur immediately. For
excess returns to peak, it requires approximately 70 additional days for the major
countries and about 15 additional days for all countries. The additional return
added is about 10 basis points over these periods. About half of this amount
comes from a higher interest diﬀerential, since cumulated excess returns rise by
more than the real exchange rate. After the follow-on increase, there is a no-
ticeable decline in returns, particularly for all countries between 15 and 65 days.
These estimates suggest that the currency underreacts initially, but that from a
longer perspective, it overreacts. The longer-run evidence does not, however,
appear to be statistically signiﬁcant.
    As expected, the return response to an increase in expected returns is negative.
  15
    Note that this result is reversed if we truncate the lags of the VAR to be relatively short-
term, e.g., under a few weeks. In that case, variation in cashﬂows dominates variation in
expected returns.



                                              19
Figure 3 shows the impulse response for both major and all our currencies. Both
pictures show a strong decline in returns initially, and relatively little movement
thereafter.
    When we calculate the under/over reaction coeﬃcient in equation (3.12) di-
rectly from Table 4, we ﬁnd that for all countries,


                          β over = 1 − 0.34 + 0.75 = 1.41.                      (4.1)

 The −0.34 indicates that over short horizons, the exchange rate underreacts by
34% to cashﬂow news. Longer-term horizons more than make up for this un-
derreaction, however, as the currency overreacts by 75% (relative to the cashﬂow
shock). For the major currencies only, the under- and over-reaction numbers are
smaller; comparable estimates are: β over = 1 − 0.04 + 0.26 = 1.22.
    Next, we explore the ﬂow response to these shocks. Figure 4 shows the cur-
rency ﬂow response to a cashﬂow shock. There are strong inﬂows over short hori-
zons and then outﬂows at longer horizons, much in keeping with the under/over-
reaction results in the currency itself. By itself this is consistent with the trend-
chasing story. However, we can sharpen this observation by examining how ﬂows
respond to a surprise currency appreciation that involves no change in cashﬂows.
Such a surprise appreciation requires a decline in expected return. If investors
are mechanical trend-chasers, there should be inﬂows in such a case, even though
expected returns have fallen. Figure 5 displays the ﬂow response to this shock, a
decline in short-term expected returns. It shows a strong negative relationship:
when the currency appreciates due to a decline in short-term expected returns,
there is a strong outﬂow in the short run. This is further evidence that in-
stitutional investors are exploiting the under/over-reaction pattern in currency
changes. Finally, we look at ﬂows after a currency appreciation due to a decline
in long-horizon expected returns. Figure 6 shows that inﬂows are strong. Thus,
trend-chasing occurs when a current appreciation is due to either a permanent
shock to fundamentals, or to a decline in long-horizon expected returns.
    Now we can turn to the estimates of the cells in Table 3. These cells allow us to
compare the relative magnitudes of the price impact, anticipation, trend-chasing,
and related eﬀects. First, the price impact eﬀect (ﬁrst row, ﬁrst column), shows a
correlation of current ﬂow and return surprises to be 28% for the major currencies
and 9% for the full panel. This is roughly what we found from the naive regression
in the previous section. Second, one line down is the simple trend-chasing eﬀect
over short horizons. It is driven by the covariance of expected cumulated ﬂow

                                         20
innovations over 30 days with a current return shock. Note that at 29% and
16%, for majors and all respectively, short-term trend chasing is somewhat larger
in magnitude than the price impact estimates. The response of expected future
ﬂow to a return shock is therefore greater than the contemporaneous ﬂow shock.
Third, the next row down is our estimate of longer-term trend chasing. Here, the
response to a return shock of expected ﬂows is negative for the majors and positive
for the entire cross section. Neither is statistically signiﬁcant. Thus, a current
appreciation has little relation on average to changes in long-term expected ﬂows.
Overall, the last row shows some weak evidence that the eﬀect of a return shock
on current and expected future ﬂows is positive.
    Next we turn to the comovement of expected returns with ﬂows. These
are in columns 2 and 3 of Table 3. The ﬁrst row of columns 2 and 3 reports,
respectively, the short-term and long-term anticipation eﬀects — the predictions
for future excess returns emerging from current ﬂow surprises. Over short ﬂow
horizons, there is positive anticipation, so that ﬂows positively predict future
returns over 30 day intervals. Over longer horizons, however, the anticipation
turns negative as the transitory impacts of the exchange rate shock are worked
oﬀ. This is not surprising given the overreaction eﬀects we have identiﬁed, and
given the negative long-horizon contemporaneous correlation between ﬂows and
returns from the previous section. Today’s shock to inﬂows forecasts longer-term
outﬂow and depreciation. Figures 7a and 7b show the impulse response to a 1
standard deviation ﬂow shock. There is clearly statistically signiﬁcant predictable
appreciation over the short run.
    In the second and third rows of columns 2 and 3, we measure the comovement
of expected returns and expected ﬂows. Column 2, row 2 reports comovement
between short-term expected ﬂows and returns. These are positive and slightly
statistically signiﬁcant. Column 3, row 3 reports the same covariance for longer-
term expected ﬂows and returns. There is little evidence here of a linkage between
cumulated innovations in long-horizon expected returns and ﬂows.
    Finally, we examine column 4 of Table 3, which shows the association between
cashﬂow news, i.e., permanent return shocks, and ﬂows. This shows the comove-
ments with ﬂows after the transitory eﬀects of expected return variation have
been removed. We see in rows 1 and 2 that both ﬂow surprises and innovations
in short-term ﬂow forecasts are positively correlated with cashﬂow shocks. Inno-
vations in long-term ﬂow forecasts in row 3 are more mixed. The sum of these
is reported in row 4, column 4. These eﬀects about oﬀset one another, leading to
a net result of about zero. We can interpret this cell as a kind of inﬁnite-horizon


                                        21
correlation between ﬂows and returns; it traces out the inﬁnite horizon correlation
from a current ﬂow and return shock. This is related to the k-period-horizon cor-
relations between ﬂows and returns calculated in the previous section. Appendix
III below derives the exact relationship between the two approaches. The results
here, in any case suggest that the inﬁnite-horizon comovement of ﬂows and re-
turns is essentially zero. Flows appear to have very important transitory impacts
on exchange rates, but not permanent impacts. As we see below, this is not the
case for fundamentals.

4.1.1. Interest diﬀerentials with flows and returns
The next set of questions pertains to the relationship between ﬂows and the driv-
ing fundamentals of real exchange rates. How strongly are innovations in ﬂows
and interest diﬀerentials related? Which tends to anticipate the other? Are in-
novations in the present value of expected inﬂows and interest diﬀerentials highly
correlated? To address these questions, we perform a similar decomposition to
Table 3, only for returns and interest diﬀerentials instead of returns and ﬂows.
    Table 5 summarizes the interest-diﬀerentials / returns interaction. There are
several striking features here as well. First, return shocks (column 1) are posi-
tively correlated with innovations in expected future interest diﬀerentials at short
horizons (row 2) and long horizons (statistically insigniﬁcant) (row 3). Currency
appreciations therefore positively anticipate future increases in real interest rates,
especially over short horizons. Second, short-term expected returns (column 2)
are positively correlated with expected future interest diﬀerentials. So it ap-
pears that innovations in real interest diﬀerentials have some positive forecasting
power for short-term currency movements. Third, evidence of a link between
innovations to long-term expected returns and interest diﬀerentials (column 3) is
tenuous. There is some statistically insigniﬁcant evidence that innovations in
long-term expected returns are negatively related to innovations in distant ex-
pected future interest diﬀerentials. In spite of this, cashﬂow shocks (column 4)
remain positively correlated with current, short-term expected, and long-term
expected innovations in interest diﬀerentials (rows 1-3).
    Perhaps the most important result in this table is again in the last cell (row
4, column 4). It shows a kind of inﬁnite-horizon correlation between interest
diﬀerentials and returns from a current shock. Interestingly, this result is statis-
tically positive for interest diﬀerentials in Table 5, though it was zero for ﬂows
in Table 3. Shocks to interest diﬀerentials and permanent shocks to currencies


                                         22
are strongly positively correlated over the long run. Even though our measure
of fundamentals may contain considerable error, it nevertheless behaves like a
measure of fundamentals should. Notice that the analogous covariance between
current observed currency shocks and the total interest diﬀerential shock (row 4,
column 1) is positive, but not statistically signiﬁcant. The relationship between
long-horizon changes in interest diﬀerentials and currencies becomes apparent only
when looking at the permanent component of returns. It is interesting to note
that essentially all of these long-horizon features of Table 5 hold in a VAR which
excludes ﬂows altogether. Thus, there is nothing substantive about the relation-
ship between interest diﬀerentials and returns that is driven by ﬂows. Table
6 reports the same set of covariances derived from a three-equation VAR which
eliminates ﬂows.
    Table 7 summarizes the interaction between interest diﬀerentials and ﬂows.
Here there are really just two points to make. First, current ﬂow shocks do appear
to predict future changes in interest diﬀerentials, at least at short horizons (row 2,
column 1). Institutional investors and the exchange rate both seem to anticipate
these short-run changes in interest diﬀerentials. The second result is that none of
the other cells are statistically signiﬁcant, including the inﬁnite horizon covariance
in the last cell (row 4, column 4). There is no detectable correlation at inﬁnite
horizons between cumulated innovations in ﬂows and interest diﬀerentials. Overall
the table argues that the relationship between ﬂows and interest diﬀerentials is
very weak. If ﬂows represent demand shocks and interest diﬀerentials represent
fundamentals, a not-so-bad approximation is that these two are unrelated.




                                         23
5. Conclusions
Our goal in this paper has been to understand how the currency ﬂows of institu-
tional investors interact with excess currency returns. We have proceeded using
both naive and more sophisticated techniques, but both give essentially similar
answers. Returns and ﬂows are highly contemporaneously correlated at daily
horizons, and even more highly correlated at monthly horizons. The reason that
correlations increase with horizon is that current day returns are positively cor-
related with future ﬂows, and, to a lesser extent, current day ﬂows are positively
correlated with future excess returns. At horizons longer than about 40 trading
days, these eﬀects begin to reverse: current ﬂows’ predictions for future excess
returns eventually turn from positive to negative as horizon increases. And sim-
ilarly, current returns’ predictions for ﬂows are initially positive and increasing,
and then are decreasing as horizon grows.
    We decompose currency returns into components attributable to cashﬂow news
and expected return news, essentially breaking excess return shocks into perma-
nent and temporary components, respectively. We ﬁnd that the latter component
is the dominant source of currency ﬂuctuations. We also ﬁnd that exchange rate
surprises generally exceed their permanent component initially and exceed them
by even more over the following 30 trading days. Thus, currency returns exhibit
underreaction at short horizons and overreaction at long horizons, a pattern that
is familiar from equity returns.
    We also ﬁnd that investor ﬂows respond positively to appreciations that are
generated by cashﬂow news and to those generated by declines in long-horizon
expected returns. However, appreciations generated by declines in short-horizon
expected returns result in outflows. This suggests that investors strongly distin-
guish between permanent and temporary appreciations in their behavior. Insti-
tutional investors are clearly not naive trend-chasers.
    In addition, we inspect the behavior of fundamentals (measured by real ex-
change rates and real interest diﬀerentials) in relation to both returns and ﬂows.
Interestingly, we ﬁnd a strong positive correlation between the permanent compo-
nent of excess returns and fundamentals, and almost a zero correlation between
total excess returns and fundamentals. This is consistent with Meese and Rogoﬀ
(1983), but also consistent with longer-horizon studies, such as Mark (1995), that
detect a positive relationship between fundamentals and exchange rates. Our
analysis makes it clear that the inﬁnite horizon return / fundamental correlation
is easily detectable, even in relatively short time-series samples.


                                        24
    Finally the relationship between ﬂows and fundamentals is noticeably weaker.
There is some evidence that over short periods of time, inﬂows anticipate future
improvements in fundamentals. Besides that, however, there is essentially no
evidence that ﬂows and fundamentals move together even at long leads and lags.
    Putting these pieces together, it is clear that we ﬁnd no support for a strong
ﬂow-centric view. Flows don’t have much to say (except over very short hori-
zons) about future fundamentals. Fundamentals have plenty to say about returns
(especially over long horizons). And permanent exchange-rate returns are essen-
tially unrelated to permanent measures of ﬂow. So the strong ﬂow-centric view,
which has ﬂows generating permanent exchange rate impacts, potentially even
proxying for cumulated innovations in future fundamentals, is rejected. Flows
seem to help understand transitory excess returns, e.g., short-run underreaction
and long-run overreaction, not permanent excess returns. As a result, the evi-
dence seems most to ﬁt the weak version of the ﬂow-centric view. We also ﬁnd
support for the fundamentals-only view at long horizons. There, fundamentals
win out in explaining currencies, and ﬂows have little impact. In sum, if ﬂows
are to be called the ‘proximate’ cause for currency movements, it is only for those
movements that are highly transitory.




                                        25
                                         Appendix

    Appendix I
    Valuing forward transactions
    All transactions for a given trade date report future value amounts bought
and sold. To aggregate the trades, we must compute the present value of these
amounts. Because we do not have the prevailing spot rate at the exact time
of the trade, we discount both sides (currency bought and currency sold) of the
forward transaction by the local-currency interest rate corresponding to the time
between trade and settlement dates.
    In doing this, we use the following formula, utilizing conventions in the foreign
exchange market for pricing forward contracts:

                                  ³¡          ¢bm/T c c ¡           ¢               ´−1
 P Vtc = δ ct Act,m , where δ =     1 + icm,t             1 + (icm,t (m − bm/T c c)

The interest rate for currency c for maturity m is given by icm,t . The discount
factor, δ ct , is applied to the amount transacted forward, Act,m , in currency c at time
t, in local currency, settling at t+m. Act,m can be either positive (currency bought)
or negative (currency sold). Note that this convention implies that the interest
rate is compounded over complete calendar year intervals. Simple interest accrues
over any remaining interval under a full year (ba/bc is the ﬂoor operator, which
rounds the variable within it to the nearest integer towards negative inﬁnity). T c
here represents the daycount basis for currency c. This is 360 for all countries
except Hong Kong, Malaysia, Singapore, South Africa, Thailand, and the UK.
     If local currency interest rates are not available for one side of the transaction,
we present value the other side. We then convert at the spot exchange rate to
estimate the present value. For transactions that do not match the maturities
of available interest rates, we linearly interpolate or extrapolate using available
rates.
     We also ﬁlter out transactions that are likely to have important data entry
or interest-rate-measurement errors. Speciﬁcally, we remove a transaction if the
diﬀerence between the PV amount bought and sold is greater than $1,000,000 or
if the percentage diﬀerence is greater than 30%. We exclude transactions in the
sparsely-traced currencies of Brazil, Kenya, Luxembourg, Peru, Russia, Turkey
and Zimbabwe. After applying these ﬁlters, we are left with a total of 6,402,392
transactions of all maturities.


                                              26
    At this point we can aggregate the transaction values by currency. We then
normalize the dollar value of ﬂow by own-country daily dollar standard-deviation
of ﬂow. We also experimented with normalizing the ﬂow data by the money sup-
ply of the respective country, which yields essentially similar results. The monthly
reporting of money supply values introduces additional time series complications,
and thus, in the empirical work, we measure ﬂows in units of own-country standard
deviations.
    Interest rate, exchange rate, and inflation data
    To construct yield curves for present valuation, we obtain daily interbank
interest rates for various horizons from one week to one year from Datastream.
When these are unavailable, we use corporate and/or deposit rates. If these
too are unavailable, we use country treasury bill rates. When maturities are
missing, we linearly interpolate or extrapolate. For longer-term rates, we use
swap or sovereign bond rates at various maturities from 1 to 25 years. Swap rates
are from Datastream for the ‘major’ currencies of Australia, Canada, Germany,
Japan, the UK and US.
    To construct excess returns and interest diﬀerentials we employ spot and
one-month forward exchange rates.         These are 11:00 a.m. EST rates from
WMR/Reuters as far back as possible. Prior to that we use Datastream or
Barclays Bank data.
    Inﬂation is constructed from diﬀerences in monthly log Consumer Price Index
(CPIs) from IFS. There were problems with seasonality in Poland’s inﬂation data,
and in some data points 12-month moving averages were used to smooth them
out. We construct the daily inﬂation series from the monthly series, by assuming
that inﬂation occurs smoothly within the month. We also lag this series by half
a month, in order to ensure inﬂation is in the current information set.

    Appendix II
    Monte Carlo design
    The Monte Carlo is conducted by ﬁrst drawing a multivariate normal ﬂow-
return pair for the stacked panel at the daily frequency, using a mean and co-
variance matrix derived from the ‘true’ stacked ﬂow-stacked return pair for that
country. In our speciﬁcations below, we use both the moments of the panel at the
daily return horizon, and the implied daily moments derived from the moments
of the panel at the monthly return horizon. We also do a second set of draws
imposing zero contemporaneous correlation between ﬂows and returns at the daily
frequency. In other words, we use


                                        27
                      µ          ¶        µµ        ¶ µ 2         ¶¶
                          ωf                   µf      σf σf r
                                     ˜N              ,
                          ωr                   µr      σ f r σ 2r

                      µ          ¶        µµ         ¶ µ 2      ¶¶
                          ω zf                 µf       σf 0
                                     ˜N               ,
                          ω zr                 µr        0 σ 2r

as our daily draws, where ω f and ω r are draws computed using the actual daily
(or monthly) covariances of ﬂows and returns, and ω zf and ω zr impose zero con-
temporaneous correlation between ﬂows and returns at the daily (or monthly)
frequency.
    Each daily draw’s β and ρ statistics are computed, and then adjacent ob-
servations in each country are summed up to the next return horizon in a non-
overlapping fashion. The panel is then re-stacked at the new, lower frequency,
and the simulated sample statistics at the new horizon are then computed. This
process continues on up until the T day return horizon, which is a cross-sectional
regression N × 1. We then sort all Monte Carlo estimated panel β and ρ statistics
across each return horizon, and report the point-wise conﬁdence intervals from
the experiment, as standard error bounds around the estimated β and ρ statistics
from our original sample. We also report the bias of the ‘true’ β and ρ statistics
away from the 50th percentile Monte Carlo draw, again sorted point-wise.
    Notice that this procedure is equivalent to drawing a diﬀerent set of daily draws
to compute point-wise conﬁdence intervals for the panel R-squared at each return
horizon. Since these draws are i.i.d., the same set of draws will suﬃce for every
return horizon. We do 10,000 trials for each simulation. Note also, as mentioned
above, that since we construct conﬁdence intervals using draws of ﬂows and returns
from a multivariate normal distribution, with zero autocorrelation imposed in our
drawn ﬂows and returns, the point-wise conﬁdence intervals we obtain using non-
overlapping computations will apply equally well to sample statistics computed
for our data using overlapping return windows.
    In order to represent the change of horizon in a convenient and readily com-
prehensible form: let T be the number of days in the entire sample (1,855), and
N be the number of countries (19). We compute R-squared statistics at return
horizons H = {1, ..., T }.
    Hence, in the panel, the Monte Carlo regressions are run with (NT /H) num-
bers of observations as H changes. Notice that when H = T , the panel regression

                                                28
becomes a cross-sectional regression N × 1, with each observation of ﬂows rep-
resenting the total net inﬂow over the entire sample period of 1,855 days, and
each observation of returns representing the total excess currency return over the
entire sample period of 1,855 days for the respective country. When H = 1, we
run the entire panel regression N × T .

   Appendix III
   Connecting the VAR with the naive approach
   Using the VAR, it is possible to derive the R2 statistics from the naïve ap-
proach. In addition, we can use the VAR to be more precise about low-frequency
co-movements. We can approximate the K-period return and ﬂow, respectively,
as
                                 K
                                 X            K
                                              X
                    rt,j (K) =     rt+1−k,j ≈   e10 Ψ(k)ut+1−k
                                 k=1              k=1


                                 K
                                 X            K
                                              X
                   Ft,j (K) =      ft+1−k,j ≈   e20 Ψ(k)ut+1−k .
                                 k=1              k=1

The approximation occurs because we assume that before the start of the sample,
we have ut = 0, for all t ≤ 0. As a result, the conditional expectation of future
returns and ﬂows is built up entirely from innovations that occur during the sample
period.
   With these assumptions, and noting that the u’s are uncorrelated at all leads
and lags, we can write the OLS slope coeﬃcient from a regression of f (K) on
F (K) as:
                                  PK
                                         e10 Ψ(k)ΣΨ(k)0 e2
                         β(K) = Pk=1 K
                                                            ,
                                         e2 0 Ψ(k)ΣΨ(k)0 e2
                                     k=1

and correspondingly, the ρ as
                                  PK
                                    e10 Ψ(k)ΣΨ(k)0 e2
                                       k=1
     ρ(K) = ³                         ´1/2 ³P                   ´1/2
             PK         0         0          K      0        0
                  k=1 e1 Ψ(k)ΣΨ(k) e1        k=1 e2 Ψ(k)ΣΨ(k) e2


   These expressions remind us that multiperiod returns and ﬂows combine news
from various periods. In a 3-period return, for example, ﬁrst-period news and

                                             29
its impact on period-2 and period-3 expected outcomes is combined with later
news, including, for example, period-3 news, where any impact on later-period
expectations is expressed only in subsequent 3-period observations. To isolate
the multiperiod comovement attributable to current-period news, it is more ap-
propriate to use the VAR impulse response. The total K-period comovement of
returns and ﬂows from current-period news is described by

                       e10 Ψ(K)ΣΨ(K)0 e2
            β(K) =
                       e20 Ψ(K)ΣΨ(K)0 e2
                                 (e10 Ψ(n)ΣΨ(n)0 e2)
            ρ(K) =                                                     ,
                       (e10 Ψ(n)ΣΨ(n)0 e1)1/2 (e20 Ψ(n)ΣΨ(n)0 e2)1/2

where β is the coeﬃcient from a regression of the n-period innovation in return
on the n-period innovation in ﬂow.




                                      30
References
 [1] Barberis, N. and A. Shleifer, 2002, “Style investing,” forthcoming, Journal
     of Financial Economics.

 [2] Beveridge, S. and C. R. Nelson,1981,“A new approach to the decomposition
     of economic time series into permanent and transitory components with par-
     ticular attention to the measurement of the ‘Business Cycle’,” Journal of
     Monetary Economics, 7, 151-174.

 [3] Brennan, M. and H. Cao, 1997, “International portfolio investment ﬂows,”
     Journal of Finance, 52, 1851-1880.

 [4] Cai, J., Cheung, Y., Lee, R.S.K., and M. Melvin, 2001, ““Once-in-a-
     generation” yen volatility in 1998: fundamentals, intervention, and order
     ﬂow,” Journal of International Money and Finance, 20, 3, 327-347.

 [5] Campbell, J., 1991, “A variance decomposition for stock returns,” Economic
     Journal, 101, 157-179.

 [6] Campbell, J. and R. Clarida 1987, “The dollar and real interest rates,”
     Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 27, 103-139.

 [7] Campbell, J. and R. Shiller, 1988, “The dividend-price ratio and expectations
     of future dividends and discount factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1,
     195-227.

 [8] Cheung, Y. and M. D. Chinn, 2000, “Currency traders and exchange rate
     dynamics: a survey of the U.S. market,” unpublished working paper.

 [9] Choe, H., B. C. Kho, and R. M. Stulz, 2001, “Do domestic investors have
     more valuable information about individual stocks than foreign investors?,”
     NBER working paper no. 8073.

[10] Clarida, R. and J. Gali, 1994, “Sources of real exchange rate ﬂuctuations:
     how important are nominal shocks?” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series
     on Public Policy, 41, 1-56.

[11] Cohen, R., P. Gompers, and T. Vuolteenaho, 2001, “Who underreacts to
     cashﬂow news? Evidence from trading between individuals and institutions,”
     manuscript, Harvard University.

                                       31
[12] Coval, J. D., and T. J. Moskowitz, 2001, “The geography of investment:
     informed trading and asset prices,” Journal of Political Economy 109, 4,
     811-841.

[13] Daniel, K., Hirshleifer, D. and A. Subrahmanyam, 1998, “Investor psychol-
     ogy and security market under- and over-reactions,” Journal of Finance,
     53(5),1839-1886.

[14] DeBondt, W.F.M., R. H. Thaler, 1985, “Does The Stock Market Overreact?”
     Journal of Finance, 40, 793-80.

[15] Engel,    C.,   2001,   “Notes on Cointegration of Real Inter-
     est    Rates   and    Real   Exchange    Rates,”    research website,
     http://www.ssc.wisc.edu/~cengel/RealCointNotes.pdf.

[16] Evans, M.D.D. and R. Lyons, 2002, “Order ﬂow and exchange rate dynam-
     ics,” Journal of Political Economy, 110, 170-180.

[17] Evans, M.D.D. and R. Lyons, 2001 ”Why order ﬂow explains exchange rates,”
     unpublished working paper

[18] Froot, K., P. O’Connell, and M. Seasholes, 2001, “The portfolio ﬂows of
     international investors,” Journal of Financial Economics, 59, 151-193.

[19] Froot, K. and T. Ramadorai, “The information content of international port-
     folio ﬂows,” NBER working paper no. 8472.

[20] Grinblatt, M., Titman, S., R. Wermers, 1995, “Momentum investment strate-
     gies, portfolio performance, and herding: a study of mutual fund behavior,”
     American Economic Review, 85, 1088-1105.

[21] Hasbrouck, J., 1991, “Measuring the information content of stock trades,”
     Journal of Finance 46, 179-207.

[22] Hong, H. and J. Stein, 1999, “A uniﬁed theory of underreaction, momentum
     trading and overreaction in asset markets,” Journal of Finance, 54, 2143-
     2184.

[23] Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman, 1993, “Returns to buying winners and selling
     losers: implications for stock market eﬃciency,” Journal of Finance, 48, 65-
     91.

                                       32
[24] Jegadeesh, N. and S. Titman, 2001, “Proﬁtability of momentum strategies:
     an evaluation of alternative explanations,” Journal of Finance, 560, 699-720.

[25] Mark, N., 1995, “Exchange rates and fundamentals: evidence on long-horizon
     predictability,” American Economic Review, 85, 201-218.

[26] Meese, R., and K. Rogoﬀ, 1983, “Empirical exchange rate models of the
     seventies,” Journal of International Economics, 14, 3-24.

[27] Payne, R., 2000, “Informed trade in spot foreign exchange markets: an em-
     pirical investigation,” mimeo, Financial Markets Group, LSE.

[28] Rime, D., 2000, “U.S. exchange rates and currency ﬂows,” unpublished work-
     ing paper.

[29] Rouwenhorst, G. 1998, “International momentum strategies,” Journal of Fi-
     nance, 53, 267-284.

[30] Seasholes, M., 2001, “Smart foreign traders in emerging markets,” unpub-
     lished working paper.

[31] Shao, J., 1989, “The eﬃciency and consistency of approximations to the jack-
     knife variance estimators,” Journal of the American Statistical Association,
     84, 114-119.

[32] Shao, J. and C. F. J. Wu, 1989 “A general theory for jackknife variance
     estimation,” Annals of Statistics, 17, 1176-1197.

[33] Griﬃn, J.M., Nardari, F., and R.M. Stulz, 2002, “Daily cross-border equity
     ﬂows: pushed or pulled?” Dice Center working paper 2002-6.

[34] Thaler, R. and W. F. M. DeBondt, 1985, “Does the stock market overreact?”
     Journal of Finance, 40, 793-805.

[35] Vuolteenaho, T., 2002, “What drives ﬁrm-level stock returns?” Journal of
     Finance, 57, 1, 233-264.

[36] Wei, S.J. and J. Kim, 1997, “The big players in the foreign exchange market:
     do they trade on information or noise?” NBER working paper no. 6256.




                                       33
                                                    Table 1
                               Descriptive Statistics: Foreign Exchange Flows
The sample period is from January 1, 1994 to February 9, 2001. The flow data are from State Street Corporation
(SSC). The first two columns report the mean of daily absolute aggregate flows (a), and standard deviation of daily
net flows in hundreds of millions of US$. The third column reports the daily partial autocorrelation of aggregate
flows. The fourth column reports the second partial autocorrelation under the restriction that days 2-5 have the same
coefficient. The fifth reports the same for days 6-10. Columns six, seven and eight report the partial autocorrelations
for currency excess returns, with the same coefficient restrictions imposed. Column nine reports the daily
contemporaneous correlation between flows and currency excess returns.

               µˆ ( f a )    σˆ ( f a )   ρˆ1 ( f a )   ρˆ 2 ( f a )   ρˆ 3 ( f a )   ρˆ1 (r )   ρˆ 2 (r )   ρˆ 3 (r )    ρ ( f a , r)
Majors         US$100M       US$100M
U.S.                 2.730       3.753         0.212          0.040          0.001
Euroland             1.636       2.242         0.170          0.039          0.009      0.012       0.004        -0.001          0.330
Japan                1.418       2.102         0.177          0.055          0.001      0.050      -0.006         0.010          0.310
U.K.                 0.860       1.229         0.222          0.009          0.006      0.038      -0.001        -0.011          0.377
Switzerland          0.674        1.023        0.185          0.034          0.002       0.096     -0.036         0.001          0.257
Canada               0.537       0.909         0.132          0.055          0.004      0.055      -0.021        -0.004          0.148
Australia            0.466        0.669        0.094          0.026          0.017      0.007      -0.010        -0.000          0.269


Others
Sweden               0.239       0.383         0.122          0.010          0.006      0.058      -0.018        -0.018          0.116
New Zealand          0.141        0.303        0.025          0.018          0.005      -0.064     -0.036         0.004          0.073
Korea                0.098       0.206         0.219          0.049          0.036      0.123      -0.092         0.084          0.024
Singapore            0.088       0.188         0.034          0.038          0.016      -0.020      0.000        -0.027          0.050
Norway               0.067       0.151         0.090          0.006          0.010      0.020      -0.025        -0.014          0.123
Mexico               0.051        0.106        0.134          0.074         -0.011      -0.095      0.016         0.014          0.054
South Africa         0.048        0.089        0.148          0.029          0.040      0.042      -0.002        -0.001          0.088
Taiwan               0.046       0.106         0.033          0.059          0.047      0.160      -0.004         0.008          0.060
Thailand             0.036       0.080         0.110          0.068          0.000      0.163      -0.013         0.009          0.006
India                0.027       0.078         0.005          0.085          0.030      0.115       0.023        -0.004          0.026
Indonesia            0.026       0.043         0.199          0.059          0.010      0.115      -0.003         0.013          0.037
Poland               0.021       0.072         0.066         -0.016         -0.016      -0.036     -0.019        -0.003          0.117
Philippines          0.021       0.034         0.125          0.072          0.042      0.060      -0.056        -0.019          0.100




                                                                 34
                                                         Table 2
               Country Univariate Regressions: Aggregate Flows and Excess Returns
This table presents estimates of equation (1): Rt ( h) = αˆ + βˆ Ft ( h) + εˆt for return horizons h = 1,5,20,60,120,240
                                                                h

and 400 days. Flows are summed in an overlapping fashion at each successive return horizon, and matched against
currency excess returns for the specified period. Flows are in US $100 millions, returns in basis points. The columns
are arranged in ascending order of return horizon, reporting         βˆ h    (with standard errors below in italics) and ρˆ , the
                                                                                                                              h

contemporaneous correlation coefficient.


                 β̂ 1     ρ̂ 1    β̂ 5     ρ̂ 5    β̂ 20    ρ̂ 20    β̂ 60      ρ̂ 60   β̂ 120 ρ̂ 120 β̂ 240 ρ̂ 240 β̂ 400 ρ̂ 400
Majors
  Euroland        8.95     0.33   10.76     0.48    9.91     0.53        7.15    0.44    4.94    0.29     1.20    0.05    -1.37    -0.07
                  0.59             0.45             0.37                 0.34            0.39             0.57             0.55
  Japan          11.20     0.31   13.61     0.47   14.10     0.56    16.02       0.55   16.01    0.54    10.38    0.39     8.47    0.33
                  0.80             0.59             0.49                 0.57            0.60             0.60             0.64
  U.K.           14.09     0.38   14.74     0.48   13.92     0.50        8.52    0.37    5.10    0.22     5.95    0.27     7.51    0.38
                  0.81             0.63             0.56                 0.50            0.53             0.53             0.48
  Switzerland     5.91     0.26    7.37     0.39    5.91     0.37        4.89    0.32    7.67    0.42     7.76    0.44     1.91    0.13
                  0.52             0.41             0.34                 0.34            0.40             0.39             0.38
  Canada          5.01     0.15    5.09     0.18    5.30     0.24        4.56    0.26    3.20    0.23     1.59    0.14    -0.26    -0.02
                  0.78             0.66             0.50                 0.40            0.33             0.28             0.32
  Australia      23.74     0.27   27.84     0.36   26.08     0.40    24.37       0.39   25.55    0.36    46.23    0.42    21.41    0.17
                  1.98             1.66             1.38                 1.35            1.57             2.47             3.31
Others
  Sweden         12.21     0.12   22.52     0.24   25.59     0.31    25.99       0.39   21.46    0.35     8.25    0.14     3.47    0.05
                  2.44             2.16             1.81                 1.43            1.39             1.47             1.74
  New Zealand    10.27     0.07   13.92     0.11   14.12     0.13    -16.94     -0.15   -40.89   -0.38   -57.28   -0.49   -73.91   -0.57
                  3.28             2.81             2.42                 2.56            2.37             2.53             2.78
  Korea          13.10     0.02   23.93     0.06   36.09     0.12    53.48       0.19   38.45    0.16    37.39    0.16    59.21    0.25
                 12.89             9.65             7.11                 6.71            5.81             5.78             6.01
  Singapore       9.12     0.05   18.22     0.12   34.33     0.27    25.18       0.23    4.18    0.05     2.24    0.03    23.12    0.25
                  4.22             3.61             2.85                 2.53            2.17             2.10             2.36
  Norway         25.67     0.12   27.54     0.15    9.71     0.06    18.15       0.13    1.22    0.01    -23.09   -0.23   -25.82   -0.26
                  4.81             4.23             3.66                 3.18            2.65             2.38             2.48
  Mexico         64.09     0.05   177.09    0.19   307.45    0.38    348.22      0.42   205.25   0.26    48.88    0.07    -44.81   -0.08
                 27.62            21.01            17.65             17.88              18.23            16.61            14.73
  South Africa   58.05     0.09   53.05     0.10   88.82     0.21    121.21      0.33   51.60    0.15    71.67    0.20    24.83    0.11
                 15.28            12.23             9.79                 8.27            7.99             8.52             5.99
  Taiwan         16.63     0.06   43.47     0.17   54.14     0.27    65.05       0.39   55.83    0.41    66.89    0.51    81.52    0.71
                  6.41             6.02             4.45                 3.61            2.99             2.79             2.12
  Thailand        5.56     0.01   23.21     0.03   -30.77   -0.04    -51.80     -0.06   -58.27   -0.07   34.74    0.04    328.53   0.36
                 22.30            20.01            18.67             19.48              18.77            19.74            22.63
  India           8.93     0.03   15.72     0.05   17.29     0.07    10.37       0.05    8.42    0.04    21.63    0.12    56.99    0.32
                  8.12             7.61             6.00                 5.11            4.99             4.32             4.41
  Indonesia      188.07    0.04   292.23    0.07   276.96    0.08    297.47      0.11   77.73    0.03    78.48    0.04    -29.07   -0.02
                 117.64           95.66            76.24             66.32              54.60            49.51            42.47
  Poland         76.54     0.12   140.37    0.23   180.35    0.29    145.81      0.24   -31.18   -0.06   -210.14 -0.29    -130.71 -0.21
                 15.11            13.76            13.65             14.00              12.09            17.31            15.69
  Philippines    222.27    0.10   174.40    0.11   138.31    0.14    94.27       0.13   51.28    0.09    16.78    0.04     8.57    0.03
                 51.29            37.98            23.15             17.40              14.41            11.03             8.80




                                                                    35
                                                       Table 3: Relationships Between Flows and Returns
Table 3 summarizes the covariances between Flows and Returns using the cashflow and expected return decomposition obtained from our VAR estimates. We
present interpretations of the various elements of the relationship matrix, followed by the estimates themselves. To scale the covariances, we divide each measure
                    1/ 2
by (e1' Σe1e2 ' Σe2)       , the product of the innovation standard deviations. Standard errors are below coefficients in italics.
                                       1.Excess Return                  2.Expected ST Return                  3.Expected LT Return             4.Cash Flow Innovation
Excess Returns                                                               Innovation                            Innovation                    (sum of columns 1-3)
Æ
                                           e1' u                            e1' Φ (k )u                        e1'(Φ − Φ(k ))u                           e1' Ψu
Flows È
                                 Majors                All            Majors               All              Majors                 All          Majors              All

                                      Price Impact                       ST Anticipation                       LT Anticipation                   Total Price Impact
1. Unexpected Flow
                                          e1' Σe2                          e1' Φ (k )Σe2                     e1'(Φ − Φ(k ))Σe2                          e1' ΨΣe2
        e2 ' u
                                  0.278              0.091            0.057            0.087                 -0.282              -0.146        0.054              0.032
                                  0.013              0.005            0.052            0.039                 0.150                0.047        0.148              0.027

                                   ST Trend Chasing              ST Expectational Comovement            Expectational Comovement               ST Cash Flow Chasing
2. Expected ST Flow
     Innovation                      e1' ΣΦ(k ) ' e2                   e1' Φ (k )ΣΦ (k ) ' e2           e1'(Φ − Φ (k ))ΣΦ (k ) ' e2               e1' ΨΣΦ (k ) ' e2
     e2 ' Φ(k )u
                                  0.292                0.156          0.030            0.083                 -0.254               -0.196       0.068              0.042
                                  0.078                0.040          0.033            0.036                 0.141                0.061        0.126              0.033

                                   LT Trend Chasing                Expectational Comovement                   LT Expectational                 LT Cash Flow Chasing
                                                                                                               Comovement
3. Expected LT Flow
     Innovation                   e1' Σ(Φ − Φ (k )) ' e2           e1' Φ (k )Σ(Φ − Φ (k )) ' e2        e1'(Φ − Φ ( k ))Σ (Φ − Φ ( k )) ' e 2   e1' ΨΣ(Φ − Φ(k )) ' e2
e2 '(Φ − Φ(k ))u
                                 -1.281                0.781         -0.020            0.168                 1.175                -0.857       -0.126             0.092
                                 1.039                 0.638          0.105            0.186                 1.163                0.687         0.572             0.171



    4. Total Flow
     Innovation                        e1' ΣΨ ' e2                       e1' Φ (k )ΣΨ ' e2                 e1'(Φ − Φ(k ))ΣΨ ' e2                   e1' ΨΣΨ ' e2
   (sum of above)
       e2 ' Ψu                   -0.711                1.028          0.067            0.338                 0.640                -1.199       -0.004             0.166
                                 1.038                 0.650          0.097            0.214                 1.043                0.707         0.312             0.219




                                                                                      36
                                          Table 4: Variance Decomposition
Table 4 presents the variance decomposition using the cash flow and expected return decomposition obtained from our VAR
estimates. Standard errors below coefficients in italics.


                   σ 2fx          σ cf2           σ er2         ρer ,cf        σ er2 ( k )   σ er2 ( k +1..∞ )   ρer ( k ),er ( k +1..∞ )


  Major          2757.77        541.83          1977.79         -0.12          9.84            2041.84               -0.26
 Countries        73.78         135.72          1901.06          0.89         16.54            1947.17                1.11



   All           6330.82        947.43           4612.70        -0.18          276.21           6523.40               -0.81
 Countries        295.36        248.98           1433.57         0.31          345.91          2263.84                0.20




                                                           37
                                           Table 5: Relationships Between Interest Differentials and Returns
Table 5 summarizes the relationships between Returns and Interest Differentials using the cash flow and expected return decomposition obtained from our VAR
estimates. We present interpretations of the various elements of the relationship matrix, followed by the estimates themselves. To scale the covariances, we divide
                                  1/ 2
each measure by (e1' Σe1e3' Σe3)         , the product of the innovation standard deviations. Standard errors are below coefficients in italics.
                                   1.Excess Return                      2.Expected ST Return                 3.Expected LT Return             4.Cash Flow Innovation
Excess Returns                                                               Innovation                           Innovation                    (sum of columns 1-3)
Æ
                                          e1' u                             e1' Φ (k )u                      e1'(Φ − Φ(k ))u                             e1' Ψu
Int. Diffs È
                              Majors                 All              Majors              All              Majors               All                Majors            All

                                   Price Impact                          ST Anticipation                      LT Anticipation                       Total Price Impact
   1. Unexpected
      Change                             e1' Σe3                          e1' Φ (k )Σe3                     e1'(Φ − Φ (k ))Σe3                          e1' ΨΣe3
        e3' u
                              0.007                  0.002            0.011               0.077             0.015              0.038           0.034              0.117
                              0.012                  0.012            0.069               0.057             0.076              0.059           0.056              0.047

                               ST Trend Chasing                  ST Expectational Comovement           Expectational Comovement                ST Cash Flow Chasing
2. Expected ST Int.
Diff Innovation                  e1' ΣΦ (k ) ' e3                      e1' Φ (k )ΣΦ (k ) ' e3           e1'(Φ − Φ(k ))ΣΦ(k ) ' e3                    e1' ΨΣΦ(k ) ' e3
e3' Φ (k )u
                              1.837                  1.032            0.295               1.616             -1.289             -0.311          0.843              2.336
                              0.840                  0.928            1.123               1.117             1.835              1.521           1.573              0.936

                               LT Trend Chasing                   Expectational Comovement                   LT Expectational                  LT Cash Flow Chasing
                                                                                                              Comovement
3. Expected LT Int.
Diff Innovation               e1' Σ(Φ − Φ (k )) ' e3               e1' Φ (k )Σ(Φ − Φ (k )) ' e3       e1'(Φ − Φ ( k ))Σ(Φ − Φ ( k )) ' e3      e1' ΨΣ(Φ − Φ (k )) ' e3
e3'(Φ − Φ (k ))u
                             29.273                  5.948            0.503               1.452            -27.749             -4.869          2.027              2.531
                             25.393                  6.112            2.445               1.707             28.571             6.316          13.414              1.511



4. Total Int. Diff.
Innovation (sum)                    e1' ΣΨ ' e3                          e1' Φ (k )ΣΨ ' e3                e1'(Φ − Φ (k ))ΣΨ ' e3                      e1' ΨΣΨ ' e3
       e3' Ψu
                             31.116                  6.981            0.809               3.146            -29.022             -5.142          2.904              4.985
                             25.366                  6.218            2.719               2.527             29.321             6.559          14.909              2.298




                                                                                     38
                        Table 6: Relationships Between Interest Differentials and Returns in a Fundamentals-only VAR
Table 6 summarizes the relationships between Returns and Interest Differentials obtained from a VAR containing Excess Returns, Interest Differentials and Real Exchange
Rates. We first present interpretations of the various elements of the relationship matrix, followed by the estimates themselves. To scale the covariances, we divide each
                             1/ 2
measure by (e1' Σe1e3' Σe3)         , the product of the innovation standard deviations. Standard errors are below coefficients in italics.
                                        1.Excess Return                    2.Expected ST Return                   3.Expected LT Return              4.Cash Flow Innovation
Excess Returns                                                                  Innovation                             Innovation                     (sum of columns 1-3)
Æ
                                             e1' u                              e1' Φ (k )u                        e1'(Φ − Φ(k ))u                           e1' Ψu
Int. Diffs È
                                    Majors                All             Majors               All              Majors                 All           Majors             All

                                        Price Impact                         ST Anticipation                       LT Anticipation                    Total Price Impact
1. Unexpected Change
                                           e1' Σe3                            e1' Φ (k )Σe3                      e1'(Φ − Φ (k ))Σe3                         e1' ΨΣe3
         e3' u
                               0.007                 0.002              0.013                 0.078           0.016                 0.037           0.036              0.117
                               0.009                 0.015              0.056                 0.096           0.070                 0.085           0.055              0.035

                                     ST Trend Chasing               ST Expectational Comovement             Expectational Comovement                ST Cash Flow Chasing
2. Expected ST Int.
Diff Innovation                        e1' ΣΦ (k ) ' e3                   e1' Φ (k )ΣΦ (k ) ' e3             e1'(Φ − Φ(k ))ΣΦ(k ) ' e3                 e1' ΨΣΦ(k ) ' e3
e3' Φ (k )u
                               1.858                 1.017              0.249                 1.610           -1.201               -0.294           0.906              2.334
                               0.785                 0.982              0.939                 1.763            1.760                1.791           1.519              0.707

                                     LT Trend Chasing                 Expectational Comovement            LT Expectational Comovement               LT Cash Flow Chasing
3. Expected LT Int.
Diff Innovation                     e1' Σ(Φ − Φ (k )) ' e3             e1' Φ (k )Σ(Φ − Φ (k )) ' e3         e1'(Φ − Φ ( k ))Σ (Φ − Φ ( k )) ' e3    e1' ΨΣ(Φ − Φ (k )) ' e3
e3'(Φ − Φ (k ))u
                             30.090                  5.828              0.357                 1.520         -28.413                -4.808           2.033              2.540
                             27.081                  9.293              2.296                 2.050          29.177                 9.175          13.604              2.162



4. Total Int. Diff.
Innovation (sum)                         e1' ΣΨ ' e3                        e1' Φ (k )ΣΨ ' e3                  e1'(Φ − Φ (k ))ΣΨ ' e3                   e1' ΨΣΨ ' e3
       e3' Ψu
                             31.955                  6.847              0.619                 3.209         -29.599                -5.065           2.975              4.991
                             27.055                  9.345              2.595                 3.284          29.813                 9.348          15.042              2.656




                                                                                         39
                                                  Table 7: Relationships Between Interest Differentials and Flows
Table 7 summarizes the relationships between Flows and Interest Differentials using the cash flow and expected return decomposition obtained from our VAR estimates.
We present interpretations of the various elements of the relationship matrix, followed by the estimates themselves. To scale the covariances, we divide each measure
                      1/ 2
by (e 2 ' Σe2e3' Σe3)        , the product of the innovation standard deviations. Standard errors are below coefficients in italics.

                                      1.Unexpected Flow                     2.Expected ST Flow             3.Expected LT Flow Innovation            4.Total Flow Innovation
Flows Æ                                                                         Innovation                         e2 '(Φ − Φ(k ))u                   (sum of columns 1-3)
                                             e2 ' u                               e2 ' Φ(k )u                                                                 e2 ' Ψu
         È
Int.DiffsÈ
                                   Majors                   All          Majors                   All           Majors                   All        Majors                  All

                                         Comovement                   ST Flows Respond to Int.Diff           LT Flows Respond to Int.Diff             Total Flow Response
1. Unexpected Change
                                            e2 ' Σe3                           e2 ' Φ (k )Σe3                     e2 '(Φ − Φ (k ))Σe3                        e2 ' ΨΣe3
         e3' u
                                    0.009                0.002           -0.033                 0.015            -0.118                0.016        -0.141              0.033
                                    0.008                0.003            0.094                 0.047            0.192                 0.209         0.193              0.220

                              Flows Anticipate ST Int. Diff          ST Expectational Comovement              Expectational Comovement
2. Expected ST Int.
Diff Innovation                         e2 ' ΣΦ (k ) ' e3                  e2 ' Φ (k )ΣΦ (k ) ' e3            e2 '(Φ − Φ (k ))ΣΦ(k ) ' e3              e2 ' ΨΣΦ (k ) ' e3
e3' Φ (k )u
                                    2.066                0.528            0.633                 0.738            -4.330                1.253        -1.630              2.520
                                    1.027                0.287            1.607                 0.890            4.974                 4.166         5.207              4.377

                                Flows Anticipate LT Int. Diff        Expectational Comovement               LT Expectational Comovement
3. Expected LT Int.
Diff Innovation                     e2 ' Σ(Φ − Φ (k )) ' e3          e2 ' Φ (k )Σ(Φ − Φ (k )) ' e3          e 2 '(Φ − Φ ( k ))Σ(Φ − Φ (k )) ' e3    e2 ' ΨΣ(Φ − Φ(k )) ' e3
e3'(Φ − Φ (k ))u
                                   10.241                -0.431           9.303                 0.256           -44.333                3.770       -24.789              3.595
                                   10.372                1.607            9.107                 1.669            67.589                7.406        51.778              9.877

                                Total Anticipation of Int. Diff

4. Total Int. Diff.                       e2 ' ΣΨ ' e3                       e2 ' Φ (k )ΣΨ ' e3                 e2 '(Φ − Φ (k ))ΣΨ ' e3                  e2 ' ΨΣΨ ' e3
Innovation (sum)
       e3' Ψu
                                   12.317                0.098            9.904                 1.009           -48.780                5.040       -26.560           6.148
                                   10.315                1.685            9.180                 2.050            71.672                10.435       56.295          12.682



                                                                                           40
Figure 1: Contemporaneous Correlation of Flows and Returns




                            41
   Figure 2a – Cumulative Excess Returns – Majors
      Excess Return Impulse Response to a 50bp Shock to Cash Flows




Figure 2b – Cumulative Excess Returns – All Countries
   Excess Return Impulse Response to a 50bp Shock to Cash Flows




                                  42
   Figure 3a – Cumulative Excess Returns– Majors
 Excess Return Impulse Response to a 50bp shock to Expected Returns




Figure 3b – Cumulative Excess Returns– All Countries
 Excess Return Impulse Response to a 50bp shock to Expected Returns




                                43
  Figure 4a – Cumulative Currency Flows– Majors
      Flow Impulse Response to a 50bp shock to Cash Flows




Figure 4b – Cumulative Currency Flows– All Countries
      Flow Impulse Response to a 50bp shock to Cash Flows




                              44
            Figure 5a – Cumulative Currency Flows– Majors
Flow Impulse Response to a Zero Cash Flow Appreciation from Short Run Expected Returns




        Figure 5b – Cumulative Currency Flows– All Countries
Flow Impulse Response to a Zero Cash Flow Appreciation from Short Run Expected Returns




                                         45
            Figure 6a – Cumulative Currency Flows– Majors
Flow Impulse Response to a Zero Cash Flow Appreciation from Long Run Expected Returns




        Figure 6b – Cumulative Currency Flows– All Countries
Flow Impulse Response to a Zero Cash Flow Appreciation from Long Run Expected Returns




                                         46
Figure 7a – Cumulative Excess Returns– Major Countries
Excess Return Impulse Response to a 1 Standard Deviation Shock to Flows




 Figure 7b – Cumulative Excess Returns– All Countries
Excess Return Impulse Response to a 1 Standard Deviation Shock to Flows




                                  47
