                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE PRICE LEVEL, THE QUANTITY THEORY OF MONEY,
                    AND THE FISCAL THEORY OF THE PRICE LEVEL


                                            David B. Gordon
                                             Eric M. Leeper


                                          Working Paper 9084
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9084


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       July 2002




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


© 2002 by David B. Gordon and Eric M. Leeper. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Price Level, the Quantity Theory of Money, and the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level
David B. Gordon and Eric M. Leeper
NBER Working Paper No. 9084
July 2002
JEL No. E31, E41, E52, E62


                                             ABSTRACT

        We consider price level determination from the perspective of portfolio choice. Arbitrages among
money balances, bonds, and investment goods determine their relative demands. Returns to real balance
holdings (transactions services), the nominal interest rate, and after-tax returns to investment goods
determine the relative values of nominal and real assets. Since expectations of government policies
ultimately determine the expected returns to both nominal and real assets, monetary and fiscal policies
jointly determine the price level. Special cases of the fiscal and monetary policies considered produce
the quantity theory of money and the fiscal theory of the price level.




David B. Gordon                                                  Eric M. Leeper
Clemson University                                               Indiana University
Department of Economics                                          Department of Economics
222 Sirrine Hall                                                 105 Wylie Hall
Clemson, SC 29634                                                Bloomington, IN 47405
gd@clemson.edu                                                   and NBER
                                                                 eleeper@indiana.edu
               The Price Level, the Quantity Theory of Money,

                     and the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level
                               David B. Gordon and Eric M. Leeper*




1.      Introduction

     Two largely independent views of price level determination currently coexist. The first view
stems from the venerable quantity theory of money. The second view, based on extensions of
Sargent and Wallace’s (1981) “Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic,” is the fiscal theory of the
price level.1 In their starkest forms, the quantity and fiscal theories are distinguished by which
nominal government liability is sufficient to determine the price level: in the quantity theory it is
the money supply and in the fiscal theory it is the quantity of government bonds. Debate
between the two views echoes Hicks’s (1939) characterization as a “sham dispute” the old
argument over whether the rate of interest is determined in the loan market or the money market.
As he put it, with “price level” in place of his original “rate of interest”: “The problem is not one
of determining [the price level] in vacuo, but it is really the general problem of price-
determination in an economy where … [the price level] is therefore a constituent part of the
general price-system” (p. 153). This paper argues that for the reasons Hicks lays out it is
counterproductive to choose between the two theories of price level determination.
     Hicks (1939) embeds the determination of the overall level of prices in the general problem
of portfolio choice and asset valuation. His perspective found formal voice in the work of
Friedman (1956), Tobin (1961) and Brunner and Meltzer (1972).2 Because those authors treat


*
  The authors thank Jon Faust for helpful suggestions and Matthew Shapiro for raising questions
this paper attempts to answer.
1
  Recent work includes Leeper (1991, 1993), Sims (1994, 1997, 1999), Woodford (1994, 1995,
1998a, 1998b, 2001), Bergin (2000), Cochrane (1999, 2001a, 2001b), Daniel (2001a, 2001b),
Dupor (1997), Mikek (1999), and Schmitt-Grohe and Uribe (2000). Important antecedents to the
recent work include Sargent and Wallace (1981), Begg and Haque (1984), Aiyagari and Gertler
(1985), Sargent (1986), and Auernheimer and Contreras (1990, 1993).
2
  Other classic analyses include Hicks (1935), Friedman (1948), Tobin (1969, 1980), and
Brunner and Meltzer (1993).

                                                  1
the demand for money symmetrically with the demands for other assets, the equilibrium price
level emerges from the valuation of all assets jointly. That treatment suggests that in a modern
economy, with a wide array of real and nominal assets that vary in return characteristics and
forms of substitutability, it is futile to try to value one type of asset separately from the rest of the
portfolio. Nonetheless, the portfolio choice problems emphasized in earlier analyses often
receive scant attention. Asset substitutions are frequently omitted or ignored in both monetary
theory and empirical estimates of money demand.3
    We consider price level determination from the perspective of portfolio choice. Arbitrages
among money balances, bonds, and investment goods determine their relative demands. Returns
to real balance holdings (transactions services), the nominal interest rate, and after-tax returns to
investment goods determine the relative values of nominal and real assets. Since expectations of
government policies ultimately determine the expected returns to both nominal and real assets,
monetary and fiscal policies jointly determine the price level. We focus on circumstances in
which all sources of fiscal financing distort portfolio choices. Special cases of the fiscal and
monetary policies considered produce the quantity theory of money and the fiscal theory of the
price level.
    Both the quantity and the fiscal theories, as popularly presented, employ a conventional
money demand function of the form:
                                             Md
                                                = h(i, y ),                                           (1)
                                             P
where P is the price level, i, the nominal interest rate, is the opportunity cost of money, and y is a
scale variable. While empirical specifications like (1) are often justified on grounds of long-run
stability [see, for example, Friedman (1959), Meltzer (1963), and Lucas (1988)], theoretical
justifications are more involved: they inform our view of the “sham dispute” and form the basis
of this paper.
    Expression (1) springs from the arbitrage between money and nominal bonds when the
nominal interest rate suffices to capture the substitutions between these assets. Missing from (1)
is the substitution between real and nominal assets—the “Tobin (1965) effect”—that expected

3
 Important exceptions that do adopt the broad asset substitution perspective of Hicks are Bryant
and Wallace (1979, 1984) and Wallace (1981, 1989), among others. Also relevant is the “New



                                                   2
monetary and fiscal policies might induce. If those substitutions are also important for
determining the demand for money, the nominal interest rate does not adequately summarize the
opportunity cost of money and (1) does not adequately summarize the determinants of the price
level.
    Combining a portfolio choice perspective with rational expectations further complicates the
analysis of price level determination. The price level depends fundamentally on mutually
consistent combinations of current and expected future policies. Current policies affect prices
both directly and indirectly through changes in expectations of future policies. Current polices
may constrain future policy options, if current policies imply debt obligations or future
expenditure commitments. Similarly, expected future policies feedback to influence the set of
current policies that can be chosen. To answer policy questions, one must consider current and
future policies jointly. When any taxes distort portfolio choices, the exact policies implemented
matter for the price level.
    A key implication of mutually consistent current and future policies is that changes in current
fiscal policy must (i) change the real value of government liabilities and therefore change future
policies; (ii) force the price level to adjust, in which case the money market will clear only if the
money supply adjusts to satisfy the demand for real money balances; or (iii) some combination
of (i) and (ii). The ultimate effect on the price level depends on exactly which policies adjust.
    From the portfolio choice perspective, the quantity theory and the fiscal theory emerge under
assumptions on policy that differ in the degree to which monetary policy is constrained to satisfy
fiscal financing needs. If monetary policy and government debt play no role in financing real
government expenditures, then the quantity theory completely describes the path of the price
level. The price level is then independent of fiscal policy. But it is not independent of debt. The
level of debt service affects real money balances through its influence on future money creation.
    The fiscal theory of the price level arises as an extension of unpleasant monetarist arithmetic
when fiscal obligations together with fixed future policies constrain monetary policy. A current
tax cut cannot be financed by higher real debt because future policies are fixed. Instead, any
expansion in nominal debt must bring forth a proportional increase in the price level that leaves
the real value of debt unchanged. But higher prices raise the demand for nominal money


Monetary Economics” associated with Fama (1980), Hall (1982, 1983) and Wallace (1983),


                                                  3
balances. To restore equilibrium, the supply of money must expand passively to return real
money balances to their original level. Fiscal financing needs determine the money stock.
   The portfolio choice perspective does admit pure fiscal effects on the price level that are
independent of the money stock. A bond-financed tax cut that generates higher expected taxes
reduces the expected return to capital and induces substitution from real to nominal assets,
including money. This Tobin effect reduces current nominal spending and the price level. When
monetary policy does not accommodate fiscal finance, a tax cut has opposite effects on nominal
demand from those under the fiscal theory.
   Some versions of the fiscal theory, for example Cochrane (1999, 2001b), start with the
observation that the equilibrium value of current government debt must equal the present value
of expected net-of-interest government surpluses. With all future policies held fixed, the real
value of government debt is constant, and any change in the current level of debt must be
associated with a proportional change in the price level. We show that this seemingly appealing
inference is misleading. First, as Cochrane observes, the restriction that debt sells at par is
critical. If government debt sells at a discount, an expansion of the quantity of bonds need not
increase the market value of the issue. Second, even if bonds sell at a discount, an expansion in
the real liabilities carried into the future is in general inconsistent with the government budget
constraint under fixed future policies. The impact of this policy change ultimately depends on
how the increased debt liabilities are financed.
   Thirty years ago the profession was unclear about the precise policy implications of the
quantity theory of money.4 Today confusion centers on the fiscal theory of the price level.
Several authors have criticized its logical foundations and at least three papers have tried to
explain the fiscal theory.5 One reason the fiscal theory may be poorly understood is that much of
the literature focuses on fine theoretical points. Among these points are: (i) the appropriate
interpretation of the government’s budget constraint; (ii) price level indeterminacy and how the
economy behaves off equilibrium paths; and (iii) how important money and monetary policy are
under the fiscal theory. Moreover, expositions of the fiscal theory typically rely on a narrow set



surveyed by Cowen and Kroszner (1987).
4
  See discussions in Gordon (1974) and Stein (1976).
5
  Buiter (1998, 2000) and McCallum (2001) criticize and Carlstrom and Fuerst (1999),
Kocherlakota and Phelan (1999), and Christiano and Fitzgerald (2000) explain.

                                                   4
of monetary and fiscal policies. Lost to these theoretical points and specialized policies is a
straightforward discussion of price level determination in a general setting with a rich array of
assets and arbitrary policies. This paper presents such a setting and argues that none of these
theoretical points are central to understanding the role of fiscal policy in determining the price
level. The combination of portfolio balance, distorting taxes, and mutually consistent current
and future policies can produce effects of macro policies that differ dramatically from those
emphasized in existing literature.


2.       A Simple Model of Portfolio Choice

      We consider a standard Ramsey-Cass-Koopmans growth model combined with a transactions
sector that provides a substitute for the transactions services of money. Private agents may hold a
nominal substitute for money, government bonds, and a real substitute, capital. This range of
substitutions suffices to provide a richer perspective on price level determination than appears in
much of the recent literature. Direct taxes are put on an equal footing with inflation taxes—both
distort portfolio choices. Equilibrium is a mapping from current and expected future policy
variables to portfolio choices and, consequently, equilibrium asset values and the price level.

2.1       The Model
      The model consists of a representative household, two firms—one producing goods and one
producing transactions services—and a government.
      The gross physical assets of the economy at date t, f (kt −1 ) , are allocated to consumption, ct ,

capital, kt , or government purchases, gt . The aggregate resource constraint each period is

                                           f (kt −1 ) ≥ ct + kt + g t ,                                (2)

with ct ≥ 0, kt ≥ 0, and g t ≥ 0. 6 The function f (⋅) is strictly increasing, strictly concave, and
continuously differentiable.




6
 Complete depreciation of capital simplifies many of the expressions without affecting the
characteristics of the equilibrium that concern us. For a version of the model with partial
depreciation of capital, see Gordon, Leeper and Zha (1998).

                                                       5
    Two types of representative firms rent factors of production from households and then sell
their outputs back to households. Goods producing firms rent k from households at rental rate r
and pay taxes levied against sales of goods. Firms choose k to solve
                                max DGt = (1 − τ t ) f (kt −1 ) − (1 + rt )kt −1 ,                       (3)

taking the tax rate, τ, and r as given.
    Transactions service producing firms rent labor, l, from households at wage rate w and sell
transactions services, T (l ) , to households at price PT . The function T (⋅) is strictly increasing,
strictly concave, and continuously differentiable. Firms choose l to solve
                                          max DTt = PTtT (lt ) − wt lt ,                                 (4)

taking PT and w as given.
    The household owns the firms and receives factor payments, so its income at the beginning
of period t is
                                    I t = (1 + rt )kt −1 + DGt + wt lt + DTt ,                           (5)
where DG and DT are dividends received from the goods-producing and transactions-producing
firms.
    Households use money balances and transactions services to acquire goods. Transactions
services purchased from the financial sector at time t execute the fraction Tt ∈ [0,1] of private
expenditures on goods. Choices of money and services must satisfy the finance constraint:
                                 M t −1
                                              + Tt (ct + kt )     ≥    ct + kt ,                         (6)
                                  Pt            "#$#     %             !
                                 !                value of            value of
                               value of           transactions        private
                               transactions       performed           transactions
                               performed          with services
                               with money

where M t −1 is nominal money balances carried into period t and Pt is the price level at t.7
Transactions services may be thought of as a clearinghouse, money market mutual funds, or
credit cards, although our specification abstracts from any institutional details. In advanced
economies, where most transactions involve the financial sector but do not involve cash directly,
T may be close to unity on average. Holding resources devoted to the financial sector fixed, the


7
 Including investment goods in the finance constraint, as in Stockman (1981), is substantive.
Excluding investment goods implies that the acts of investing or reallocating investments do not
generate any demand for money or for transactions services.

                                                         6
constraint implies that doubling the value of transactions doubles the value of transactions
performed with services by doubling the size of each transaction. It also implies that the
marginal product of transactions services increases with the value of transactions performed.8
    Preferences are defined over consumption and leisure. The current period utility function,
U (⋅) , is time-separable, strictly increasing in both arguments, strictly concave, and continuously
differentiable. Households are endowed with one unit of time each period and choose c, k, l, T,
M, and B, nominal bonds, to solve9
                                                 ∞
                                  max E0 ∑ β tU (ct ,1 − lt ),            0 < β <1                         (7)
                                                t =0

subject to the budget constraint
                                       M t + Bt                 M + (1 + it −1 ) Bt −1
                           ct + kt +            + PTt Tt ≤ I t + t −1                  ,                   (8)
                                          Pt                          Pt

and the finance constraint, (6), with 0 ≤ lt ≤ 1 , Pt , PTt , it and τ t taken as given, and the initial

conditions ( k−1 , M −1 , (1 + i−1 ) B−1 ) .10 Total government expenditures, g, are financed by printing

money, M, and selling nominal bonds, B, which pay a net nominal interest rate of i, and levying a
proportional tax rate, τ, against net output. The government’s budget constraint is
                                                M t − M t −1 Bt − (1 + it −1 ) Bt −1
                             τ t f (kt −1 ) +               +                        = gt .                (9)
                                                    Pt               Pt
    Let the state of the economy at the beginning of each period be given by the resources
available to the private sector and expected sequences of future policies. At time t the state is



8
  The specification is in the spirit of Tobin with Golub’s (1998) characterization of Baumol’s
(1952) and Tobin’s (1956) theories of cash inventories, where economies of scale “result from
costs that are as large for hundred-dollar transactions as for million-dollar transactions” [Tobin
with Golub (1998), p. 49]. The specification is also in keeping with Friedman’s (1956) view of
the myriad ways that households and firms may create substitutes for money in transactions.
9
  One can imagine the representative household composed of a worker/shopper pair. Each
member of the household is endowed with a unit of time each period and specializes in the
production of a specific commodity. The worker supplies labor inelastically to the goods
producing firm and the shopper supplies labor elastically to the transactions services producing
firm. The worker’s labor supply is unity and the shopper’s labor supply is l .
10
   The operator E in (7) denotes equilibrium expectations of private agents over future policy.
Although we focus on perfect foresight equilibria, we employ the notation Et to distinguish
between current and past policies (dated t and earlier) and future policies (dated s > t ).

                                                             7
zt = ( kt −1 , M t −1 , (1 + it −1 ) Bt −1 ,{Et ρ j , Etτ j , Et s gj }∞j =t ) , where ρ is money growth, ρt = M t M t −1 , and

s g is the government-spending share, stg = gt f (kt −1 ) . Rational expectations require that
expected policies are consistent with equilibrium. A perfect foresight competitive equilibrium is
a set of sequences {ct , kt , lt , Tt , M t , Bt , Pt , PTt , it , rt , wt , τ t , g t }t∞=0 such that given the

{Pt , PTt , it , rt , wt , ρt , τ t , gt } sequences, the {ct , kt , lt , Tt , M t , Bt } sequences solve the firms’ and the
household’s optimum problems, clear markets, and satisfy the government’s budget constraint at
each date.11
Functional Forms
     To obtain an explicit characterization of the model’s equilibrium, we specialize the model by
assuming the following functional forms for the production functions and for preferences:
                                                   f (kt −1 ) = ktσ−1 ,    0 <σ ≤1                                          (10)

                                                 T (lt ) = 1 − (1 − lt )α ,       α >1                                      (11)

                                     U (ct ,1 − lt ) = ln(ct ) + γ ln(1 − lt ),         0 < γ < α.                          (12)
First-Order Conditions
     The firms’ first-order conditions are:
     kt −1 :                                               1 + rt = σ (1 − τ t ) ktσ−1−1 ,                                  (13)

     lt :                                                  wt = α (1 − lt )α −1 PTt .                                       (14)

     Letting ϕ be the lagrange multiplier for the budget constraint and λ be the multiplier for the
finance constraint, the household’s first-order conditions are:
                                                                   1
     ct :                                           ϕ t + λt =        + λtTt ,                                              (15)
                                                                   ct
                                                       γ
     lt :                                                     = wtϕ t ,                                                     (16)
                                                     1 − lt

     Tt :                                       ϕ t PTt = λt (ct + kt ),                                                    (17)




11
  We prefer this conventional definition of equilibrium over the non-standard one employed by
Kocherlakota and Phelan (1999) in their explanation of the fiscal theory. Their definition
includes the puzzling description of policy behavior as simultaneously taking the price level
sequence as given and potentially choosing a sequence of nominal interest rates.

                                                                     8
                                                           ϕt        ϕ + λ 
      Mt :                                                    = β Et  t +1 t +1  ,                           (18)
                                                           Pt         Pt +1 

                                                      ϕt                  ϕ 
      Bt :                                               = β (1 + it ) Et  t +1  ,                           (19)
                                                      Pt                   Pt +1 
      kt :                                       ϕ t + λt = λtTt + β Et (1 + rt +1 )ϕ t +1.                    (20)
      Expressions (18)-(20) price assets and (17) prices transactions services. Interconnections
among the asset pricing equations make it clear that price level determination is only one
component of a general portfolio choice problem. Only under special circumstances that
effectively decouple (18) and (19) from (20) can nominal assets be priced independently of the
real asset.12

2.2          The Equilibrium
      We characterize the equilibrium at time t in terms of two policy expectations functions,
( µt ,ηt ) , current government claims to goods, stg , and beginning-of-period assets,

( kt −1 , M t −1 , (1 + it −1 ) Bt −1 ) .   A solution maps expectations of policy into portfolio choices, where

those expectations are restricted to policy paths consistent with market clearing, the resource
constraint, and budget constraints. The functions ( µt ,ηt ) summarize everything agents need to
know to form rational expectations about the equilibrium of the economy.
      As detailed below, η and µ capture the portfolio balance effects of expected policies. η, a
product of solving the first-order condition for capital, measures the direct tax distortion on
investment as well as the extent to which government expenditures are financed by taxing
output. A rise in expected future taxes lowers η and lowers investment. µ, a product of solving
the first-order condition for money, reflects expected inflation and thus the expected return on
nominal assets. Higher expected inflation lowers µ and lowers the demand for money.
      Although in general the equilibrium depends on the entire expected paths of future policies, it
is convenient to focus on circumstances in which the economy is in a stationary equilibrium for
dates s > t but starts from some other equilibrium at t. Assume:



12
   Necessary and sufficient conditions for an optimum are (6), (8), (9), (13)-(20) plus
transversality conditions for M t Pt , Bt Pt , and kt .

                                                                        9
                                                ρt + j = ρ F ,         ∀j > 0
                                               τt+ j = τ F ,           ∀j > 0                   (21)
                                                stg+ j = sFg ,         ∀j > 0.

      Define the private savings rate as st = kt (ct + kt ) . In equilibrium that rate is13

                                                        1
                                                             = ηt ,                             (22)
                                                      1 − st

and (the inverse of) the velocity of money, 1 − Tt , is

                                                     1     γ µ
                                          (1 − Tt )       − = t,                              (23)
                                                    1 − st α  ρ t
where
                                                             γ  1−τ F 
                                                        1 − σβ
                                          (−) (+)            α  1 − sFg 
                                      ηt (τ F , sF ) =
                                                 g
                                                                             ,                  (24)
                                                               1−τ F 
                                                       1 − σβ        g 
                                                                   1 − sF 
and
                                                               γ        
                                                (−)      βα             
                                           µt ( ρ F ) =                 .                     (25)
                                                         1 − β ρ F     
                                                                         
Signs appearing in parentheses above the function arguments in (24) and (25) denote partial
derivatives of the functions with respect to future values of the policy variables.
      The equilibrium capital stock is
                                                  1     
                                        kt =  1 −        (1 − st ) f (kt −1 ),
                                                                  g
                                                                                                (26)
                                              ηt        
and equilibrium real money balances are

                                     M t  µt      
                                        =          (1 − st ) f (kt −1 ).
                                                            g
                                                                                                (27)
                                     Pt  ηt − γ α 

In (27), µ substitutes for the nominal interest rate, as arbitrage between nominal assets implies




13
     Appendix A solves the model.

                                                           10
                                                        γ  1
                                            µt = β        1 +  .                                   (28)
                                                        α  it 
Equilibrium nominal interest rates depend only on expected future money growth.


3.       Price Level Determination

      In the equilibrium outlined above expectations of government policies determine the returns
on money holdings, bonds, and real investments, and therefore determine the price level. This
section derives the implications for the price level of various policies and explores the tradeoffs
between current and expected policies that are consistent with equilibrium.

3.1      Policy Expectations and the Price Level
      The velocity equation, (27), determines the price level, given the policy expectations
functions µt and ηt . Equilibrium real balances are

                                         Mt
                                            = ∆ t (1 − stg ) f (kt −1 ),                             (29)
                                         Pt
where
                                                          µt
                                                ∆t =            ,                                    (30)
                                                       ηt − γ α
with

                                                      γ              1−τF     
                                                    β        1 − σβ           
                                                                      1 − sF
                                   (−)(+) (−)                               g

                              ∆t ( ρ F ,τ , s ) =
                                            g         α                         .                 (31)
                                       F   F
                                                  1− γ α      1 − β ρF           
                                                                                 
                                                                                
      µ and η capture three distinct aspects of the influence of policy expectations on the price
level. The first works through µ, the marginal value of end-of-period real money balances,
which is ubiquitous in dynamic monetary models. All else equal, changes in µ imply changes in
expected inflation and the rate of return on money holdings, producing the direct effects of
monetary policy. Expectation of a higher rate of money growth depreciates the real value of
money, lowers µ, induces substitution away from money, and raises the equilibrium price level.
      η captures a Tobin effect through two interdependent impacts of expected policies. One
impact is a direct tax distortion, which alters the private return on real assets. To isolate this

                                                        11
effect, consider the impact of higher expected future taxes, holding future money growth and
government-spending shares fixed. Further suppose that debt is identically zero and, in order to
focus on substitution effects, that the revenues collected through higher distorting taxes are
rebated as a lump sum. Higher future tax rates reduce the expected return on investment and
induce agents to substitute from capital into consumption. A lower expected return on capital
also induces substitutions into nominal assets, including money, and produces the Tobin effect.
With the current money stock fixed, higher money demand drives down the price level today.
      A second impact comes from η’s summary of the composition of expected fiscal financing in
terms of the relative sizes of the real and the inflation tax bases. Higher η reflects an increase in
expected nominal liability creation, a rise in the inflation tax base, and a reduction in the role of
real taxation in financing government expenditures. This tradeoff can be seen heuristically from
an alternative expression for the terms (1 − τ ) (1 − s g ) that appear in the definition of η in (24).
A transformation of the government budget constraint yields:
                         1−τt
                                 = 1+
                                      ( M t − M t −1 + Bt − (1 + it −1 ) Bt −1 ) Pt , t ≥ 0.         (32)
                         1 − stg
                                                  (1 − stg ) f (kt −1 )

Terms in (1 − τ ) (1 − s g ) reflect the fraction of private resources absorbed by the acquisition of
new nominal liabilities issued by the government. Higher η indicates an expected shift in future
financing that expands the inflation tax base and contracts the real tax base. By reflecting the
relative sizes of the two tax bases, changes in η generate an expected inflation effect that is not
embedded in the nominal interest rate. Whenever policies change η, the conventional money
demand expression in (1) will mispredict the impacts of future policies on the price level.

3.2      Equilibrium Policies
      The preceding discussion focused on how changes in rates of return on real and nominal
assets affect the price level and how the rates of return relate to government policies. Well-
posed policy questions require complete specification of current and future policies. Even
standard questions like “What are the impacts of an increase in the expected growth rate of
money?” or “What are the effects of an increase in the expected tax rate?” must be linked to
other policies to satisfy the equilibrium conditions and clear the government budget constraint.
      Suppose expectations are initially consistent with equilibrium, and that agents expect future
government expenditures to be financed by money creation or tax receipts. Absent some other

                                                        12
change in government expenditures or taxes, an increase in the growth rate of money (a decline
in µ) increases seigniorage in the future, and neither current nor future government budget
constraints are satisfied. Similarly, a rise in the expected tax rate (a fall in η ) is consistent with
equilibrium only if it is associated with an appropriate expected change in future money growth,
government spending, or debt creation.
      Not only do current policies constrain future policy options, but also variations in fiscal
financing in the future require changes in current policy. Any change in expected future policy
that affects the current price level will alter the real values of current changes in money and debt.
As a result, the government budget constraint will continue to be satisfied only under specific
circumstances.
      To analyze how jointly consistent combinations of changes in current and future policy affect
the price level, we must consider
which policy combinations are consistent with equilibrium given current expectations (µ and η);
and
how current policy changes affect the set of future policies that are consistent with equilibrium—
that is, which policy expectations are rational.
      The government budget constraint in period t yields policy combinations that satisfy 0 given
current expectations:
                            ρt − 1  B  (1 + it −1 )  B            stg − τ t
                                  +      −         ⋅    t     ∆ =           ,                 (33)
                            ρt       M t   ρt         M t −1      1 − stg

where ( B M ) s ≡ Bs M s and ∆ t , defined in (30), summarizes the given expected policies.14
      We now characterize which future (date F) policies satisfy 0, given the state of government
indebtedness at date t. The current state of indebtedness is captured by the bond-to-money ratio
at the end of period t, ( B M )t . Assume that future interest liabilities are correctly anticipated at

time t and that the bond-to-money ratio is constant at ( B M ) F in the future stationary
equilibrium. Re-labeling variables dated t + 1 with an “ F ” subscript and imposing a stationary
equilibrium yields:




14
     Details of the derivations underlying (33) and (34) appear in Appendix B.

                                                     13
                                                                            
                                                                            
                                 s −τ F  
                                   g
                                                            1                .
                           ∆t =   F
                                         g 
                                                                                                   (34)
                                  1 − s F 
                                                B    1  B    ρ   − 1  
                                               −   + 
                                                                     F
                                                                           
                                               M  F β  M t  ρ F  
Given government indebtedness at the end of period t, expression (34) describes the tradeoffs
among future policies consistent with equilibrium and a given set of current policies; that is, it
reports policies that satisfy (37) with ∆ t constant.15

      To deduce the impacts on the price level of changes in monetary and fiscal policy, the
contemplated policies must satisfy relationships (33) and (34). Those relationships imply that
standard questions about the impacts of policy changes or changes in expectations may not be
consistent with equilibrium now or in the future, and must be reinterpreted after being coupled
with policies that jointly determine the equilibrium.

3.3      The Effects of Changing Policy Expectations

3.3.1    Expected Inflation
      We have already considered the usual description of the effects of an increase in expected
inflation due to an increase in expected money growth. The expected inflation rate rises, the real
return on money holdings falls (µ falls), and the current price level rises. If we start from an
initial equilibrium in which the government has a positive return from net money and bond
growth, this cannot be the total adjustment because the real value of current nominal liability
creation has fallen and neither current nor future government budget constraints are satisfied.
      The full effect of the change in expected monetary policy depends on the changes in other
policy expectations that produce the new equilibrium. A decrease in future taxes or an increase
in future government spending generates a substitution away from money and towards real
saving. This substitution further increases the current price level. Higher expected money
growth directly raises the price level and reduces the real return to current nominal liability
creation. If current taxes rise to offset the loss in revenue, there is no additional impact on the
price level because private real resources are unchanged. If government spending falls instead,


15
  We focus on government fiscal obligations in the form of debt, but any expenditure
commitments, such as spending programs, Medicare, or Social Security, that constrain future
policy options are subject to the same analysis.

                                                   14
private resources increase, raising the demand for money and moderating the effect on the price
level.

3.3.2    Tax Policy Expectations
    In section 3.1 we considered the direct effects of changes in expected taxes (through η). A
fall in the expected future tax rate produces an increase in current capital investment, substitution
away from nominal assets, and a rise in the current price level. Again, the resulting fall in
government revenues is not consistent with equilibrium, in either the current period or in the
future, without some further adjustment in policy. If the fall in expected tax receipts is
compensated for by an increase in expected money growth, expected inflation rises and the rise
in the current price level is exacerbated. The result is identical to the analysis above of a change
in expected money growth with the tax rate adjusting to retain the same level of government
spending. Indeed, it is arbitrary to refer to one of the policy expectations as adjusting to a change
in the other. The price change results from a shift in the combination of policy expectations that
are consistent with equilibrium.
    In contrast, suppose the fall in the expected tax rate is associated with an equal decline in
expected government spending and no change in money growth. Under the assumption that
there is an expected government deficit ( sFg > τ F ), ηt falls. Τhis change in expectations directly

increases the demand for money and decreases the price level. Neither current nor future
government budget constraints clear with this policy change alone. A lower current price level
increases the real return to money creation. Similarly, the rise in the government-spending share
in the future implies that the price level in the future rises, decreasing expected seigniorage (a
decline in the seigniorage tax base with no change in the stationary inflation rate reduces
seigniorage revenues). With unchanged monetary policy, future taxes must rise more than
government spending, moderating the impact on the current price level.
    Expected fiscal policy may affect the price level independently of monetary policy. Consider
the impact on the price level of the substitution between current and future taxes that a debt-
financed tax cut induces. If the sequences of money growth rates and government-spending
shares, {ρt , ρ F , stg , sFg } , are fixed exogenously, a bond-financed tax cut at t increases government

liabilities in the future and necessitates some change in future policy, as (34) indicates. In the
spirit of a Ricardian experiment, suppose that future direct taxes rise. Higher τ F reduces the


                                                   15
expected return on physical capital. A lower return on the real asset relative to nominal assets
increases the value of the current stock of money and bonds and reduces velocity. With the
money stock fixed, the price level at time t falls. A Tobin effect gives debt a natural role in
determining the price level, and a role that is independent of the stock of money. This pure fiscal
effect from a tax cut reduces nominal demand and the price level.
      One consequence of the policy change is that even though money growth is constant,
seigniorage revenues rise with the lower price level, due to the impacts of future taxes on the
demand for money and equilibrium real money balances. Of course, the change in seigniorage is
a consequence of the fiscally induced change in the price level.


4.       The Quantity Theory and The Fiscal Theory of The Price Level

      Our perspective on price determination emphasizes that the price level depends on jointly
consistent current and expected policies. This analysis does not conflict with either the quantity
theory of money or the fiscal theory of the price level: each theory arises from particular sets of
restrictions on policies.

4.1      The Quantity Theory of Money
      The quantity theory is sometimes described as positing strict proportionality between the
supply of money and the aggregate price level, and delivering the corresponding neutrality of
money. Friedman (1956) rejects this depiction as too extreme and provides a short description of
the quantity theoretic perspective. His description includes (a) a demand for money relation that
depends on a restricted set of variables and (b) an assumption that the money demand function is
stable.16
      Even in the simple model considered here, (a) is satisfied only if the restricted set of
variables includes the parameters of the processes determining policy. In addition, those
parameters must be observable. To satisfy (b) we must add the strong assumption that the policy
process is “stable” in some well-defined sense. We now explore (a) and (b).
      The velocity equation is often expressed in the form of an equilibrium “money demand”
function. While not formally a demand function, it has the familiar form of including an index


16
  Friedman also requires a degree of independence between the factors determining the supply
and demand for money. We have nothing to add on this point.

                                                   16
of expenditures and a measure of opportunity cost. Although Friedman’s (1956) general demand
function includes a role for expected inflation that is independent of the nominal interest rate,
most monetary analyses include only this rate-of-return influence of expected inflation [for
example Laidler (1985)].
    Expected inflation affects the demand for money by changing the own return on nominal
money balances, which is embedded in the nominal interest rate, i. A second expected inflation
effect operates through the composition of future fiscal financing, which η summarizes.
Changes in η trigger the asset substitutions that generate the Tobin effect. The velocity equation,
expressed in terms of the nominal interest rate, is:

                              Mt   γ  1 + it  1
                                 =β                (1 − stg ) f (kt −1 ).                         (35)
                              Pt   α  it  ηt − γ α
    This expression underscores that the nominal interest rate is generally an inadequate measure
of the opportunity cost of money balances. Without auxiliary assumptions that eliminate the
Tobin effect and the corresponding substitutions between real and nominal assets, the nominal
rate incompletely summarizes the opportunity cost.
    Special policy assumptions are necessary for the price level to be determined by monetary
policy alone. Those assumptions result in a dichotomy between the nominal and real sides of the
economy, but not an independence of the price level from debt. Consider a policy that sets the
net-of-interest budget surplus to zero each period, so τ t = stg for all t. In this special case, the

model delivers a simple quantity theory because ηt = (1 − σβγ / α ) /(1 − σβ ) for all t. This policy

removes substitutions between nominal and real assets, so the demand for money stems entirely
from arbitrage between bonds and money. Equilibrium real balances reduce to
                                           Mt
                                              = h(it , ct + kt ),                                   (36)
                                           Pt




                                                    17
which is analogous to the specification in (1). Now the price level is independent of fiscal
policy, but it is not independent of debt unless debt is zero: money growth must finance the
interest obligations, so the level of debt matters for the level of real money balances.17

4.2      Representations of Money Demand
     Friedman (1956) presents the demand for money as a function of a vector of rates of return on
money and alternative forms of wealth. It is evident that stability of the simple money demand
relation in (36) requires special assumptions about fiscal policy. We now relax those
assumptions to ask whether expectations of fiscal policy summarized by η in (35) can be
replaced by a judicious choice of rates of return.
      Can (35) be converted into a simple and stable money demand relation if it is expressed in
terms of a real return and expected inflation, as Friedman argues? Because the real interest rate
described by r includes transactions costs, no simple relation links it to the nominal rate and the
expected inflation rate. A simple Fisher relation can be obtained by adjusting the real rate for
transactions costs. Let rt*+1 denote the net real rate of return on capital between t and t + 1 after
adjusting for transactions costs. The net-of-transactions-costs real intertemporal marginal rate of
transformation is given by
                                            ϕ t = β Et (1 + rt*+1 )ϕ t +1.                         (37)

Simplification yields the simple Fisher equation
                                         1 + it = Et (1 + π t +1 )(1 + rt*+1 ).                    (38)

Combining this simple Fisher equation with (35) yields an equivalent version of (35) in terms of
expected inflation and the real return on capital adjusted for transactions costs:

                    Mt   γ                 1                      1
                       =β                                   + 1        (1 − stg ) f (kt −1 ).    (39)
                    Pt   α  Et (1 + π t +1 )(1 + rt +1 ) − 1  ηt − γ α
                                                    *



This money demand relation is stable only under certain assumptions about fiscal policy.



17
  Of course, with lump-sum taxes in place of the distorting tax, the quantity theory and
Ricardian equivalence hold under the wider range of policies described in Leeper (1991) as
“active monetary” and “passive fiscal” policies [see also Woodford (1999) or Cochrane
(2001b)]. The convention of using lump-sum taxes in association with the quantity theory is
consistent with Friedman’s (1976, p. 311) “Marshallian approach to theory,” as opposed to
“Tobin’s Walrasian approach.”

                                                          18
     An alternative expression involving the real rate of return, r, may be obtained using the
capital Euler equation, (20):
                                                                         η −γ α 
                                   1 + it = Et (1 + π t +1 )(1 + rt +1 )  t     .                             (40)
                                                                          ηt    
Using (40) yields another equivalent, although somewhat more complicated equilibrium money
demand relation in terms of expected inflation, the expected return on capital, and expected fiscal
variables:

             Mt    γ                             1                              1
                = β                                                      + 1       (1 − stg ) f (kt −1 ).   (41)
             Pt    α  Et (1 + π t +1 )(1 + rt +1 ) (1 − ((γ α ) ηt ) ) − 1  ηt − γ α

Effects of expected fiscal policies continue to appear separately through η.18 Brunner and
Meltzer (1972) specify a money demand function that includes the expected real return on real
assets, an argument closely related to η.
     There has also been extensive discussion about the appropriate scale variable in a money
demand relation. While it may be more informative because of relative stability, measurement,
or information problems to use one specification or another, there is no theoretical basis for the
choice. It is logically equivalent to express the equilibrium demand for real balances in terms of
private expenditures yields, as in (35), or in terms of consumption, as in

                                         Mt   γ  1 + it       ηt
                                            =β                         ct .                                   (42)
                                         Pt   α  it           ηt − γ α
     On a theoretical level there is no basis for distinguishing among these various representations
of equilibrium M P . They may have some descriptive value in terms of the nature of the
substitutions at work, but they are not structural relationships. Moreover, because expectations
of policy enter as arguments in all these relationships, strong assumptions are necessary for these
relationships to be stable over time.19




18
   Adding a long-term nominal interest rate, as Meltzer (1963) and Lucas (1988) do, still does not
eliminate the Tobin effect from the money demand function. Arbitrage between the one-period
bond and the long-term bond implies that the equilibrium long rate also depends only on
expected money creation.
19
   Lucas (1988) makes a similar observation about the money demand function he derives by
presenting agents with a portfolio problem.

                                                         19
      Friedman argues that if asset substitutions are very stable, the price level can be determined
without analyzing all the margins relevant in the general specification. This argument may be
without fault on a theoretical level. It may also be consistent with some broad empirical
regularities. But our analysis is another example of circumstances under which it is misguided to
treat an empirically stable relationship involving real money balances as identifying structural
elements of the economy.

4.3      “Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic” as a Fiscal Theory
      Sargent and Wallace (1981) develop an environment in which fiscal policy drives inflation.
In their example, limitations on tax receipts result in a fiscal responsibility for the monetary
authority. As Sargent (1986) emphasizes, this perspective places responsibility for controlling
inflation equally on monetary and fiscal authorities.
      The potential for unpleasant arithmetic arises in the present model when considering an open
market operation. Consider a bond sale with M t + Bt fixed. In addition, fix the sequence

{stg , sFg } and the current value of τ t . Because the open-market sale raises future government
indebtedness, it is clear that some policy must change in the future. With government-spending
shares fixed exogenously, either future taxes, τ F , or future money growth, ρ F , must rise to
accommodate the increase in debt service. Unpleasant monetarist arithmetic arises when
individuals expect higher money growth in the future, which lowers the expected return on
money (lower µ), decreases money demand, and raises the price level. This effect is
counteracted by the direct negative effect on the price level from the decrease in M t due to the
open-market sale. The ultimate effect on the price level can go either way, and depends on how
much future money growth must adjust following an open-market operation to be consistent with
equilibrium. The change in future money growth, in turn, depends on the bond-money ratio at
the time of the nominal asset exchange. To see this, note that the proportion by which ( B M )t
changes from a given open-market operation varies with the initial bond-money ratio. And the
larger the change in B M , the greater is the change in debt service and, therefore, money growth
and inflation in the future.




                                                  20
      Price level changes from open-market operations depend on the corresponding changes in
policy expectations, and on the state of government indebtedness.20 State-dependence of the
price effects of changes in money supply produced by normal central bank procedures arises
from fiscal considerations frequently overlooked in conventional monetary analyses.

4.4       The Canonical Fiscal Theory Exercise
      Like the quantity theory, the fiscal theory can be understood as eliminating all substitutions
between real and nominal assets, and emerges as a special case of the general analysis above.
What we term the “canonical” fiscal theory exercise stems from the policy assumptions in
Leeper (1991), Sims (1994), and Woodford (1995), among many others.21 This exercise restricts
asset substitution to occur only between current nominal assets.
      Assume all future policies, ( ρ F , τ F , sFg ) , and stg are fixed. These policies make ηt constant
and equilibrium real money balances again reduce to (1). They also peg the nominal interest
rate. Under these assumptions, consider the impact of a bond-financed tax cut, so τ t falls and Bt
rises. Can this be equilibrium? The government budget constraint (34) implies it cannot. If
current money growth is unchanged, then future government liabilities, summarized by ( B M )t ,
rise. Some future policy must change. There is only one equilibrium consistent with unchanged
future policies; that equilibrium arises when current money growth expands to prevent ( B M )t
from rising when nominal debt expands. Expression (33) yields the monetary adjustment
required when τ t is reduced, if future government liabilities are to remain unchanged. Note that
future money growth is held fixed. The current monetary expansion required to maintain
equilibrium is exactly enough so that the increase in future seigniorage (because the level of
money supplied is now higher) at the fixed rate of monetary growth just suffices to pay for the
increased debt service. To determine the effect on the equilibrium price level, note that fixing
( stg , ρ F , τ F , sFg ) pegs the nominal interest rate and determines a constant level of real money




20
   Sargent and Wallace (1981) also have state-dependent price effects from open-market
operations.
21
   Brunner and Meltzer (1972) present an early version of the fiscal theory in an environment
with a money demand function similar to ours.

                                                     21
balances. The new higher level of M t , together with (27), yield the new higher equilibrium
price level.22
      The fiscal theory contrasts with the bond-financed tax cut examined in section 3.3.2. That
bond-financed tax cut was pure fiscal policy in the sense that it was independent of the stock of
money. It also reduced nominal spending and the price level. An essential aspect of the fiscal
theory is that the current money stock must adjust to clear the money market.23 This makes a tax
cut expand nominal demand and raise the price level.
      Designating either the fiscal policy change or the response of monetary policy as the source
of the price level change is completely arbitrary. But as in unpleasant arithmetic, monetary
policy is constrained by the government’s fiscal obligations.

4.5      Taking the Government Budget Constraint Seriously
      Does the intertemporal government budget constraint determine the price level? Some
expositions of the fiscal theory may make it seem so. Cochrane (1999, 2001b), for example,
focuses attention on the government’s intertemporal budget constraint:
                       Bt
                          = Expected present value of future primary surpluses.                    (43)
                       Pt
Woodford (1995, p. 12) writes that “…it is often more useful to think of [the government’s
present value budget constraint, (43)] rather than [equilibrium real money balances, (29)] as the
equilibrium condition that determines the equilibrium price level at date t.” This leads to direct
inferences based on (43) such as, lower expected surpluses or higher current nominal debt raise
the price level. These seemingly appealing inferences are misleading for two reasons.
      First, as Cochrane (2001a) correctly observes, (43) assumes that government bonds sell at
par. If instead bonds sells at price qt , then the left-hand-side of the equation is qt Bt / Pt . Now

higher Bt may raise the price of bonds, leaving the real market value of debt, qt Bt / Pt , and the
price level unchanged. We agree with Cochrane that (43) is really a “valuation equation” for
nominal government debt.

22
  Again, with lump-sum taxes, a range of policies is consistent with the fiscal theory. Leeper
(1991) labels them “active fiscal” and “passive monetary” policies.




                                                  22
     Second, even if one incorporates Cochrane’s observation, higher Bt and unchanged qt Bt / Pt

and Pt cannot be an equilibrium. The real liabilities of the government have increased in the
future (future debt service increased). Some future policy must change. The ultimate effect on
the price level depends on which policy the private sector expects will adjust.


5.      Concluding Remarks
     This paper takes a portfolio choice perspective in which the price level depends generically
on all current and expected future monetary and fiscal policies. Generic dependence of the price
level comes from the presence of distorting taxes and an insistence that current and future
policies be jointly consistent with equilibrium.
     This perspective also delivers a money demand function that depends on the nominal interest
rate, a scale variable, and expected tax and government spending policies. Expected fiscal
policies cannot be replaced by a vector of real rates of return, expected inflation, a long-term
interest rate, or other typical arguments of money demand.
     The quantity and fiscal theories emerge under restrictions on policy behavior that eliminate
substitutions between real and nominal assets. When, in addition, neither money creation nor
debt expansion finances fiscal expenditures, a conventional quantity theory of money emerges.
When all future policies are fixed and the current money stock adjusts passively to satisfy money
demand at the pegged nominal interest rate, the fiscal theory of the price level is reproduced.
     Although the required policy restrictions are severe, they are revealing about conditions
under which either the quantity theory or the fiscal theory is likely to prevail. During periods
when direct tax revenues approximately cover government spending and monetary policy is
conducting routine open-market operations, the quantity theory should hold well. On the other
hand, periods when the central bank supports bond prices (as it might during wars), should find
that fiscal policy plays a larger role in determining the price level.
     These restrictions also point toward circumstances when the quantity theory and the fiscal
theory are likely to breakdown. Those circumstances include periods when expectations of fiscal


23
  Models with a single asset make the logical point that the fiscal theory can be independent of
money: Woodford’s (1998b, 1998c) “cashless limit”; Sims’s (1997) model with nominal bonds
and no money; Cochrane’s (2001b) model with zero overnight money demand.

                                                   23
policy change in important ways, triggering substitutions between real and nominal assets. The
Tobin effect should be important for large changes in macro policies, including tax reforms, big
new spending initiatives, or changes in the inflation target pursued by the central bank. These
circumstances call for a more general money demand specification than commonly appears in
macro models.
    An insistence that either the quantity theory or the fiscal theory governs the price level is
extremely limiting. Those theories are powerful in their simplicity but require strong
assumptions on policy behavior that are unlikely to hold generally. We have offered a broader
perspective that admits the two theories as special cases. The combination of portfolio choice
and mutually consistent current and expected macro policies applies generally, with only a small
sacrifice in simplicity.




                                                 24
                                    Appendix A: Solving The Model
   This appendix describes how to solve the model given the first-order conditions (13)-(20),
the aggregate resource constraint, (2), and the finance constraint, (6).
   Define the private savings rate as st = kt (ct + kt ) and the government’s share of output as

stg = gt f (kt −1 ) . The equilibrium savings rate is given by the solution to the Euler equation for
capital, which implies the difference equation:

                        1            1 − τ t +1  1                      γ 1 − τ t +1 
                             = σβ Et                        + E  1 − σβ   ⋅            .                          (A.1)
                                                                             α 1 − stg+1 
                                                                   t
                      1 − st         1 − st +1  1 − st +1  
                                            g
                                                                     
The solution to (A.1) is
                                                          1
                                                               = ηt ,                                                  (A.2)
                                                        1 − st
where
                                                                              i −1  1 − τ          
                     ∞
                                             γ 1 − τ t +i +1 
            ηt ≡ Et ∑ (σβ )i diη 1 − σβ        ⋅               ,       diη = ∏ 
                                                                                           t + j +1
                                                                                                    ,     d 0η = 1.   (A.3)
                    i =0                     α 1 − stg+i +1                                     
                                                                              j = 0  1 − st + j +1 
                                                                                            g



   The Euler equation for money is solved analogously. Letting ρt = M t M t −1 denote the
growth rate of the money supply, the Euler equation is

                                1     γ   1                  1        γ  γ 
                     (1 − Tt )       − =β    Et (1 − Tt +1 )          −  + .                                     (A.4)
                               1 − st α   ρ t               1 − st +1 α  α 
The solution is:
                                                       1     γ µ
                                            (1 − Tt )       − = t,                                                   (A.5)
                                                      1 − st α  ρ t
where
                                    γ    ∞                              i −1
                                                                                  1
                           µt ≡ β     Et ∑ β i d iµ ,         diµ ≡ ∏                      ,   d 0µ ≡ 1.               (A.6)
                                    α i =0                              j =0   ρt + j +1
   This delivers expressions (22) and (23) in the text.




                                                             25
                           Appendix B: The Government Budget Constraint
     This appendix uses the model’s equilibrium together with the government budget constraint
to obtain the equilibrium connections among current and future policies. Those connections are
used in section 3.2 where particular policy rules are studied.
     Using expression (27) for equilibrium real balances, the government budget constraint in
period t can be written as
                                      M − M t −1 + Bt − (1 + it −1 ) Bt −1       1−τt
                                  1+  t                                     ∆t =         ,   (B.1)
                                                   Mt                            1 − stg

where
                                                                µt
                                                      ∆t =            .                        (B.2)
                                                             ηt − γ α
Equivalently,
                                     ρt − 1 Bt (1 + it −1 ) Bt −1         stg − τ t
                                           +    −          ⋅         ∆t =           .        (B.3)
                                     ρt      Mt   ρt         M t −1       1 − stg

Given expectations of policy, as embodied in ∆t , (B.3) reports the tradeoffs that exist in
equilibrium among current policies, given the initial conditions summarized by
(1 + it −1 ) ( Bt −1 M t −1 ) .

     We now seek to characterize the tradeoffs that exist among future policies given the current
state of government indebtedness. Combine the equilibrium nominal interest obtained from the
arbitrage between money and bonds,

                                                             γ  1
                                                    µt = β     1 +  ,                        (B.4)
                                                             α  it 
with the recursive representation of µ,
                                                        γ    µ 
                                                 µt = β  + Et t +1  ,                        (B.5)
                                                        α    ρt +1 
to obtain
                                                                      γ α
                                               1 + it −1 = 1 +                   .             (B.6)
                                                                 Et −1 ( µt ρt )

Substitute (B.6) into (B.3) and push the dating forward one period to obtain



                                                                 26
                             1  Bt +1            γ α         Bt           stg+1 − τ t +1
                                          − +
                                              1                      − + =
                                                                      1   1                      .                 (B.7)
                            ρt +1  M t     E ( µ ρ )  M                ∆      (1 − s  g
                                                                                               )
                                               t   t +1 t +1     t        t +1        t +1


Under the assumption of perfect foresight, policy choices at t+1 are known at t, so the
equilibrium nominal interest rate adjusts to those choices. Then (B.7) may be rewritten as
                            Bt +1   1  (γ α ) ρ t +1  Bt   1              sg −τ
                                  −       1 +            −    + 1 ∆ t +1 = t +1 g t +1 .                       (B.8)
                            M t +1 ρ t +1     µt +1  M t ρt +1             1 − st +1

Denote future values by an “ F “ subscript, consistent with the assumptions about policy in (21),
and denote current values by a “ t “ subscript. If B M is constant in the future at the ratio
( B M ) F , so nominal debt grows at the same rate, ρ F , as money, then substituting for ∆ t +1 and
imposing future values,
                      B     1  ρF − β   B            1   sFg − τ F
              µt +1 ⋅     −     1 +              +  1 −    =          ⋅ (ηt +1 − γ α ),                     (B.9)
                      M  F ρ F      β   M t  ρ F   1 − sFg

which reduces to
                                   B     1 B       1   sFg − τ F
                           µt +1 ⋅     −     + 1 −    =          ⋅ (ηt +1 − γ α ).                        (B.10)
                                   M  F β  M t  ρ F   1 − s F
                                                                      g



Substitute for µt +1 and ηt +1 from (25) and (24) to obtain

                  γ
               β
                  α  1                  B        1 B                           sFg − τ F
                                        ρ
                                         F       −      ( F ) 
                                                                   + ρ − 1      =                             .   (B.11)
             1 − γ α  ρ F − β             M  F   β  M  t              (1 − s g
                                                                                         F ) − σβ  (1 − τ F )

Expression (B.11) can be rewritten in the form
    γ
  β                                                                                        −1
    α  1 (1 − s g ) − σβ (1 − τ )   = ( s g − τ )  ρ   B  − 1  B   + ( ρ − 1)  . (B.12)
                                F               F  F                           
1− γ α  ρF − β                                         M  F β  M t 
                  F                          F                                     F
                                                                                        
Given the state of government indebtedness at t, as summarized by ( B M )t , with which the

economy enters the stationary equilibrium in periods s > t , (B.12) characterizes the tradeoffs
among future policies in equilibrium.
      Using (B.2), together with (25), (24), and (B.12),




                                                               27
                                             γ
                                            β
                          ∆t                 α  (1 − sF ) − σβ (1 − τ F ) 
                                                       g
                             (1 − sFg ) =                                 
                          ρF              1−γ α         ρF − β            
                                                                                 (B.13)
                                                      sFg − τ F
                                      =                                ,
                                             B      1 B 
                                        ρ F    −    + ( ρ F − 1)
                                              M  F β  M t 
or
                                 sg −τ                    1
                          ∆ t =  F gF     ⋅                                .   (B.14)
                                 1 − sF      B  − 1  B   +  ρF −1 
                                                                    
                                                M  F β  M t   ρ F 
     (B.3) and (B.14) deliver expressions (33) and (34) in the text.




                                                    28
                                         References
Aiyagari, S. Rao and Mark Gertler (1985). “The Backing of Government Debt and Monetarism.”
   Journal of Monetary Economics 16, July, 19-44.
Auernheimer, Leonardo and Benjamin Contreras (1990). “Control of the Interest Rate with a
   Government Budget Constraint: Determinacy of the Price Level and Other Results.”
   February.
Auernheimer, Leonardo and Benjamin Contreras (1993). “A Nominal Interest Rate Rule in the
   Open Economy.” August.
Baumol, William J. (1952). “The Transactions Demand for Cash: An Inventory Theoretic
   Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 66, November, 545-556.
Begg, David K. H. and Badrul Haque (1984). “A Nominal Interest Rate Rule and Price Level
   Indeterminacy Reconsidered.” Greek Economic Review 6, 31-46.
Bergin, Paul R. (2000). “Fiscal Solvency and Price Level Determination in a Monetary Union.”
   Journal of Monetary Economics 45, February, 37-53.
Brunner, Karl and Allan H. Meltzer (1972). “Money, Debt, and Economic Activity.” Journal of
   Political Economy 80, September/October, 951-977.
Brunner, Karl and Allan H. Meltzer (1993). Money and the Economy: Issues in Monetary
   Analysis. (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press).
Bryant, John and Neil Wallace (1979). “The Inefficiency of Interest-Bearing National Debt.”
   Journal of Political Economy 87, April, 365-381.
Bryant, John and Neil Wallace (1984). “A Price Discrimination Analysis of Monetary Policy.”
   Review of Economic Studies 51, 279-288.
Buiter, Willem H. (1998). “The Young Person’s Guide to Neutrality, Price Level Indeterminacy,
   Interest Rate Pegs and Fiscal Theories of the Price Level.” NBER Working Paper No. 6396,
   February.
Buiter, Willem H. (2000). “The Fallacy of the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level.” London School
   of Economics, Center for Economic Performance Discussion Paper: 447, March.
Carlstrom, Charles T. and Timothy S. Fuerst (1999). “The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level.”
   Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Review 3.
Christiano, Lawrence J. and Terry J. Fitzgerald (2000). “Understanding the Fiscal Theory of the
   Price Level.” Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Economic Review 36, 2-34.
Cochrane, John H. (1999). “A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation.” In NBER Macroeconomics
   Annual, 1998, Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press):
   323-384.
Cochrane, John H. (2001a). “Long Term Debt and Optimal Policy in the Fiscal Theory of the
   Price Level.” Econometrica 69, January, 69-116.
Cochrane, John H. (2001b). “Money as Stock.” University of Chicago, July.
Cowen, Tyler and Randall Kroszner (1987). “The Development of the New Monetary
   Economics.” Journal of Political Economy 95, June, 567-590.
Daniel, Betty C. (2001a). “A Fiscal Theory of Currency Crises.” International Economic Review
   42, November, 969-988.
Daniel, Betty C. (2001b). “The Fiscal Theory of the Price Level in an Open Economy.” Journal
   of Monetary Economics 48, October, 293-308.
Dupor, William (1997). “Exchange Rates and the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level.” Journal of
   Monetary Economics.


                                              29
Fama, Eugene F. (1980). “Banking in the Theory of Finance.” Journal of Monetary Economics
    6, January, 39-57.
Friedman, Milton (1948). “A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic Stability.”
    American Economic Review 38, June, 245-264.
Friedman, Milton (1956). “The Quantity Theory of Money -- A Restatement.” In Studies in the
    Quantity Theory of Money, Milton Friedman, ed. (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).
Friedman, Milton (1959). “The Demand for Money -- Some Theoretical and Empirical Results.”
    Journal of Political Economy 67, June, 327-351.
Friedman, Milton (1976). “Comments on Tobin and Buiter.” In Monetarism, Jerome L. Stein, ed.
    (Amsterdam: North-Holland): 310-317.
Gordon, David B., Eric M. Leeper and Tao Zha (1998). “Trends in Velocity and Policy
    Expectations.” In Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 49, Bennett T.
    McCallum and Charles I. Plosser, eds. (Amsterdam: North-Holland): 265-304.
Gordon, Robert J., ed. (1974). Milton Friedman’s Monetary Framework. (Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press).
Hall, Robert E. (1982). “Monetary Trends in the United States and the United Kingdom: A
    Review from the Perspective of New Developments in Monetary Economics.” Journal of
    Economic Literature 20, December, 1552-1556.
Hall, Robert E. (1983). “Optimal Fiduciary Monetary Systems.” Journal of Monetary Economics
    12, July, 33-50.
Hicks, John R. (1935). “A Suggestion for Simplifying the Theory of Money.” Economica NS 2,
    February, 1-19.
Hicks, John R. (1939). Value and Capital. 2nd Edition, 1946. (Oxford: The Clarendon Press).
Kocherlakota, Narayana and Christopher Phelan (1999). “Explaining the Fiscal Theory of the
    Price Level.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 23, 14-23.
Laidler, David E. W. (1985). The Demand for Money. 3rd Edition. (New York: Harper & Row
    Publishers).
Leeper, Eric M. (1991). “Equilibria Under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary and Fiscal Policies.”
    Journal of Monetary Economics 27, February, 129-147.
Leeper, Eric M. (1993). “The Policy Tango: Toward a Holistic View of Monetary and Fiscal
    Effects.” Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Economic Review 78, 1-27.
Lucas, Jr., Robert E. (1988). “Money Demand in the United States: A Quantitative Review.” In
    Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 29, Karl Brunner and Bennett T.
    McCallum, eds. (Amsterdam: North-Holland): 137-168.
McCallum, Bennett T. (2001). “Indeterminacy, Bubbles, and the Fiscal Theory of Price Level
    Determination.” Journal of Monetary Economics 47, February, 19-30.
Meltzer, Allan H. (1963). “The Demand for Money: The Evidence from the Time Series.”
    Journal of Political Economy 71, June, 219-246.
Mikek, Peter (1999). Interactions Between Monetary and Fiscal Policy in an Open Economy.
    Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Economics, Indiana University, Bloomington, August.
Sargent, Thomas J. (1986). “The Ends of Four Big Inflations.” In Rational Expectations and
    Inflation, (New York: Harper & Row).
Sargent, Thomas J. and Neil Wallace (1981). “Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic.”
    Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 5, Fall, 1-17.




                                              30
Schmitt-Grohe, Stephanie and Martin Uribe (2000). “Price Level Determinacy and Monetary
    Policy Under a Balanced-Budget Requirement.” Journal of Monetary Economics 45,
    February, 211-246.
Sims, Christopher A. (1994). “A Simple Model for Study of the Determination of the Price Level
    and the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy.” Economic Theory 4, 381-399.
Sims, Christopher A. (1997). “Fiscal Foundations of Price Stability in Open Economies.”
    September.
Sims, Christopher A. (1999). “The Precarious Fiscal Foundations of EMU.” De Economist 147,
    December, 415-436.
Stein, Jerome L., ed. (1976). Monetarism. (Amsterdam: North-Holland).
Stockman, Alan C. (1981). “Anticipated Inflation and the Capital Stock in a Cash-in-Advance
    Economy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 8, November, 387-393.
Tobin, James (1956). “The Interest Elasticity of Transactions Demand for Cash.” Review of
    Economics and Statistics 38, August, 241-247.
Tobin, James (1961). “Money, Capital, and Other Stores of Value.” American Economic Review
    (Papers and Proceedings) 51, May, 26-37.
Tobin, James (1965). “Money and Economic Growth.” Econometrica 33, October, 671-684.
Tobin, James (1969). “A General Equilibrium Approach to Monetary Theory.” Journal of
    Money, Credit and Banking 14, May, 15-29.
Tobin, James (1980). Asset Accumulation and Economic Activity. (Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press).
Tobin, James and Stephen S. Golub (1998). Money, Credit, and Capital. (Boston: Irwin
    McGraw-Hill).
Wallace, Neil (1981). “A Modigliani-Miller Theorem for Open-Market Operations.” American
    Economic Review 71, June, 267-274.
Wallace, Neil (1983). “A Legal Restrictions Theory of the Demand for ‘Money’ and the Role of
    Monetary Policy.” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review 7, Winter, 1-7.
Wallace, Neil (1989). “Some Alternative Monetary Models and Their Implications fo the Role of
    Open-Market Policy.” In Modern Business Cycle Theory, Robert J. Barro, ed. (Cambridge,
    MA: Harvard University Press): 306-328.
Woodford, Michael (1994). “Monetary Policy and Price Level Determinacy in a Cash-in-
    Advance Economy.” Economic Theory 4, 345-380.
Woodford, Michael (1995). “Price-Level Determinacy Without Control of a Monetary
    Aggregate.” In Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy 43, Bennett T.
    McCallum and Charles I. Plosser, eds. (Amsterdam: North-Holland): 1-46.
Woodford, Michael (1998a). “Doing Without Money: Controlling Inflation in a Post-Monetary
    World.” Review of Economic Dynamics 1, January, 173-219.
Woodford, Michael (1998b). “Public Debt and the Price Level.” July.
Woodford, Michael (1999). “Comment on Cochrane’s ‘A Frictionless View of U.S. Inflation’.”
    In NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 1998, Ben S. Bernanke and Julio J. Rotemberg, eds.
    (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press): 390-419.
Woodford, Michael (2001). “Fiscal Requirements for Price Stability.” Journal of Money, Credit,
    and Banking 33, August, 669-728.




                                             31
