                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




  DEFINING BENCHMARK STATUS: AN APPLICATION USING EURO-AREA BONDS


                                             Peter G. Dunne
                                            Michael J. Moore
                                             Richard Portes


                                          Working Paper 9087
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9087


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2002




An earlier version was presented at the NYU Salomon Center conference on ‘The Euro: Valuation, Hedging
and Capital Market Issues’, 5 April 2002. We are grateful for comments from our discussant, Lasse Pedersen.
We have also received very helpful comments from Kjell Nyborg. We have also benefited from discussions
with Stephen Hall. This paper is part of a research network on ‘The Analysis of International Capital
Markets: Understanding Europe’s Role in the Global Economy’, funded by the European Commission under
the Research Training Network Programme (Contract No. HPRNOECTOE1999OE00067). We thank MTS
for providing the data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Peter G. Dunne, Michael J. Moore and Richard Portes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Defining Benchmark Status: An Application using Euro-Area Bonds
Peter G. Dunne, Michael J. Moore and Richard Portes
NBER Working Paper No. 9087
August 2002
JEL No. F36, G12, H63


                                             ABSTRACT

        The introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 created the conditions for an integrated
government bond market in the euro area. Using a unique data set from the electronic trading platform
Euro-MTS, we consider what is the ‘benchmark’ in this market. We develop and apply two definitions
of benchmark status that differ from the conventional view that the benchmark is the security with lowest
yield at a given maturity. Using Granger-causality and cointegration methods, we find a complex pattern
of benchmark status in euro-area government bonds.



Peter G. Dunne
The Queen's University of Belfast
School of Management & Economics
Belfast BT 7 1 NN
Northern Ireland
p.dunne@qub.ac.uk

Michael J. Moore
The Queen's University of Belfast
School of Management & Economics
Belfast BT 7 1 NN
Northern Ireland
m.moore@qub.ac.uk

Richard Portes
Department of Economics
London Business School
Sussex Place
Regent's Park
London NW1 4SA
and NBER
rportes@london.edu
      Defining Benchmark Status: An Application using Euro-Area Bonds

                                Peter G. Dunne (QUB)
                               Michael J. Moore (QUB)
                           Richard Portes (LBS and CEPR)




This version: June 2002




1. Introduction



The introduction of the euro on 1 January 1999 eliminated exchange risk between

the currencies of participating member states and thereby created the conditions for

a substantially more integrated public debt market in the euro area. The euro-area

member states agreed that from the outset, all new issuance should be in euro and

outstanding stocks of debt should be re-denominated into euro. As a result, the

euro-area debt market is comparable to the US treasuries market both in terms of

size and issuance volume. Unlike in the United States, however, public debt

management in the euro area is decentralised under the responsibility of 12 separate

national agencies.



This decentralised management of the euro-area public debt market is one reason

for the fragmentation of the market and the consequent cross-country yield spreads

that exist. But the evidence for this fragmentation has not been thoroughly explored,

and one of the contributions of this paper is to describe patterns in cross-country

yield differences. For example, we find yields are lowest for German bonds; that

there is an inner periphery of countries centred on France for which yields are

consistently higher; and that the outer periphery centred on Italy display the highest

yields.
                                           3
We begin our analysis by discussing why such yield spreads exist. Our main

contribution, however, comes in examining benchmark status. In this decentralised

euro government bond market, there is no official designation of benchmark

securities, nor any established market convention. Indeed, benchmark status is more

or less explicitly contested among countries.



We consider in detail, with empirical evidence, the meaning of the term “benchmark”

bond. The most common view associates the benchmark bond with the lowest yield.

If that were all that mattered for benchmark status, then the German market would

provide the benchmark at all maturities (see below). Analysts who take this view

accept that the appropriate criterion for benchmark status is that this is the security

against which others are priced, and they simply assume that the security with lowest

yield takes that role (e.g., Favero et al., 2000, pp. 25-26). A plausible alternative,

however, is to interpret benchmark to mean the most liquid security1, which is

therefore most capable of providing a reference point for the market. But the Italian

market, not the German, is easily the most liquid for short-dated bonds; and perhaps

the French is most liquid at medium maturities.



A different approach to defining benchmark status focuses directly on price discovery

and regards the price discovery process as a purely empirical matter. Our

perspective is that the benchmark bond is the instrument to which the prices of other

bonds react. On this view, benchmark status must emerge from estimation and

cannot simply be asserted or read off the data.




1
    See Blanco (2002).
                                            4
We approach this estimation using two different empirical techniques. First, we

conduct Granger causality tests between yields. If a bond yield at a particular

maturity Granger-causes the yields of bond in other countries at the same maturity,

this suggests that the Granger-causing bond is the benchmark at that maturity. The

second method of analysis exploits the fact that yields are non-stationary for every

country and at every maturity. If there were a unique benchmark at every maturity,

then we would expect that the yields of other bonds would be cointegrated with that

benchmark. Indeed, there should be multiple cointegrating vectors centering on the

benchmark bond.



In the next section, we discuss the structure and development of the market for euro-

area government bonds. Section 3 describes our unique data set. Section 4

presents the empirical analysis. Section 5 concludes.



2. The market for euro-area government bonds



The euro-area government bond market, at just under USD 3 trillion, is somewhat

larger than that of the United States (Table 1). The largest outstanding stocks are

those of Italy, Germany and France, in that order (Table 2). Turnover has risen

dramatically since 1998 – by a factor of three for France, for example (Figure 1).

International participation has also risen rapidly: in the three years from 1997 to

2000, the share of Belgian bonds held by non-residents rose from 29% to 53%

(Galati and Tsatsaronis, 2001); for France, it doubled to reach one-third, which was

also the average for the entire area (ibid. and Blanco, 2001).



McCauley (1999) draws some comparisons between the US municipal bond market

and the euro government bond markets, but there can be no question that the latter

                                           5
are much more highly integrated. There has been considerable convergence among

countries in the structure and maturities of government debt. The share of foreign-

currency debt has fallen to negligible levels, mainly because that formerly

denominated in other euro-area currencies is now denominated in euros. Privately

placed loans have disappeared, and there is almost complete reliance on marketable

instruments, especially fixed-rate medium- and long-term bonds. Each country is

striving to achieve large liquid benchmark-size issues: recent French and Italian

issues have exceeded € 20 bn, putting them at the level of US Treasury benchmark

issues. German issues are in the range of € 10-15 bn, and even the small countries

are now up to € 3-5 bn issue size. Secondary markets have become much deeper

and more efficient (see Favero, et al., 2000).



There are still significant impediments to market integration. The single currency has

not brought unification of tax structures, accounting rules, settlement systems,

market conventions, or issuing procedures. On the other hand, a single electronic

trading platform now handles about half of the total volume of secondary market

transactions (see below).



Nor has market integration gone so far as to give identical yields on different

countries’ securities of the same characteristics. Yields have indeed converged

(Figure 2). But there are still significant spreads, and since mid-2000, though not

before, all countries have had positive spreads relative to Germany at all maturities

(Figure 3). In our data (see below), for example, the Italian-German yield gap ranges

from 18 bp at the short end to 35 bp at the very long end (it rises monotonically with

maturity – see Tables 6, 8, 10, 12). Some observers conclude that this gives

Germany unambiguous status as the benchmark issuer, although there might have

been some multiplicity in the first eighteen months of EMU (Blanco, 2001, p. 14-15).

                                           6
What are the sources of these yield differentials? It is plausible that before EMU,

much of the spread simply reflected exchange-rate risk. Indeed, by comparing swap

rates, Blanco (2001, Sec. 4.1) has broken down the spreads over German yields at

the 10-year maturity between the foreign exchange factor and other factors, which he

identifies with credit (default) risk and microstructure characteristics, in particular

liquidity. He finds that for those countries with wide pre-1999 spreads, the main

component was exchange-rate risk (Table 3). Moreover, taking that factor out,

spreads have in fact widened significantly for all countries since the advent of the

euro. And insofar as bond ratings represent default risk, it seems clear that only part

of these wider spreads is attributable to this factor (Figure 4). But the interpretation of

the spreads as representing different credit risks and liquidity characteristics is

problematic. The spreads vary over time and along the yield curve. But credit ratings

vary very little indeed over time and typically do not discriminate across maturities;

and we are far from being able to identify time-varying and maturity-dependent

determinants of liquidity.



Whatever the causes of the spreads for other countries over German yields, the

mere fact that they are positive is enough for most observers to conclude that

Germany provides the benchmark all along the yield curve. We shall find that the

dynamic evidence on price discovery suggests a very different view.



3. Data


3.1    Primary data

We have a unique transactions-based data set from Euro-MTS for October and

November of 2000. Since the creation of the euro in 1999, Euro-MTS has emerged


                                             7
as the principal electronic trading platform for bonds denominated in euros. At the

end of 2000, it handled over 40% of total transactions volume (Galati and

Tsatsaronis, 2001). Government bonds traded on Euro-MTS must have an issue size

of at least € 5 bn. For a discussion of MTS, see Scalia and Vacca (1999).



The full data set consists of all actual transactions. For each transaction, we have a

time stamp, the volume traded, the price at which the trade was conducted and an

indicator showing whether the trade is initiated by the buyer or seller. The countries

represented are Germany, Finland, Portugal, Spain, Austria, Italy, France, the

Netherlands and Belgium: all euro-area countries except Ireland. Greece joined the

euro-area after the time-period covered by the sample, while the twelfth euro-area

country, Luxembourg, has negligible government debt.



The sample includes all Euro-MTS and country-specific MTS bonds traded on the

electronic platforms. In addition to treasury paper, the data set also includes French

and German mortgage-backed bonds, a European Investment Bank bond, and a

euro-denominated US agency bond (“Freddie-Mac”).


3.2    Derived data

In the analysis below we use the most frequently traded bond on the EuroMTS

platform for each of three countries (Italy, France and Germany) and for each of four

maturities. These are short, medium, long and very long. On the EuroMTS platform,

all bonds are grouped into one of these four categories, as follows:




                                           8
Maturity Baskets on Euro-MTS

Short                  1.25-3.5 years

Medium                 3.5-6.5 years

Long                   6.5-13.5 years

Very long              >13.5 years



The coverage of our data set for these three countries is set out in Table 4. It is

evident that even at the very long maturity, there is much greater transactions volume

for Italy on Euro-MTS than for either of the other countries (reflecting the origins of

MTS in the Italian market). But there is no particular problem of

‘unrepresentativeness’ in our data for the other two countries. For our time-series

analysis, we track only a single security for each country at each maturity, and there

are enough transactions in the most highly traded bonds to give a fully representative

series.



In each case the data are observed twice daily, at the end of each morning and

afternoon. We take the transaction nearest in time to the latest transaction of the

least liquid of the three bonds under scrutiny at that maturity. Our sample covers

October and November of the year 2000. This was a consistently active period for

the MTS electronic trading platform. Thus we have 44 trading days and 88

observations for each bond. Where liquidity was low (e.g., in the case of the French

bond at the long end and the German at the short end), some interpolation of missing

values was conducted



Interpolation was done in relatively few cases (never for the Italian) and almost

always involved the use of the most similar bonds from the same country (i.e. similar

                                            9
in terms of maturity, coupon, liquidity, and the yield gap against the other two

countries). In the case of the long bonds, interpolation of the French benchmark was

sometimes done using the most similar Dutch bond.In the instances where

interpolation was not possible, the previously observed yield was continued

forward2. This was done mostly in the cases of the German short and the French

Very-Long bonds. It is worth pointing out that the periods of greatest illiquidity were

also the periods of least variability, so that our practice of assuming zero change is

not likely to have had significant effects on our regression results presented below.



The timing of observations is important, especially for the causality testing that we

carry out in the analysis below. The most obvious problem that could arise from data

of varying liquidity is that the most liquid variable will tend to be most up-to-date and

appear to Granger-cause the other variables. This is most likely if data for each

variable are selected according to a fixed time at the end-point of each trading

period. In our case, the transactions for each variable were chosen according to their

closeness in time to (either before or after) the last available transaction in each

period in the least-liquid bond. This arrangement has a number of positive features:

(i) our observations are likely to be close together, since we are trying to match more

plentiful observations with those that are least plentiful rather than the other way

around; and (ii) observations for the more liquid bonds are just as likely to precede as

to follow the available illiquid bond observations, so that we would not expect a

liquidity bias in the ordering.



Using ‘continuations’ is likely to have the following effect on the conclusions of

section 4.2. The ‘Modified Davidson Method’, which we introduce there, is more

likely to select a less variable yield as a benchmark. This discriminates against the


2
    We refer to these data points as ‘continuations’.
                                                        10
most liquid bonds on Euro-MTS (Italy) in favour of the less liquid (France and

Germany). From the Table below, this suggests that continuations should bias our

conclusions against Italy at the short-end, against France at the medium and in

favour of France at the Very Long end. We shall see below that none of these

outcomes actually materialise.


                                      Continuations
  German Short                   6               French Short                    3
 German Medium                   2              French Medium                    0
  German Long                    1               French Long                     3
German Very Long                 5            French Very Long                   9



3.3 Data Summary



To fix ideas, we first provide a set of descriptive statistics for all of the data used in

the analysis. For each of the four maturities, Tables 5, 7, 9, 11 show the mean,

standard deviation, skewness, excess kurtosis and range for each of the three

countries. The data are graphically displayed in Figures 5, 7, 9, 11. The units of

measurement are percentage yields. The even-numbered Tables provide the same

descriptive statistics for the three possible yield gaps. These yield gaps are

displayed in the even-numbered figures. The unit of measurement for the gaps is

basis points. The general pattern of the data is easy to describe. The Italian yield is

always highest, the German the lowest, with the French yield in the intermediate

position. The yield gap tables and figures show that the French yield is typically

closer to the German than to the Italian yield. The only exception to this is displayed

in Figure 10: for four days in early October 2000, the French-German yield gap was

slightly higher than the Italian-German yield differential in the long-dated category.




                                             11
Figures 13-16 graph the yields at each of the four maturities for most of the countries

in our data set. These graphs suggest why we focus on Germany, France and Italy.

Not only are they the three top countries in number of transactions at all maturities

(Table 4), we see also that France and Italy appear to be the centre countries of two

groups that emerge from the data, whereas Germany consistently carries the lowest

yield.3



The final set of descriptive statistics anticipates the analysis. For each maturity, each

bond and yield gap is subjected to a stationarity test. We use the Dickey-Fuller test

or the Augmented Dickey-Fuller test where necessary. The results are reported in

Tables 13 to 16 with one table devoted to each maturity. The columns in each table

are as follows: the first shows the series under study; the second column shows

whether the Dickey-Fuller or Augmented Dickey-Fuller test was used, indicating the

number of lags required to obtain white noise. The column headed “t-value” shows

the value of the statistic, and the following column provides the 95% critical value for

the test. As usual, large t-values provide evidence for stationarity and vice-versa. For

ease of comparison, the outcome of the testing procedure is listed in the last column.

The intermediate columns simply provide evidence of test quality control: they show

Ljung-Box test statistics and their p-values for first, second, third and sixth order

autocorrelation.



The outcome of the tests is simple to summarise. In every case, the yield is

unambiguously non-stationary. The results for the yield gaps, however, are not so

clear. This is reflected in the fact that all of the tests on the yield gaps were carried

out first with just a constant in the specification and then repeated with both a

3
  Inspection of Figures 14 and 15 (the intermediate maturities) may suggest four rather than
three groupings (with Spain, Austria and Finland somewhat below Italy and Portugal). But the


                                             12
constant and a trend. For example, at the short end (Table 13), it is unclear whether

the Italian-German or the Italian-French yield gaps are stationary, whereas the

French-German gap appears to be stationary. The implications of this will be

developed in the next section.




4. Results and analysis



4.1 Granger causality



We begin by examining the flow of causality among the yields at each maturity. We

bypass the issues raised by changes in the term structure by carrying this out for

each maturity separately. We construct a three-variable vector autoregression at

each maturity. Tables 17-20 report tests for lag length. This is done using Sims

likelihood ratio tests, the Akaike Information criterion and Schwarz’s Bayesian

criterion. The tests are carried out on univariate autoregressions and the VAR

system.4 On the basis of the results reported in the Tables, the following lag lengths

were selected for the vector autoregressions at each maturity.



VAR lag length at each maturity

Short                                             1

Medium                                            1

Long                                              3

Very long                                         1




central positions of Germany, France and Italy in their respective places are sufficiently
distinct to warrant our focus on them.
4
  We include dummy variables for the source of the order (trade type): a trade is either seller-
or buyer-initiated, and we control for this.
                                               13
Tables 21-24 report the results of the Granger Causality Tests. At the short end

(Table 21), no country emerges as benchmark. Non-causality is rejected in every

case: lagged yields of each country affect the yields of one or both of the other

countries. For the medium maturity, the German bond can be ruled out as a possible

benchmark, but both the Italian and French yields have predictive power for other

countries’ yields. At the long end, the Italian bonds emerge as a benchmark and

have predictive power for both French and German yields. Finally, for the very long

maturity, as with the medium maturity, only the German bond can be ruled out as

benchmark.



These results strongly reject the hypothesis that innovations in German yields

Granger-cause innovations in French and Italian yields, at all maturities. That

interpretation of Germany as the benchmark issuer is not consistent with our data.



4.2 Cointegration



The Granger-causality analysis is simple but perhaps rather crude. It ignores long-

run relationships. Such a structure to the price discovery process should appear from

an analysis of cointegration of the yield series. If a particular country provides the

benchmark at a given maturity, then there should be two cointegrating vectors in the

three-variable system of country yields. For example, if Germany were the

benchmark, then the cointegrating vectors could be5



Italian yield = gGerman yield + nuisance parameters

French yield = dGerman yield + nuisance parameters




                                           14
.

The difficulty with the above analysis emerges from the identification problem. Even

if we are satisfied that cointegration vectors along the lines of the above exist, we still

cannot draw any immediate conclusion about the structure of the relationships

between yields such as the identity of the benchmark. The reason for this is that any

linear combination of multiple cointegrating vectors is itself a cointegrating vector. In

particular,



Italian yield = (g/d)French yield + nuisance parameters



provides us with a perfectly valid cointegrating vector derived from the above. On the

face of it, any one of the yields can provide the benchmark and we have made no

progress.



A recent development in non-stationary econometrics due to Davidson (1998) and

developed by Barassi, Caporale and Hall (2000) [BCH] enables us to explore the

matter further. This involves testing for irreducibility of cointegrating relations and

ranking according to the criterion of minimum variance. The interesting feature of this

method is that it allows us to learn about the structural relationship that links

cointegrated series from the data alone, without imposing any arbitrary identifying

conditions. In this case, the ‘structural’ relationship which we are exploring is the

identity of the benchmark in a set of bond yields.




5
 A strong restriction is that the constant in both cointegrating vectors be unity. This
corresponds to two stationary yield gaps. We already know from the discussion in
Section 3 that this is problematic.

                                            15
There is a risk of confusion in the use of the word structure, because of the many

different uses to which it has been put by different authors. Davidson uses the term

to mean parameters or relations that have a direct economic interpretation and may

therefore satisfy restrictions based on economic theory. It need not mean a

relationship that is regime-invariant. The possibility that “incredible assumptions”

(Sims, 1980) need not always be the price of obtaining structural estimates turns out

to be a distinctive feature of models with stochastic trends.



We begin with the concept of an irreducible cointegrating vector.



Definition 1 (Davidson): A set of I(1) variables is called irreducibly cointegrated (IC)

if they are cointegrated, but dropping any of the variables leaves a set that is not

cointegrated.



IC vectors can be divided into two classes: structural and solved. A structural IC

vector is one that has a direct economic interpretation.



Theorem (Davidson). If an IC relation contains a variable which appears in no other

IC relation, it is structural.



The less interesting solved vectors are defined as follows:



Definition 2 (Davidson). A solved vector is a linear combination of structural

vectors from which one or more common variables are eliminated by choice of

offsetting weights such that the included variables are not a superset of any of the

component relations.




                                           16
A solved vector is an IC vector which is a linear combination of structural IC vectors.

Once an IC relation is found, interest focuses on the problem of distinguishing

between structural and solved forms. Of course, the theoretical model might answer

this question for us, but this would then simply be using the theory to identify the

model, so in the absence of overidentifying restrictions we could learn nothing about

the validity of the theory itself. The compelling issue is whether we can identify the

structure from the data directly.



BCH introduce an extension of Davidson's framework which can be illustrated

concretely with our problem as follows. In our system made up of three I(1)

variables, the French, German and Italian bond yields, consider the case where the

pairs (German yields, French yields) and (German yields, Italian yields) are both

cointegrated. It follows necessarily that the pair (French yields, Italian yields) is also

cointegrated. The cointegrating rank of these three variables is 2, and one of these

three IC relations necessarily is solved from the other two. The problem is that we

cannot know which, without a prior theory. Here is where the BCH extension of

Davidson's methodology shows its effectiveness. In order to detect which of the

cointegrating relations is the solved one and which of the vectors are irreducible and

structural, we calculate the descriptive statistics of each cointegrating relation and

rank these vectors on the basis of the magnitude of their variance. The reason for

this is suggested by standard statistical theory and can be illustrated as follows: Let

x, y and z be our cointegrated series and let

x - βy = e1

y - gz = e2

x - dz = e3




                                            17
be the three irreducible cointegrating relations. Now assume that the structural

relationships are the first two, (x-βy and y-gz), with e1 and e2 being the structural

error terms from the first two which are therefore assumed to be distributed

independently N(0, s i2 ), i=1,2. The third equation is just solved from the first two.

This implies that e3 is a function of e1 and e2, and therefore we expect it to be

distributed N(0, s 12 + s 22 ). Basically, cointegrating relations that display lower

variance should be the structural ones, the remaining others being just solved

cointegrating relations.



In the light of the above, our empirical strategy is as follows. First, we use the

Johansen procedure to identify the number of cointegrating vectors at each maturity

in our three-variable system. Secondly, we use Phillips-Hansen fully modified

estimation to estimate the irreducible cointegrating vectors as recommended by

Davidson. Finally we rank the irreducible cointegrating vectors using the variance

ranking criterion of BCH. From this we identify the structural vectors and therefore

the benchmark. The latter must be the common yield in the two structural irreducible

cointegrating vectors.



The results of the Johansen Procedure and Phillips estimation are shown for each

maturity in Tables 25-28.



(i)     Johansen Procedure: In Tables 25 , 27 and 28, it is clear that that there are

        two cointegrating vectors among the three yields at the short, long and very

        long maturities. Tables 26 provides more ambiguous evidence. For the

        medium maturity, there is at least one cointegrating vector using the trace and




                                             18
        l max tests, but only the latter suggests that there are two cointegrating

        vectors.



(ii)    Phillips-Hansen Estimation:

        Short: All three pairs are irreducibly cointegrated using standard ADF tests.

        Interestingly, the coefficients are statistically significantly less than unity in

        each case.

        Medium: Two of the pairs are irreducibly cointegrated using standard ADF

        tests. This supports the evidence provided by the l max but not the trace

        test above. The remaining pair must be cointegrated as a consequence. Two

        out of the three cointegrating vectors displayed slopes that were significantly

        less than unity. The third was less than unity but not significantly so.

        Long: Two of the pairs are irreducibly cointegrated using standard ADF tests.

        From both the Johansen results and arithmetic of multiple cointegration, the

        third pair must also be cointegrated. All three pairs have slopes that are

        insignificantly different from unity.

        Very Long: All three pairs are irreducibly cointegrated using standard ADF

        tests. For two out of three pairs, the coefficients are statistically significantly

        less than unity.



(iii)   BCH minimum variance ranking:

        Short: The ranking of the variances of the residuals of the three cointegrating

        vectors from smallest to largest is:

        Italian-German

        Italian-French

        French-German



                                                19
       From this we conclude that that the Italian-German and Italian-French pairs

       are structural and that the Italian yield provides the benchmark at the short

       end.

       Medium: The ranking of the variances of the residuals of the three

       cointegrating vectors from smallest to largest is:

       French-German

       French-Italian

       Italian-German

       On this basis, the French yield is the benchmark at the medium maturity.

       Long and Very Long: For both these maturities, the ranking of the variances

       of the residuals of the three cointegrating vectors from smallest to largest is:

       Italian-German

       German-French

       Italian-French

       Thus the German market provides the benchmarks at both the long and very

       long maturities.




The results here contrast sharply with those based on Granger-causality, as shown in

this summary table (using the standard symbols D, F, I for Germany, France, Italy):




                                          20
                              Benchmark issuers



Maturity                      Granger-causality tests       Cointegration analysis



Short                         None                          Italy

Medium                        France or Italy               France

Long                          Italy                         Germany

Very long                     France or Italy               Germany




The simplest explanation for this unexpectedly contradictory picture is that the

Granger-causality tests are representing the daily dynamics, while the cointegration

analysis reveals the long-run relationships. The latter supports the conventional view

of Germany as the benchmark issuer at the long end of the market. That Italy

provides the benchmark at the short end is perhaps not surprising, in view of the

relative volume of Italian issues and the historical absence of German issues at this

maturity. It could be argued that the French domination at the medium maturity is

due to some combination of liquidity dominance over German bonds and "low yield"

dominance over the Italian bonds. What is clear is that some role for liquidity in

determining benchmark status emerges from the cointegration analysis.



4.3 An interpretation of the cointegration/ECM results from arbitrage pricing theory



Arbitrage Pricing Theory (in this application, better described as an affine theory of

bond pricing) argues that the return on an asset is composed of three elements: an

expected return, the systematic risk and the idiosyncratic risk. The systematic risk

                                           21
arises from the sensitivity of the asset return to a parsimonious number of factors.

These factors are arbitrarily determined, and they may indeed be derived

atheoretically from (for example) factor analysis.



This offers a new interpretation of the benchmark problem.       Consider the canonical

case. If Germany were to provide the benchmark, we expect that the yield gap

between that country and each of France and Italy would be stationary, mindful of the

fact that all yields are non-stationary. Specifically, the cointegrating vectors take the

form:

Italian yield = a0 + a1German yield + stationary error     (a1 = 1)

French yield = b0 + b1German yield + stationary error        (b1 = 1)



From the Granger Representation Theorem, the system has the following error

correction representation:



DItalian yield = l0 + l1(German/Italian yield gap) + l2(German/French yield gap)

            + nuisance lags + noise

There are similar equations describing the evolution of the other yields.



The ECM equation above can be interpreted as an affine equation as follows:

Construct a portfolio consisting of a long position in German bonds and an equal

short position in Italian bonds. Call this the first canonical benchmark portfolio. Its

return equals the German/Italian yield gap by construction. The parameter l1 can be

understood as the loading sensitivity to that portfolio. A similar interpretation also

applies to l2 with respect to a portfolio that is long in German bonds with an equal

short position in French bonds. Call this the second canonical benchmark portfolio.


                                            22
In fact, however, we find that the two canonical portfolios constructed above are not

always the benchmark portfolios. Instead, we identify the benchmark portfolios

through estimation using the Phillips-Hansen FMOLS procedure. For example, at the

short maturity, the benchmark portfolios consist of

(i)     a portfolio which is long in the Italian bond and (almost in equal measure)

        short in the French bond

(ii)    a portfolio which is long in the Italian bond and has an almost equal short

        position in the German bond



The specific factors change depending on the structural relations chosen on the

basis of the cointegration analysis. As shown in Table 29, at the short maturity the

two factors are only significant for adjustment of yields in two cases. This is

consistent with the view that the benchmark is solely the Italian bond. The Italian

yield changes are not related to either factor, so that the Italian yield is weakly

exogenous - a likely property of a benchmark. Remarkably, the French and German

yield changes significantly relate only to the factor involving their own long-run yield

relation with the Italian benchmark.



At the other maturities things are not as straightforward. Yield changes appear to

react significantly to perturbations in both factors. While this may simply reflect

complexity in the adjustment of the entire system of yields to disequilibria, it also

suggests that benchmark status could be shared by more than one country. This is

particularly relevant to the medium maturity, where the German yield changes relate

significantly only to the factor that does not involve the German yield. It could

therefore be concluded that the benchmark is some combination of the Italian and

French bonds.



                                            23
The concept of a benchmark security as a basket of bonds is not entirely new. Galati

and Tsatsaronis (2001) raise the idea in the context of euro-area government bonds,

only to dismiss it immediately: ‘Market participants, however, are not yet ready to

accept a benchmark yield curve made up of more than one issuer, being wary of the

problems posed by small but persistent technical differences between the issues that

complicate hedging and arbitrage across the maturity spectrum (p. 10).’ But market

participants themselves are not always fully aware of the structure of their behaviour.

Moreover, this market is changing rapidly, so that both perceptions and analysis may

not yet have assimilated fully the new conditions in the market after early 2000 (cf.

our discussion in Section 2).



The view that there must be a single benchmark issuer, at least at a given maturity, is

equivalent in our analysis to stipulating that the ‘benchmark portfolios’ enter into the

yield change equations in a particularly simple form. In general, this is not what the

data are telling us. The benchmark portfolios are typically simple, but not that simple.



5. Conclusion

We focus on the meaning of ‘benchmark’ bond in the context of the market for euro-

area government securities. This market has developed rapidly since the beginning

of monetary union, but it is still not fully integrated, and there is no consensus6

regarding which securities have benchmark status. That is partly because this status

has not been carefully defined. We investigate two possible criteria, using Granger-

causality and cointegration frameworks. We find rather different results with the two

methods, reflecting their different temporal focus. But with neither do we find the

unambiguous benchmark status for German securities that would come from a

simple focus on the securities with lowest yield at a given maturity. Our interpretation



                                           24
of the cointegration results in an arbitrage pricing theory framework leads naturally to

looking for benchmark portfolios rather than a single benchmark security. This may

be particularly appropriate in this newly and only partially integrated market.



Clearly more research is needed, and the Euro-MTS data base that we use is a rich

source. Meanwhile, however, we believe it is clear from the research reported here

that at least in the euro area, no simple definition of benchmark status will do.

Perhaps the markets are coming to understand this too:

‘German government bonds, long the unrivalled royalty of the European debt market,
now find pretenders to the throne. The German government is careful…to protect the
benchmark status of its bonds…But all the good intentions…are nothing in the face
of the inexorable march of European monetary union. The euro-driven integration of
European financial markets is creating vigorous competition to Germany’s long reign
as king of the region’s bond markets. “Benchmark status is more contended now
than it ever was,” said Adolf Rosenstock, European economist in Frankfurt at
Nomura Research…’ (International Herald Tribune, 21 March 2002)




6
 Remolona (2002) argues that the swaps market now provides the benchmark yield curve for euro
denominated bonds.
                                               25
References

Barassi, M. R., G. M. Caporale, and S. G. Hall, 2000, 'Interest Rate Linkages:
Identifying Structural Relations', Discussion Paper no. 2000.02, Centre for
International Macroeconomics, University of Oxford.

Barassi, M. R., G. M. Caporale, and S. G. Hall, 2000, 'Irreducibility and Structural
Cointegrating Relations: An Application to the G-7 Long Term Interest Rates',
Working Paper ICMS4, Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine.

Blanco, R., 2001, ‘The euro-area government securities markets: recent
developments and implications for market functioning’, Working Paper no. 0120,
Servicio de Estudios, Banco de Espana.

Blanco, R., 2002, ‘The euro-area government securities markets: recent
developments and implications for market functioning’, mimeo, Launching Workshop
of the ECB-CFS Research Network on Capital Markets and Financial Integration in
Europe, European Central Bank.

Davidson, J., 1998, 'Structural relations, cointegration and identification: some simple
results and their application', Journal of Econometrics 87,87-113.

Favero, C., A. Missale, and G. Piga, 2000, ‘EMU and public debt management: one
money, one debt?’, CEPR Policy Paper No. 3.

Galati, G., and K. Tsatsaronis, 2001, ‘The impact of the euro on Europe’s financial
markets’, Working Paper No. 100, Bank for International Settlements.

McCauley, R., 1999, "The Euro and the Liquidity of European Fixed Income
Markets", in Part 2.2. of "Market Liquidity: Research Findings and Selected Policy
Implications", Committee on the Global Financial System, Bank for International
Settlements, Publications No. 11 (May 1999).

Remolona E. M., 2002, "Micro and Macro structures in fixed income markets: The
issues at stake in Europe", mimeo, Launching Workshop of the ECB-CFS Research
Network on Capital Markets and Financial Integration in Europe, European Central
Bank.

Scalia, A., and V. Vacca 1999, ‘Does market transparency matter? a case study’,
Discussion Paper 359, Banca d’Italia.

Sims, C., 1980. Macroeconomics and Reality. Econometrica 48 (1), 1-48.




                                          26
                                      Table 1




Source: Galati and Tsatsaronis (2001, p. 7)

                                      Table 2




Source: Blanco (2001, p. 23)




                                         27
                                     Figure 1




Source: Galati and Tsatsaronis (2001, p. 8)


                                     Figure 2




Source: Galati and Tsatsaronis (2001, p. 7)




                                         28
                                     Figure 3




Source: Galati and Tsatsaronis (2001, p. 9)




                                         29
                               Table3




Source: Blanco (2001, p. 28)



                               Figure 4




Source: Blanco (2001, p. 31)




                                 30
                                                 Table 4




                           OVERVIEW OF THE COVERAGE OF THE DATA SET.
                                Number of              Total Number           Number of Transactions
Country                           Bonds       %        of Tranactions   %      in the most liquid bond    %
                                                 Short Maturity.
German                               7       16.7            808        3.7              280             11.9
French                               4        9.5            938        4.3              517             22.0
Italian                             31       73.8          20151       92.0             1551             66.1
                                               Medium Maturity.
German                              23       36.5           1358        4.9              407              6.0
French                              11       17.5           2048        7.5              606              9.0
Italian                             29       46.0          24046       87.6             5744             85.0
                                                 Long Maturity.
German                              20       43.5           2221        6.3              722              3.0
French                              15       32.6           2426        6.8             1081              4.5
Italian                             11       23.9          30873       86.9            22059             92.4
                                              Very-Long Maturity.
German                               4       28.6           1127       13.5              679             12.2
French                               5       35.7            451        5.4              261              4.7
Italian                              5       35.7           6767       81.1             4641             83.2
                                                  All Maturities.
Totals for Short Maturity.          42       25.5          21897       23.5             2348               6.1
Totals for Medium Maturity          63       38.2          27452       29.5             6757              17.5
Totals for Long Maturity            46       27.9          35520       38.1            23862              61.9
Totals for Very-Long Maturity       14        8.5           8345        9.0             5581              14.5
Totals for All Maturities.         165      100.0          93214      100.0            38548             100.0




                                                     31
                                                     Figures 5 and 6

                                          Short Maturity Yields - Twice Daily Oct & Nov 2000

                                  5.4
                                                                                                     Italian Short
                                                                                                     French Short
                                                                                                     German Short
                                  5.3
Annualised % Yield to Maturity.




                                  5.2




                                  5.1




                                   5




                                  4.9




                                  4.8




                                        Short Maturity Yield Gaps - Twice Daily Oct & Nov 2000.

                                  25
                                                                                               Italian-German

                                                                                               Italian-French

                                                                                               French-German
                                  20




                                  15
Basis Points.




                                  10




                                   5




                                   0




                                                               32
                                                      Figures 7 and 8



                                          Medium Maturity Yields - Twice Daily Oct & Nov 2000.

                                  5.4
                                                                                                   Italian Medium
                                                                                                   French Medium
                                                                                                   German Medium
                                  5.3
Annualised % Yield to Maturity.




                                  5.2




                                  5.1




                                   5




                                  4.9




                                  4.8




                                        Medium Maturity Yield Gaps - Twice Daily Oct & Nov 2000.

                                  35
                                                                                                    Italian-German
                                                                                                    Italian-French
                                                                                                    French-German
                                  30




                                  25




                                  20
Basis Points.




                                  15




                                  10




                                   5




                                   0




                                                               33
                                                    Figures 9 and 10


                                          Long Maturity Yields - Twice Daily Oct & Nov 2000.

                                  5.6
                                                                                                    Italian Long
                                                                                                    French Long
                                                                                                    German Long
                                  5.5
Annualised % Yield to Maturity.




                                  5.4




                                  5.3




                                  5.2




                                  5.1




                                   5




                                        Long Maturity Yield Gaps - Twice Daily Oct & Nov 2000.

                                  35




                                  30




                                  25




                                  20
Basis Points.




                                  15




                                  10




                                   5
                                                                                                 Italian-German
                                                                                                 Italian-French
                                                                                                 French-German
                                   0




                                                              34
                                                     Figures 11 and 12


                                          Very-Long Maturity Yields - Twice Daily Oct & Nov 2000.

                                  6.1
                                                                                              Italian Very-Long
                                                                                              French Very-Long
                                                                                              German Very-Long
                                   6




                                  5.9
Annualised % Yield to Maturity.




                                  5.8




                                  5.7




                                  5.6




                                  5.5




                                  5.4




                                        Very-Long Maturity Yield Gaps - Twice Daily Oct & Nov 2000.

                                  40



                                  35



                                  30



                                  25
Basis Points.




                                  20



                                  15



                                  10



                                   5
                                                                                                      Italian-German
                                                                                                      Italian-French
                                                                                                      French-German
                                   0




                                                                 35
                                                                               Figures 13 and 14


                                                                   Euro-Area Short Maturity Yields - Daily Oct & Nov 2000.

                                   5.3


                                  5.25                                                                               Italian


                                   5.2                                                                   Portuguese
                                                                                                 Spanish
Annualised % Yield to Maturity.




                                  5.15
                                                                                                        Dutch

                                   5.1
                                                                                                     French

                                  5.05

                                                                                                     German
                                    5


                                  4.95


                                   4.9


                                  4.85


                                   4.8
                                         1

                                             3

                                                 5

                                                     7

                                                         9

                                                             11

                                                                    13

                                                                         15

                                                                              17

                                                                                   19

                                                                                        21

                                                                                                23

                                                                                                         25

                                                                                                                27

                                                                                                                       29

                                                                                                                               31

                                                                                                                                    33

                                                                                                                                         35

                                                                                                                                              37

                                                                                                                                                   39

                                                                                                                                                        41

                                                                                                                                                             43
                                                                  Euro-Area Medium Maturity Yields - Daily Oct & Nov 2000.

                                  5.5




                                  5.4                                                                                Belgian
                                                                                                                     Italian
Annualised % Yield to Maturity.




                                                                                                                Portuguese
                                  5.3

                                                                                               Spanish

                                                                                             Austrian
                                  5.2
                                                                                                 Dutch


                                                                                                 French
                                  5.1

                                                                                                 German


                                   5




                                  4.9
                                         1

                                             3

                                                 5

                                                     7

                                                         9

                                                             11

                                                                    13

                                                                         15

                                                                              17

                                                                                   19

                                                                                        21

                                                                                                23

                                                                                                        25

                                                                                                                27

                                                                                                                      29

                                                                                                                               31

                                                                                                                                    33

                                                                                                                                         35

                                                                                                                                              37

                                                                                                                                                   39

                                                                                                                                                        41

                                                                                                                                                             43




                                                                                               36
                                                                               Figures 15 and 16


                                                                    Euro-Area Long Maturity Yields - Daily Oct & Nov 2000.

                                  5.7




                                  5.6


                                                                                                                                     Portuguese
                                  5.5                                                                                                 Belgian
Annualised % Yield to Maturity.




                                                                                                                                           Italian
                                                                                                                                     Spanish

                                  5.4                                                                                                Austrian
                                                                                                                                     Finnish

                                                                                                                                      Dutch
                                  5.3
                                                                                                                                     French


                                  5.2

                                                                                                                                   German

                                  5.1




                                   5
                                        1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44




                                                                 Euro-Area Very-Long Maturity Yields - Daily Oct & Nov 2000.

                                  6.1


                                                                                                                        Italian
Italy
                                                                                                                     Belgian

                                  5.9
Annualised % Yield to Maturity.




                                                                                                                   Spanish


                                  5.8

                                                                                                                     French

                                  5.7
                                                                                                                     Dutch


                                  5.6
                                                                                                                  German


                                  5.5




                                  5.4
                                        1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44




                                                                                            37
                                      Tables 5-8

                   Short Maturity Yield Descriptive Statistics.
                       Italian Short        French Short          German Short
Mean                        5.204               5.075                 5.026
Standard Deviation          0.059               0.051                 0.049
Excess Kurtosis             2.407               0.859                 0.627
Skewness                   -1.291              -0.790                -0.463
Minimum                     4.978               4.912                 4.875
Maximum                     5.297               5.162                 5.134
Count                        88                   88                   88


                  Short Maturity Yield-Gap Descriptive Statistics.
                        Italian-German      Italian-French       French-German
Mean                          1.778               1.291               0.487
Standard Deviation            0.262               0.214               0.144
Kurtosis                      -0.277              0.187               0.174
Skewness                      0.034               0.349              -0.372
Minimum                        1.034              0.660               0.046
Maximum                       2.356               1.817               0.817
Count                           88                 88                  88




                   Medium Maturity Yield Descriptive Statistics.
                       Italian Medium      French Medium         German Medium
Mean                         5.301              5.112                 5.040
Standard Deviation            0.055             0.052                 0.055
Kurtosis                      3.679             1.940                 2.894
Skewness                     -1.661            -1.195                -1.361
Minimum                       5.079             4.923                 4.831
Maximum                      5.377              5.188                 5.130
Count                          88                88                    88


                Medium Maturity Yield-Gap Descriptive Statistics.
                      Italian-German      Italian-French       French-German
Mean                        2.608               1.893               0.715
Standard Deviation          0.126               0.104               0.104
Kurtosis                    0.320               1.666               0.454
Skewness                    0.622              -0.215               0.629
Minimum                     2.349               1.553               0.490
Maximum                     2.933               2.226               0.998
Count                         88                 88                  88




                                          38
                                    Tables 9-12

                     Long Maturity Yield Descriptive Statistics.
                         Italian Long        French Long           German Long
  Mean                       5.499               5.319                 5.194
  Standard Deviation          0.047               0.055                0.051
  Kurtosis                    2.269               1.292                1.803
  Skewness                   -1.579              -1.164               -1.329
  Minimum                     5.338               5.148                5.026
  Maximum                    5.562               5.415                 5.275
  Count                        88                  88                   88


                    Long Maturity Yield-Gap Descriptive Statistics.
                         Italian-German       Italian-French       French-German
  Mean                         3.044                1.801               1.243
  Standard Deviation            0.118               0.169               0.123
  Kurtosis                      0.976               0.707               0.192
  Skewness                     -1.230              -0.893              -0.305
  Minimum                       2.694               1.288               0.894
  Maximum                      3.217                2.111               1.552
  Count                          88                  88                  88


                    Very-Long Maturity Yield Descriptive Statistics.
                         Italian Very-Long   French Very-Long     German Very-Long
  Mean                          5.928             5.677                 5.579
  Standard Deviation             0.040             0.047                0.044
  Excess Kurtosis                0.796             1.003                0.712
  Skewness                      -0.713            -1.004               -0.963
  Minimum                        5.823             5.539                5.453
  Maximum                       6.008             5.754                 5.656
  Count                           88                88                   88


               Very-Long Maturity Yield-Gap Descriptive Statistics.
                       Italian-German      Italian-French       French-German
Mean                         3.498               2.515               0.983
Standard Deviation            0.171              0.199               0.107
Kurtosis                      1.175              0.442               1.372
Skewness                     -1.156             -0.959              -0.434
Minimum                       2.998              2.017               0.583
Maximum                      3.783               2.937               1.205
Count                          88                 88                  88




                                         39
                                                  Tables 13-16

                                  SHORT MATURITY YIELD - STATIONARITY TESTS
SERIES           Statistic t-value 95% Crit. L-B(1) [p-val] L-B(2) [p-val] L-B(3) [p-val]   L-B(6) [p-val] Conclude
                                                   YIELDS(constant)
Italian Yield    ADF(1)        1.23 (-2.8955) 0.004 [0.94] 0.440 [0.80] 0.646 [0.88]        3.142 [0.79]   Non-stationary
French Yield     DF           -0.78 (-2.8955) 1.416 [0.23] 1.931 [0.38] 2.179 [0.53]        3.582 [0.73]   Non-stationary
German Yield     DF           -0.48 (-2.8955) 0.289 [0.59] 0.415 [0.81] 0.619 [0.89]        4.021 [0.67]   Non-stationary
                                                 YIELD-GAP(constant)
Italian-German   ADF(1)       -0.97 (-2.8951) 0.032 [0.85] 1.496 [0.47] 5.098 [0.16]        5.223 [0.51]   Non-stationary
French-German    DF           -6.27 (-2.8955) 0.476 [0.49] 2.483 [0.28] 3.204 [0.36]        5.654 [0.46]   Stationary
Italian-French   ADF(1)       -1.81 (-2.8951) 0.244 [0.62] 2.698 [0.25] 2.706 [0.43]        5.085 [0.53]   Non-stationary
                                              YIELD-GAP(constant & trend)
Italian-German   DF           -4.32 (-3.462) 0.352 [0.55] 1.104 [0.57] 2.009 [0.57]         2.920 [0.81]   Stationary
French-German    DF           -7.29 (-3.462) 0.059 [0.80] 1.097 [0.57] 1.265 [0.73]         3.951 [0.68]   Stationary
Italian-French   DF           -5.57 (-3.462) 0.725 [0.39] 2.422 [0.29] 2.726 [0.43]         4.096 [0.66]   Stationary



                                   MEDIUM MATURITY YIELD - STATIONARITY TESTS
SERIES           Statistic t-value 95% Crit. L-B(1) [p-val] L-B(2) [p-val] L-B(3) [p-val]   L-B(6) [p-val] Conclude
                                                    YIELDS(constant)
Italian Yield    ADF(2)       1.605 (-2.8955) 0.010 [0.91] 0.016 [0.99] 0.142 [0.98]        0.972 [0.98]   Non-stationary
French Yield     ADF(2)        0.48 (-2.8955) 0.074 [0.78] 0.075 [0.96] 0.624 [0.89]        1.483 [0.96]   Non-stationary
German Yield     ADF(2)       0.842 (-2.8955) 0.002 [0.96] 0.004 [0.99] 0.157 [0.98]        0.530 [0.99]   Non-stationary
                                                  YIELD-GAP(constant)
Italian-German   ADF(1) -2.211 (-2.8951) 1.034 [0.30] 1.256 [0.53] 2.392 [0.49]             2.676 [0.84]   Non-stationary
French-German    DF          -3.917 (-2.8955) 1.119 [0.29] 1.414 [0.49] 1.414 [0.70]        6.635 [0.35]   Stationary
Italian-French   DF             -3.8 (-2.8955) 0.001 [0.97] 0.396 [0.82] 1.470 [0.68]       9.534 [0.14]   Stationary
                                               YIELD-GAP(constant & trend)
Italian-German   DF           -2.45 (-3.462) 0.648 [0.42] 0.964 [0.61] 2.158 [0.54]         2.478 [0.87]   Non-stationary
French-German    DF           -3.86 (-3.462) 0.014 [0.90] 0.047 [0.97] 0.599 [0.89]         7.122 [0.30]   Stationary
Italian-French   DF             -4.4 (-3.462) 0.002 [0.96] 0.497 [0.77] 1.805 [0.61]        8.140 [0.22]   Stationary



                                       LONG MATURITY - STATIONARITY TESTS
SERIES           Statistic t-value 95% Crit. L-B(1) [p-val] L-B(2) [p-val] L-B(3) [p-val]   L-B(6) [p-val] Conclude
                                                   YIELDS(constant)
Italian Yield    ADF(2)        1.67 (-2.8955) 0.144 [0.70] 0.322 [0.85] 0.935 [0.81]        2.328 [0.88]   Non-stationary
French Yield     DF(0)       -0.134 (-2.8955) 0.955 [0.32] 0.998 [0.60] 1.030 [0.79]        2.457 [0.87]   Non-stationary
German Yield     ADF(3) 0.3129 (-2.8955) 0.003 [0.95] 0.029 [0.98] 0.050 [0.99]             1.123 [0.98]   Non-stationary
                                                 YIELD-GAP(constant)
Italian-German   ADF(2) -1.529 (-2.8959) 0.265 [0.60] 1.201 [0.54] 6.238 [0.10]             6.698 [0.34]   Non-stationary
French-German    ADF(2) -3.147 (-2.8959) 0.033 [0.85] 0.106 [0.94] 0.641 [0.88]             2.428 [0.87]   Stationary
Italian-French   ADF(1) -2.905 (-2.8959) 0.032 [0.85] 0.033 [0.98] 0.545 [0.90]             3.398 [0.75]   Stationary
                                              YIELD-GAP(constant & trend)
Italian-German   ADF(3) -1.907 (-3.463) 0.293 [0.58] 0.318 [0.85] 1.232 [0.74]              2.254 [0.89]   Non-stationary
French-German    DF          -4.764 (-3.463) 0.542 [0.46] 1.362 [0.50] 1.394 [0.70]         5.308 [0.50]   Stationary
Italian-French   DF          -4.399 (-3.462) 1.320 [0.25] 4.357 [0.11] 4.390 [0.22]         8.382 [0.21]   Stationary



                                   VERY-LONG MATURITY - STATIONARITY TESTS
SERIES           Statistic t-value 95% Crit. L-B(1) [p-val] L-B(2) [p-val] L-B(3) [p-val]   L-B(6) [p-val] Conclude
                                                   YIELDS(constant)
Italian Yield    DF          -0.098 (-2.8955) 0.140 [0.70] 0.511 [0.77] 0.959 [0.81]        5.018 [0.54]   Non-stationary
French Yield     DF           0.044 (-2.8955) 1.098 [0.29] 1.205 [0.54] 2.022 [0.56]        3.509 [0.74]   Non-stationary
German Yield     DF           -0.32 (-2.8955) 0.067 [0.79] 0.331 [0.84] 0.389 [0.94]        5.142 [0.52]   Non-stationary
                                                 YIELD-GAP(constant)
Italian-German   ADF(2) -1.908 (-2.8955) 0.025 [0.87] 0.193 [0.90] 0.277 [0.96]             1.887 [0.92]   Non-stationary
French-German    DF          -6.312 (-2.8951) 0.585 [0.44] 0.989 [0.60] 1.835 [0.60]        4.007 [0.67]   Stationary
Italian-French   ADF(1) -1.788 (-2.8951) 0.058 [0.80] 0.878 [0.64] 1.011 [0.79]             1.678 [0.94]   Non-stationary
                                              YIELD-GAP(constant & trend)
Italian-German   ADF(2)       -2.24 (-3.463) 0.037 [0.84] 0.299 [0.86] 0.554 [0.90]         2.113 [0.90]   Non-stationary
French-German    DF           -6.71 (-3.462) 0.205 [0.65] 0.596 [0.74] 1.356 [0.71]         3.371 [0.76]   Stationary
Italian-French   ADF(1) -2.179 (-3.462) 0.000 [0.99] 1.250 [0.53] 1.252 [0.74]              2.096 [0.91]   Non-stationary




                                                           40
                                     Table 17

                    SHORT MATURITY - AR/VAR Lag Length Analysis.
Based on 85 observations from 4 to 88.
Deterministic variables:CONSTANT AND TRADE-TYPE DUMMIES

                 Log Likelihood AIC       SBC     LR Test of lag reduction[p-value]
                                  ITALIAN YIELD
AR of Order 3       627.418    620.418 611.869                    ------
AR of Order 2       627.087    621.087 613.759        CHSQ( 1)= .66337[.415]
AR of Order 1       626.762    621.762 615.655        CHSQ( 2)= 1.3130[.519]
AR of Order 0       519.121    515.121 510.236        CHSQ( 3)= 216.5947[.000]
Conclude                                  AR of Order 1
                                 FRENCH YIELD
AR of Order 3       600.933    593.933 585.384                    ------
AR of Order 2       600.845    594.845 587.517        CHSQ( 1)= .17635[.675]
AR of Order 1       600.382    595.382 589.275        CHSQ( 2)= 1.1028[.576]
AR of Order 0       533.744    529.744 524.858        CHSQ( 3)= 134.3793[.000]
Conclude                                  AR of Order 1
                                 GERMAN YIELD
AR of Order 3       610.218    603.218 594.669                    ------
AR of Order 2       610.186    604.186 596.858        CHSQ( 1)= .063493[.801]
AR of Order 1       610.030    605.030 598.923        CHSQ( 2)= .37599[.829]
AR of Order 0       535.441    531.441 526.556        CHSQ( 3)= 149.5531[.000]
Conclude                                  AR of Order 1
                  ALL THREE YIELDS: VAR LAG-LENGTH SELECTION
VAR of Order 3        1954.6    1915.6   1868.0                   ------
VAR of Order 2        1951.4    1921.4   1884.8       CHSQ( 9)= 6.3958[.700]
VAR of Order 1        1947.4    1926.4   1900.7       CHSQ( 18)= 14.5555[.692]
VAR of Order 0        1779.4    1767.4   1752.8      CHSQ( 27)= 350.4430[.000]
Conclude                                 VAR of Order 1




                                         41
                                      Table 18


                    MEDIUM MATURITY - AR/VAR Lag-Length Analysis.
Based on 85 observations from 4 to 88.
Deterministic variables:CONSTANT AND TRADE-TYPE DUMMIES

                 Log Likelihood   AIC       SBC      LR Test of lag reduction[p-value]
                                    ITALIAN YIELD
AR of Order 3       606.899      599.899 591.350                     ------
AR of Order 2       605.679      599.679 592.351          CHSQ( 1)= 2.4392[.118]
AR of Order 1       605.404      600.404 594.297          CHSQ( 2)= 2.9896[.224]
AR of Order 0       519.343      515.343 510.458         CHSQ( 3)= 175.1108[.000]
Conclude                                     AR of Order 1
                                   FRENCH YIELD
AR of Order 3       596.841      589.841 581.292                     ------
AR of Order 2       593.867      587.867 580.539          CHSQ( 1)= 5.9470[.015]
AR of Order 1       593.863      588.863 582.757          CHSQ( 2)= 5.9555[.051]
AR of Order 0       524.568      520.568 515.683         CHSQ( 3)= 144.5452[.000]
Conclude                 AR of Order 3 by AIC & LR Test, AR of Order 1 by SBC.
                                   GERMAN YIELD
AR of Order 3       597.715      590.715 582.166                     ------
AR of Order 2       596.672      590.672 583.344          CHSQ( 1)= 2.0865[.149]
AR of Order 1       596.469      591.469 585.362          CHSQ( 2)= 2.4929[.288]
AR of Order 0       518.948      514.948 510.062         CHSQ( 3)= 157.5350[.000]
Conclude                                     AR of Order 1
                  ALL THREE YIELDS: VAR LAG-LENGTH SELECTION
VAR of Order 3        2023.4      1984.4    1936.7                   ------
VAR of Order 2        2021.7      1991.7    1955.0        CHSQ( 9)= 3.3807[.947]
VAR of Order 1        2013.5      1992.5    1966.8       CHSQ( 18)= 19.8209[.343]
VAR of Order 0        1855.0      1843.0    1828.4       CHSQ( 27)= 336.7015[.000]
Conclude                                    VAR of Order 1




                                          42
                                       Table 19


                     LONG MATURITY - AR/VAR Lag-Length Analysis.
Based on 85 observations from 4 to 88.
Deterministic variables:CONSTANT AND TRADE-TYPE DUMMIES

                 Log Likelihood   AIC        SBC      LR Test of lag reduction[p-value]
                                    ITALIAN YIELD
AR of Order 3       635.482      627.482 617.759                      ------
AR of Order 2       635.023      628.023 619.515          CHSQ( 1)= .91764[.338]
AR of Order 1       631.879      625.879 618.587          CHSQ( 2)= 7.2047[.027]
AR of Order 0       631.878      626.878 620.801          CHSQ( 3)= 7.2067[.066]
Conclude                 AR of Order 2 by AIC & LR Test, AR of Order 0 by SBC.
                                   FRENCH YIELD
AR of Order 3       614.968      607.968 599.419                      ------
AR of Order 2       614.852      608.852 601.524          CHSQ( 1)= .23365[.629]
AR of Order 1       614.197      609.197 603.091          CHSQ( 2)= 1.5422[.463]
AR of Order 0       519.989      515.989 511.104          CHSQ( 3)= 189.9583[.000]
Conclude                                      AR of Order 1
                                   GERMAN YIELD
AR of Order 3       613.821      604.821 593.937                      ------
AR of Order 2       613.661      605.661 595.985          CHSQ( 1)= .32111[.571]
AR of Order 1       612.191      605.191 596.725          CHSQ( 2)= 3.2607[.196]
AR of Order 0       609.290      603.290 596.034          CHSQ( 3)= 9.0620[.028]
Conclude                 AR of Order 2 by AIC, AR of Order 1 by SBC & LR Test.
                  ALL THREE YIELDS: VAR LAG-LENGTH SELECTION
VAR of Order 4        2019.6      1971.6     1913.3                   ------
VAR of Order 3        2013.1      1974.1     1926.7       CHSQ( 9)= 13.0538[.160]
VAR of Order 2        2001.3      1971.3     1934.9       CHSQ( 18)= 36.5837[.006]
VAR of Order 1        1989.4      1968.4     1942.9       CHSQ( 27)= 60.4879[.000]
VAR of Order 0        1816.1      1804.1     1789.5      CHSQ( 36)= 407.0707[.000]
Conclude                VAR of Order 1 by SBC, VAR of Order 3 by AIC & LR Test.




                                          43
                                      Table 20


                  VERY-LONG MATURITY - AR/VAR Lag-Length Analysis.
Based on 85 observations from 4 to 88.
Deterministic variables:CONSTANT AND TRADE-TYPE DUMMIES

                 Log Likelihood   AIC       SBC      LR Test of lag reduction[p-value]
                                    ITALIAN YIELD
AR of Order 3       651.205      644.205 635.656                     ------
AR of Order 2       651.165      645.165 637.837         CHSQ( 1)= .080573[.777]
AR of Order 1       651.159      646.159 640.053         CHSQ( 2)= .092219[.955]
AR of Order 0       545.899      541.899 537.013         CHSQ( 3)= 210.6134[.000]
Conclude                                     AR of Order 1
                                   FRENCH YIELD
AR of Order 3       633.952      626.952 618.403                     ------
AR of Order 2       633.942      627.942 620.614         CHSQ( 1)= .020422[.886]
AR of Order 1       633.634      628.634 622.527          CHSQ( 2)= .63599[.728]
AR of Order 0       531.628      527.628 522.742         CHSQ( 3)= 204.6482[.000]
Conclude                                     AR of Order 1
                                   GERMAN YIELD
AR of Order 3       628.862      621.862 613.313                     ------
AR of Order 2       628.738      622.738 615.410          CHSQ( 1)= .24725[.619]
AR of Order 1       628.706      623.706 617.600          CHSQ( 2)= .31122[.856]
AR of Order 0       536.206      532.206 527.321         CHSQ( 3)= 185.3107[.000]
Conclude                                     AR of Order 1
                  ALL THREE YIELDS: VAR LAG-LENGTH SELECTION
VAR of Order 3        2021.9      1982.9    1935.3                   ------
VAR of Order 2        2018.7      1988.7    1952.1        CHSQ( 9)= 6.4019[.699]
VAR of Order 1        2006.8      1985.8    1960.2       CHSQ( 18)= 30.2008[.036]
VAR of Order 0        1834.0      1822.0    1807.3       CHSQ( 27)= 375.8738[.000]
Conclude                VAR of Order 2 by AIC & LR Test, VAR of Order 1 by SBC.




                                          44
                                         Table 21

                SHORT MATURITY - Granger Block Non-Causality Tests.
Endogenous Variables: Italian, French and German Yields.
Deterministic variables: Constant and Italian, French and German Trade-Type Dummies.
                           Granger Non-Causality of Italian Yield
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                    1993.8
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                       1985.3
Non-Causality LR Test.                                    CHSQ( 2)= 16.9464[.000]
Conclude                                                    Reject Non-Causality.
                           Granger Non-Causality of French Yield
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                    1993.8
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                       1989.8
Non-Causality LR Test.                                    CHSQ( 2)= 7.9651[.019]
Conclude                                                    Reject Non-Causality.
                          Granger Non-Causality of German Yield
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                    1993.8
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                       1987.7
Non-Causality LR Test.                                    CHSQ( 2)= 12.1048[.002]
Conclude                                                    Reject Non-Causality.

                        Test for exclusion of Deterministic Variables.
                            Excluding All Trade-Type Dummies.
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                      1993.8
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                         1984.3
LR Test of restriction.                                    CHSQ( 9)= 18.8973[.026]
Conclude                                           Reject exclusion restriction (Marginally).




                                             45
                                         Table 22


               MEDIUM MATURITY - Granger Block Non-Causality Tests.
Endogenous Variables: Italian, French and German Yields.
Deterministic variables: Constant and Italian, French and German Trade-Type Dummies.
                           Granger Non-Causality of Italian Yield
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                    2056.7
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                       2046.4
Non-Causality LR Test.                                    CHSQ( 2)= 20.7317[.000]
Conclude                                                    Reject Non-Causality.
                           Granger Non-Causality of French Yield
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                    2056.7
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                       2051.8
Non-Causality LR Test.                                    CHSQ( 2)= 9.9366[.007]
Conclude                                                    Reject Non-Causality.
                          Granger Non-Causality of German Yield
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                    2056.7
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                       2054.8
Non-Causality LR Test.                                    CHSQ( 2)= 3.8216[.148]
Conclude                                                    Accept Non-Causality.

                        Test for exclusion of Deterministic Variables.
                            Excluding All Trade-Type Dummies.
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                      2056.7
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                         2052.9
LR Test of restriction.                                    CHSQ( 9)= 7.6377[.571]
Conclude                                                  Accept exclusion restriction.




                                             46
                                          Table 23


                LONG MATURITY - Granger Block Non-Causality Tests.
Endogenous Variables: Italian, French and German Yields.
Deterministic variables: Constant and Italian, French and German Trade-Type Dummies.
                           Granger Non-Causality of Italian Yield
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                    2037.5
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                       2030.6
Non-Causality LR Test.                                    CHSQ( 6)= 13.8659[.031]
Conclude                                                    Reject Non-Causality.
                           Granger Non-Causality of French Yield
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                    2037.5
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                       2033.2
Non-Causality LR Test.                                    CHSQ( 6)= 8.5729[.199]
Conclude                                                    Accept Non-Causality.
                          Granger Non-Causality of German Yield
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                    2037.5
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                       2036.2
Non-Causality LR Test.                                    CHSQ( 6)= 2.6320[.853]
Conclude                                                    Accept Non-Causality.

                        Test for exclusion of Deterministic Variables.
                            Excluding All Trade-Type Dummies.
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                      2037.5
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                         2038.8
LR Test of restriction.                                    CHSQ( 9)= 17.3046[.044]
Conclude                                                  Reject exclusion restriction.




                                             47
                                         Table 24

             VERY-LONG MATURITY - Granger Block Non-Causality Tests.
Endogenous Variables: Italian, French and German Yields.
Deterministic variables: Constant and Italian, French and German Trade-Type Dummies.
                           Granger Non-Causality of Italian Yield
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                    2050.8
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                       2046.4
Non-Causality LR Test.                                    CHSQ( 2)= 8.8651[.012]
Conclude                                                    Reject Non-Causality.
                           Granger Non-Causality of French Yield
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                    2050.8
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                       2041.9
Non-Causality LR Test.                                    CHSQ( 2)= 17.7714[.000]
Conclude                                                    Reject Non-Causality.
                          Granger Non-Causality of German Yield
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                    2050.8
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                       2049.8
Non-Causality LR Test.                                    CHSQ( 2)= 2.0123[.366]
Conclude                                                    Accept Non-Causality.

                        Test for exclusion of Deterministic Variables.
                            Excluding All Trade-Type Dummies.
Unrestricted Maximized value of log-likelihood.                      2050.8
Restricted Maximized value of log-likelihood                         2040.9
LR Test of restriction.                                    CHSQ( 9)= 19.8047[.019]
Conclude                                           Reject exclusion restriction (Marginally).




                                             48
                                                          Tables 25 and 26

                        SHORT MATURITY - COINTEGRATION ANALYSIS - Johansen Test of Cointegrating Rank.

Endogenous Variables: Italian, French and German Yields.
Exogenous variables in the cointegration space: Drift & Italian, French & German Trade-Type Dummies.
Unrestricted constant outside cointegration space.
Lag length: 1               Effective sample: 2 to 88                        Observations less the number of Variables: 76

                                     DETERMINATION OF NUMBER OF COINTEGRATING VECTORS.
      Eigenv.                L-max               Trace              H0: r                  p-r          L-max Crit. 90%         Trace Crit. 90%
      0.4276                  48.55              75.12                 0                    3                 16.13                 39.08
      0.1743                  16.66              26.58                 1                    2                 12.39                 22.95
      0.1077                   9.92               9.92                 2                    1                 10.56                 10.56
                         Conclusion: Both the L-Max and Trace statistics imply that there are two cointegrating vectors.

                             PAIRWISE COINTEGRATION ANALYSIS - Estimation by Phillips-Hansen FMOLS.
Regressing one yield on another and including nuisance parameters: constant, trend and trade type dummies.
Trade type (i) is for the trade type of the dependent variable and trade type (ii) is for trade type of the regressor yield.
Std. Errors In brackets & Std. Errors from Unity in the case of the coefficient on the yield regressor.

  Regressing ….                   French on German                          Italian on French                        Italian on German

 Yield (It,Ge or Fr)                0.879 (0.034)                            0.897 (0.035)                             0.848 (0.033)
 Std. Err. from 1.                      3.46                                     2.88                                      4.52

      Constant                       0.665   (0.175)                        0.682 (0.181)                              0.979   (0.168)
       Trend                       -0.0003   (0.0001)                     -0.0007 (0.0001)                           -0.0009   (0.0001)
   Trade Type (i)                   -0.088   (0.032)                       -0.063 (0.029)                             -0.006   (0.028)
   Trade Type (ii)                   0.095   (0.030)                        0.018 (0.033)                              0.051   (0.030)
                                                                 Resid. Analysis
ADF (Crit.10% -3.5)                    DF -7.76                                DF -5.07                                   DF -3.97
    Std. Dev.                           1.22                                    1.17                                       1.09

    Conclusion                        All three pairs are cointegrated. Pairs involving Italian Yield have lowest residual variance.



                       MEDIUM MATURITY - COINTEGRATION ANALYSIS - Johansen Test of Cointegrating Rank.

Endogenous Variables: Italian, French and German Yields.
Exogenous variables in the cointegration space: Drift & Italian, French & German Trade-Type Dummies.
Unrestricted constant outside cointegration space.
Lag length: 1               Effective sample: 2 to 88                        Observations less the number of Variables: 76

                                    DETERMINATION OF NUMBER OF COINTEGRATING VECTORS.
      Eigenv.                L-max              Trace                 H0: r                p-r          L-max Crit. 90%         Trace Crit. 90%
      0.4277                  48.55             67.73                   0                   3                  16.13                39.08
       0.139                  13.02             19.18                   1                   2                  12.39                22.95
      0.0684                   6.16              6.16                   2                   1                  10.56                10.56
                       Conclusion: The L-Max statistic implies 2 cointegrating vectors while the Trace statistics implies 1.

                             PAIRWISE COINTEGRATION ANALYSIS - Estimation by Phillips-Hansen FMOLS.
Regressing one yield on another and including nuisance parameters: constant, trend and trade type dummies.
Trade type (i) is for the trade type of the dependent variable and trade type (ii) is for trade type of the regressor yield.
Std. Errors In brackets & Std. Errors from Unity in the case of the coefficient on the yield regressor.

  Regressing ….                   French on German                          French on Italian                        Italian on German

 Yield (It,Ge or Fr)                0.855 (0.022)                            0.958 (0.028)                             0.864 (0.029)
 Std. Err. from 1.                      6.39                                     1.43                                      4.56

     Constant                       0.814 (0.115)                           0.024 (0.155)                              0.967   (0.151)
      Trend                           -0.0002 (0)                         0.0000 (0.0001)                            -0.0003   (0.0001)
  Trade Type (i)                    -0.046 (0.021)                         -0.060 (0.024)                             -0.098   (0.027)
  Trade Type (ii)                   -0.047 (0.020)                          0.079 (0.025)                             -0.051   (0.027)
                                                                 Resid. Analysis
ADF (Crit.10% -3.5)                    DF -6.71                             ADF(2) -3.73                                ADF(1) -2.88
    Std. Dev.                           0.847                                   0.949                                     1.009

    Conclusion          Italian-German pair fail cointegration test but must be cointegrated since the two other pairs are.
                                                       Pairs involving French Yield have lowest residual variance.




                                                                       49
                                                         Tables 27 and 28

                       LONG MATURITY - COINTEGRATION ANALYSIS - Johansen Test of Cointegrating Rank.

Endogenous Variables: Italian, French and German Yields.
Exogenous variables in the cointegration space: Drift & Italian, French & German Trade-Type Dummies.
Unrestricted constant outside cointegration space.
Lag length: 3               Effective sample: 4 to 88                        Observations less the number of Variables: 62

                                   DETERMINATION OF NUMBER OF COINTEGRATING VECTORS.
      Eigenv.              L-max               Trace              H0: r                  p-r          L-max Crit. 90%            Trace Crit. 90%
      0.3034                30.74              66.43                 0                    3                 16.13                    39.08
      0.2829                28.26               35.7                 1                    2                 12.39                    22.95
      0.0838                 7.44               7.44                 2                    1                 10.56                    10.56
                       Conclusion: Both the L-Max and Trace statistics imply that there are two cointegrating vectors.

                             PAIRWISE COINTEGRATION ANALYSIS - Estimation by Phillips-Hansen FMOLS.
Regressing one yield on another and including nuisance parameters: constant, trend and trade type dummies.
Trade type (i) is for the trade type of the dependent variable and trade type (ii) is for trade type of the regressor yield.
Std. Errors In brackets & Std. Errors from Unity in the case of the coefficient on the yield regressor.

  Regressing ….                  German on French                           Italian on French                        Italian on German

 Yield (It,Ge or Fr)               0.927 (0.042)                             0.917 (0.049)                             0.967 (0.042)
 Std. Err. from 1.                     1.71                                      1.69                                      0.78

      Constant                     0.256    (0.227)                        0.607 (0.264)                               0.466    (0.222)
       Trend                      0.0000    (0.0001)                     0.0002 (0.0001)                              0.0001    (0.0001)
   Trade Type (i)                  -0.011   (0.030)                        0.069 (0.035)                               0.011    (0.029)
   Trade Type (ii)                 0.036    (0.029)                       -0.038 (0.034)                               0.000    (0.029)
                                                                Resid. Analysis
ADF (Crit.10% -3.5)                   DF -4.50                                DF -4.58                                  ADF(3) -1.89
    Std. Dev.                          1.09                                    1.29                                        0.97

    Conclusion         Italian-German pair fail cointegration test but must be cointegrated since the two other pairs are.
                                                     Pairs involving German Yield have lowest residual variance.



                     VERY-LONG MATURITY - COINTEGRATION ANALYSIS - Johansen Test of Cointegrating Rank.

Endogenous Variables: Italian, French and German Yields.
Exogenous variables in the cointegration space: Drift & Italian, French & German Trade-Type Dummies.
Unrestricted constant outside cointegration space.
Lag length: 1               Effective sample: 2 to 88                        Observations less the number of Variables: 76

                                   DETERMINATION OF NUMBER OF COINTEGRATING VECTORS.
      Eigenv.              L-max               Trace              H0: r                  p-r          L-max Crit. 90%            Trace Crit. 90%
      0.4064                45.37              70.67                 0                    3                 16.13                    39.08
      0.1726                16.48               25.3                 1                    2                 12.39                    22.95
      0.0964                 8.82               8.82                 2                    1                 10.56                    10.56
                       Conclusion: Both the L-Max and Trace statistics imply that there are two cointegrating vectors.

                             PAIRWISE COINTEGRATION ANALYSIS - Estimation by Phillips-Hansen FMOLS.
Regressing one yield on another and including nuisance parameters: constant, trend and trade type dummies.
Trade type (i) is for the trade type of the dependent variable and trade type (ii) is for trade type of the regressor yield.
Std. Errors In brackets & Std. Errors from Unity in the case of the coefficient on the yield regressor.

  Regressing ….                  German on French                           Italian on French                        Italian on German

 Yield (It,Ge or Fr)               0.955 (0.028)                             0.858 (0.049)                             0.880 (0.050)
 Std. Err. from 1.                     1.56                                      2.85                                      2.35

     Constant                      0.150    (0.163)                        1.046 (0.283)                               1.004    (0.285)
      Trend                       0.0000    (0.0001)                     0.0003 (0.0001)                              0.0002    (0.0001)
  Trade Type (i)                   -0.003   (0.023)                       -0.016 (0.040)                               -0.055   (0.039)
  Trade Type (ii)                  0.032    (0.023)                       -0.174 (0.040)                               0.077    (0.039)
                                                                Resid. Analysis
ADF (Crit.10% -3.5)                   DF -6.92                                DF -5.23                                    DF -3.49
    Std. Dev.                          0.97                                    1.49                                         1.4

    Conclusion                      All three pairs are cointegrated. Pairs involving German Yield have lowest residual variance.




                                                                       50
                                                    Table 29

                                            FACTOR LOADINGS.
                            (Insignificant coefficient estimates restricted to zero).
                                           Short             Medium                Long    Very-long
Italian Yield Change on Factor 1             0.0                0.0                 0.0       0.0
T-Statistic                                   --                 --                   --       --

Italian Yield Change on Factor 2             0.0               -0.065             0.028     0.021
T-Statistic                                   --                -2.94              2.01      2.17

French Yield Change on Factor 1             0.065              -0.066             0.040     0.033
T-Statistic                                 5.31                -2.33              2.26      2.14

French Yield Change on Factor 2              0.0               -0.083             0.056     0.028
T-Statistic                                   --                -3.18              2.94      2.61

German Yield Change on Factor 1              0.0                0.0                0.0      -0.039
T-Statistic                                   --                 --                 --       -2.46

German Yield Change on Factor 2             0.064              -0.078             0.050     0.035
T-Statistic                                 5.18                -3.16              3.15      3.19

                           FACTOR DETAILS - excluding nuisance parameters.
Short Factor 1:                                      Italian Yield-0.897 French Yield
Short Factor 2:                                    Italian Yield - 0.848 German Yield
Medium Factor 1:                                  French Yield - 0.855 German Yield
Medium Factor 2:                                    French Yield - 0.958 Italian Yield
Long Factor 1:                                    German Yield - 0.967 French Yield
Long Factor 2:                                     Italian Yield - 0.927 German Yield
Very Long Factor 1:                               German Yield - 0.955 French Yield
Very Long Factor 2:                                Italian Yield - 0.967 German Yield




                                                       51
