                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              LAW, ENDOWMENTS, AND FINANCE


                                            Thorsten Beck
                                          Asli Demirguc-Kunt
                                              Ross Levine


                                          Working Paper 9089
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9089


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2002


We thank David Arseneau, Pam Gill, and Tolga Sobaci for excellent research assistance, and Agnes
Yaptenco for assistance with the graphs. We thank without implicating Daron Acemoglu, John Boyd, Maria
Carkovic, Tim Guinnane, Patrick Honohan, Phil Keefer, Paul Mahoney, Alexander Pivovarsky, Andrei
Shleifer, Oren Sussman, an anonymous referee, seminar participants at the Banco Central de Chile, the
University of Minnesota, Harvard University, the World Bank, University of Maryland, and UCLA, and
conference participants at the Fedesarrollo conference on Financial Crisis and Policy Responses in
Cartagena, the Crenos conference on Finance, Institutions, Technology, and Growth in Alghero, and the
CEPR Summer Finance Conference in Gerzensee. Parts of this paper were originally part of a working paper
titled “Law, Politics, and Finance,” which was a background paper for the 2002 World Development Report.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research, the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.


© 2002 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirguc-Kunt and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Law, Endowments, and Finance
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirguc-Kunt and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 9089
August 2002
JEL No. G2, K2, O11, P51


                                               ABSTRACT

        This paper assesses two theories regarding the historical determinants of international differences
in financial development. The law and finance theory holds that legal traditions differ in terms of the
priority they attach to protecting the rights of private investors vis-a-vis the State and this has important
implications for financial development. The endowment theory argues that the disease and geographical
environment influence the formation of long-lasting institutions that influence financial development.
Using a sample of former colonies, we explore whether the legal system brought by colonizers and/or the
initial disease/geographical endowments encountered by colonizers explain financial development today.
The empirical results indicate that both the legal systems brought by colonizers and the initial
endowments in the colonies are important determinants of stock market development and private property
rights protection. However, initial endowments are more robustly associated with financial intermediary
development than legal origin and initial endowments explain more of the cross-country variation in
financial intermediary and stock market development than legal origin.




Thorsten Beck                    Asli Demirguc-Kunt                    Ross Levine
The World Bank                   The World Bank                        Carlson School of Management
1818 H Street, NW                1818 H Street, NW                     University of Minnesota
Washington, DC 20433             Washington, DC 20433                  321 19th Ave. South
tbeck@worldbank.org              ademirguckunt@worldbank.org           Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                                                       and NBER
                                                                       rlevine@csom.umn.edu
                                                     1




1. Introduction

       A substantial body of work suggests that well-functioning financial intermediaries and

markets promote economic growth (Levine, 1997). The view that financial systems exert a first-

order impact on economic growth raises critical questions: How did some countries develop well-

functioning financial systems, while others did not? Why do some countries have strong laws and

property rights protection that support private contracting and financial development, while others

do not? While considerable research examines the finance-growth relationship, much less work

examines the fundamental sources of international differences in financial development.

       This paper empirically evaluates two theories concerning the historical determinants of

financial development. First, the law and finance theory holds that (a) legal traditions differ in

terms of the priority they attach to protecting the rights of private investors vis-à-vis the State, (b)

private property rights protection forms the basis of financial contracting and overall financial

development, and (c) the major legal traditions were formed in Europe centuries ago and were then

spread through conquest, colonization, and imitation [LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and

Vishny, 1998, henceforth LLSV]. Thus, the law and finance theory predicts that historically

determined differences in legal tradition help explain international differences in financial

development today.

       The law and finance theory focuses on the differences between the two most influential legal

traditions: the British Common law and the French Civil law [Hayek, 1960; LLSV, 1998].

According to this theory, the British Common law evolved to protect private property owners

against the crown [Merryman, 1985].1 This facilitated the ability of private property owners to

transact confidently, with positive repercussions on financial development [North and Weingast,

1989]. In contrast, the French Civil law was constructed to eliminate the role of a corrupt judiciary,
                                                   2


solidify State power, and restrain the courts from interfering with State policy.2 Over time, State

dominance produced a legal tradition that focuses more on the rights of the State and less on the

rights of individual investors than the British Common law [Hayek, 1960; Mahoney, 2001].

According to the law and finance theory, a powerful State with a responsive legal system will have

the incentives and capabilities to divert the flow of society’s resources toward favored ends and this

power will hinder the development of free, competitive financial systems. Thus, the law and finance

theory predicts that countries that have adopted a French Civil law tradition will tend to place less

of an emphasis on private property rights protection and will enjoy correspondingly lower levels of

financial development than countries with a British Common law tradition.

       The law and finance theory focuses on the origin of a country’s legal tradition. The French

secured the Napoleonic Code in all conquered lands and colonies. Furthermore, the Code shaped

the Spanish and Portuguese legal systems, which further spread the French Civil law to Spanish and

Portuguese colonies. The British also instituted the Common law in its colonies. According to the

law and finance theory, the spread of legal traditions had enduring influences on national

approaches to private property rights and financial development: British colonizers brought a legal

tradition that stresses private property rights and fosters financial development; in contrast,

colonizers that brought the French Civil law implanted a legal tradition that is less conducive to

financial development.

       The endowment theory emphasizes the roles of geography and the disease environment in

shaping institutional development and we apply this theory to the development of private property

rights and financial institutions. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001, henceforth AJR) base

their theory on three premises. First, AJR note that Europeans adopted different types of

colonization strategies. At one end of the spectrum, the Europeans settled and created institutions to

support private property and check the power of the State. These “settler colonies” include the
                                                    3


United States, Australia, and New Zealand. At the other end of the spectrum, Europeans did not

aim to settle and instead sought to extract as much from the colony as possible. In these “extractive

states,” Europeans did not create institutions to support private property rights; rather, they

established institutions that empowered the elite to extract gold, silver, etc. (e.g., Congo, Ivory

Coast, and much of Latin America).

       The second component of AJR’s theory holds that the type of colonization strategy was

heavily influenced by the feasibility of settlement. In inhospitable environments, Europeans tended

to create extractive states (AJR, 2001) 3. In areas where endowments favored settlement, Europeans

tended to form settler colonies. For instance, AJR note that the Pilgrims decided to settle in the

American colonies instead of Guyana partially because of the high mortality rates in Guyana.

Moreover, Curtin (1964, 1998) documents that European newspapers published colonial mortality

rates widely, so that potential settlers had information about colonial “endowments.” Thus,

according to the endowment theory, the disease environment shaped colonization strategy and the

types of institutions established by Europeans colonizers.

       The final piece of the AJR theory of institutional development stresses that the institutions

created by European colonizers endured after independence. Settler colonies tended to produce

post-colonial governments that were more democratic and more devoted to defending private

property rights than extractive colonies. In contrast, since extractive colonies had already

constructed institutions for effectively extracting resources, the post-colonial elite frequently

assumed power and readily exploited the pre-existing extractive institutions.4

       While AJR (2001) focus on institutional development in general, their theory is applicable to

the financial sector. In an “extractive” environment, colonizers will not construct institutions that

favor the development of free, competitive financial markets because competitive markets may

threaten the position of the “extractors.” In “settler” colonies, however, colonizers will be much
                                                     4


more likely to construct institutions that protect private property rights and hence foster financial

development. Thus, according to the endowment theory, differences in endowments shaped initial

institutions and these initial institutions have had long-lasting repercussions on private property

rights protection and financial development. 5

        Although the law and endowment theories both stress the importance of initial institutions in

shaping financial development today, they highlight very different mechanisms. The law and

finance theory focuses on the legal tradition implanted by the colonizer. The endowment theory

focuses on the disease/geography endowments of the colony and how these endowments shaped

colonization strategy and the construction of long-lasting institutions. In the law and finance

theory, the identity of the colonizer is crucial, but the identity of the colonizer is irrelevant

according to the endowment theory. Similarly, in the endowment theory, the endowments of the

lands where Europeans arrived are crucial, but the law and finance theory gives no weight to the

mortality rates of European colonizers in explaining private property rights and financial

development today.6 These two explanations of financial development are not necessarily mutually

exclusive, though they highlight very different causal mechanisms.

        To evaluate empirically the law and endowment theories of financial development, we use

cross-country regressions. We examine whether cross-country differences in financial institutions

are accounted for by cross-country differences in legal tradition and/or initial endowments while

controlling for other possible determinants. To measure financial development, we use measures of

(i) financial intermediary development, (ii) equity market development, and (iii) private property

rights protection. For simplicity, we use the term “financial development” to refer both to particular

measures of financial intermediary and stock market development and to the protection of property

rights. We measure financial development over the period 1990-95. To measure legal tradition, we

use the LLSV (1999) indicators of whether the country has a British or French legal tradition, which
                                                   5


is based on the origin of each country’s Company/Commercial law. For reasons described below,

we examine a sample of 70 former colonies with either British or French legal origins. To measure

initial endowments, we primarily use the AJR measure of settler mortality as European settlers

arrived in various parts of the globe. For robustness, we also use the absolute value of the latitude of

each country as an alternative – albeit less precise -- indicator of initial endowments since many

authors argue that tropical climates are not conducive to institutional and economic development.

In conducting the cross-country comparisons, we control for other potential determinants of

financial development. Specifically, we include measures of ethnic diversity, religious

composition, years of independence since 1776, and continent dummy variables. Further, we also

assess whether the political structure of a country is the only mechanism through which the legal

tradition and initial endowments influence current financial development.

       We focus on a sample of 70 former colonies for two reasons. First, we have AJR’s (2001)

data on settler mortality, which is a key building block of AJR’s (2001) empirical assessment of the

endowment theory. Second, there are good reasons for believing that legal and financial systems

evolved simultaneously in Europe centuries ago (Berman, 1997). Thus, it may be inappropriate to

treat legal origin as exogenous in England and France, as well as in Germany, the Scandinavian

countries, and other non-colonies. European colonization offers a unique break, a natural

identifying condition (AJR, 2001, 2002; Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997). As European conquerors

and colonizers landed, they brought different legal traditions. Colonization represents a period

during which legal traditions were exogenously established around the globe. For these reasons, we

use a sample of 70 former colonies with data on settler mortality. This sample only includes

countries with British and French legal origins.

       This paper makes four contributions.7 First, this paper applies AJR’s (2001) endowment

theory of institutions directly to the study of financial development. Although AJR (2001) carefully
                                                   6


document the connections running from endowments to institutions to the level of economic

development today, we examine whether initial colonial endowments explain a wide array of

current measures of financial development. Since financial development helps explain

technological innovation, the efficiency of capital allocation across industries and firms, output

volatility, the likelihood of suffering a systemic banking crisis, and economic growth even when

controlling for the level of economic development and the level of institutional development, it is

important to assess whether endowments influence financial development.8 Second, this is the first

paper to consider simultaneously the legal and endowment views of financial development. This is

crucial to assessing two very different visions of how the institutions founded by Europeans

continue to shape national approaches to private property and financial development. Third,

although others have shown that legal tradition shapes financial development [LLSV, 1997; 1998;

2000], this paper goes much farther in evaluating the robustness of the law and finance view by

controlling for endowments, religion, ethnic diversity, the length of independence, etc. This

assessment is critical if we are to have much confidence in legal theories of financial development.

Fourth, while some argue that political factors drive private property rights protection and financial

development (Rajan and Zingales, 2002), this is the first paper to examine whether legal origin and

disease/geographical endowments explain cross-country differences in financial development

beyond their ability to account for differences in national political systems.

       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and presents figures that

motivate the analysis. Section 3 discusses the regression results and a series of robustness tests are

presented in Section 4. Section 5 concludes.
                                                   7




2. Data and Initial Assessments

       This section describes the data and presents figures documenting that (1) Common law

countries tend to have higher levels of financial development than French civil law countries and (2)

countries with high levels of European mortality during the initial stages of colonization tend to

have lower levels of financial development than countries with initially low settler mortality rates.


2.1. Financial Development

       To measure financial development, we use indicators of financial intermediary development,

stock market development, and the protection of property rights. The goal is to proxy for the degree

to which national financial systems facilitate the acquisition of information about firms, ease

corporate governance, and help agents manage risk, and mobilize savings effectively.

Unfortunately, we do not have direct and comparable measures of the ability of national financial

systems to provide these services for a broad cross-section of countries. Thus, we use a variety of

indicators of financial development to assess the connections between law, endowments, and

finance.

       PRIVATE CREDIT equals financial intermediary credits to the private sector divided by

gross domestic product (GDP) and is measured over the 1990-95 period. PRIVATE CREDIT

excludes credit to the public sector and cross claims of one intermediary on another, i.e., credits by

one financial intermediary to another financial intermediary are not included in PRIVATE

CREDIT. It thus measures the amount of savings that is channeled through debt-issuing financial

intermediaries to private borrowers. For most countries, PRIVATE CREDIT is obtained from data

available from the International Monetary Fund (IMF). To maximize the size of the sample,

however, we also used World Bank data sources for a few countries missing IMF data; the countries
                                                   8


and sources are specified in the data appendix. Past work shows a strong connection between

PRIVATE CREDIT and economic growth [Levine, Loayza, and Beck, 2000]. PRIVATE CREDIT

ranges from values above 0.9 in the United States, Hong Kong, Singapore, South Africa, and

Malaysia, to values less than 0.03 in Sierra Leone, Uganda, Angola, and Zaire.

       STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT equals the total value of outstanding equity shares as

a fraction of GDP and is averaged over the 1990-95 period.9 This measures the overall size of the

equity market relative to the size of the economy.10 The data are primarily collected from the World

Bank’s International Finance Corporation. However, we use additional data sources to complete the

dataset and these data sources are specified in the data appendix. There are large cross-country

differences as shown in Table 1, Panel A. STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT is greater than

0.65 in the United States, Chile, Singapore, South Africa, Hong Kong, and Malaysia and

indistinguishable from zero in 29 countries.

       PROPERTY RIGHTS is an index of the degree to which the government protects private

property and enforces laws that protect private property. The data are for 1997 and were obtained

from LLSV (1999) and the Index of Economic Freedom. While PRIVATE CREDIT and STOCK

MARKET DEVELOPMENT are direct measures of the size of financial intermediaries and equity

markets, PROPERTY RIGHTS does not directly measure the size of a component of the financial

sector. Rather, PROPERTY RIGHTS measures a key input into the efficient operation of financial

contracts and the development of formal financial institutions: the degree of protection of private

property rights. The law and endowment theories stress the degree to which national institutions

emphasize private property rights versus the rights of the State. This difference in emphasis may

influence a variety of indicators of financial development. While PROPERTY RIGHTS is one

indicator, there may be measurement problems and differences in emphasis on State versus private

rights that affect financial contracting beyond narrow indicators of property rights protection.
                                                    9


Hence, we examine a variety of financial development indicators. The maximum value of

PROPERTY RIGHTS is five, while one indicates the weakest property rights protection. Nine

former colonies have the maximum value of five. Only Haiti and Rwanda have the minimum value

of 1, while 15 countries have a value of 2 for PROPERTY RIGHTS.11

2.2. Legal Origin

       LLSV (1998, 1999) identify the legal origin of each country’s Company/Commercial Law

as French, British, German, Scandinavian, or Socialist.12 Given that we are examining former

colonies with data on settler mortality from AJR (2001), we have data for only French and British

legal origin countries.13 The FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN dummy variable equals one if the country

adopted its Company/Commercial law from the French Civil Law and zero otherwise. In the

regressions, the British legal origin is captured in the constant.

       Figure 1 clearly shows that financial development is substantially higher in countries with a

British Common law tradition than in countries with a French Civil Law tradition. French Civil law

countries have, on average, lower levels of PRIVATE CREDIT, STOCK MARKET

DEVELOPMENT, and PROPERTY RIGHTS than British Common Law countries. There are 45

French civil law countries and 25 Common law countries. The Table 1 Panel B correlations confirm

Figure 1: the FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN dummy variable is significantly, negatively correlated

with each of the three financial development indicators. Furthermore, Figure 2 illustrates that in

Common law countries, eight countries have PRIVATE CREDIT greater than 0.6 (Australia,

Canada, New Zealand, Malaysia, Singapore, South Africa, Hong Kong, and the United States),

while among French civil law countries, only Malta has PRIVATE CREDIT greater than 0.6.

       Figure 2 just as clearly shows that legal origin does not completely explain cross-country

variation in financial development today. For instance, many Common law countries have

PRIVATE CREDIT less than 0.3 and Common law countries such as Uganda, Sierra Leone, Ghana,
                                                  10


Sudan, and Tanzania have extremely low PRIVATE CREDIT levels. We need to know more than

legal origin to account for cross-country differences in financial development.


2.3. Endowments

       As Europeans arrived around the world, they encountered very different environments. In

some lands, Europeans found hospitable environments. In others, conditions were less inhospitable

and European died in large numbers. According to AJR (2001), these “endowments” fundamentally

influenced the types of long-lasting institutions created by European colonists.

       To measure endowments, we use the AJR (2001) measure of SETTLER MORTALITY.

AJR (2001) compile data on the death rates faced by settlers. Curtin (1989) constructs data on the

mortality and disease rates of European soldiers in colonies during the early nineteenth century. The

raw data come from British, French, and United States governments during the period 1817-1848.

The standard measure was annualized deaths per thousand soldiers with each death replaced with a

new soldier. Curtin (1998) adds similar data on soldier mortality during the second half of the

nineteenth century. Finally, Gutierrez (1986) uses Vatican records to construct estimates of the

mortality rates of bishops in Latin America from 1604 to 1876. Since some of these data overlap

with Curtin’s separate estimates, AJR confirm the compatibility of the two data series before

constructing an overall measure of the logarithm of annualized deaths per thousand Europeans,

SETTLER MORTALITY, for a large group of former colonies. As in AJR (2001), we use the

logarithm to diminish the impact of outliers. The AJR (2001) measure forms the core of our

analysis of endowments and finance. This measure ranges from to 2.15 (Australia and New

Zealand) to 7.99 (Mali).

       Figure 3 shows a generally negative, though certainly not a simple linear, relation between

SETTLER MORTALITY and financial development.14 This is especially pronounced for
                                                   11


PRIVATE CREDIT and STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT. In particular, there are no countries

with PRIVATE CREDIT greater than 0.6 and with SETTLER MORTALITY greater than 3. Table

1, Panel B shows that there is a significant, negative correlation between SETTLER MORTALITY

and each of the three financial development indicators at the one-percent significance level. The

data indicate that in colonies where early settlers found very inhospitable environments, we do not

observe well-developed financial systems today.

2.4. Other Possible Determinants of Financial Development

       To assess the robustness of our results, we include several other potential determinants of

financial development in our empirical analysis. ETHNIC FRACTIONALIZATION measures the

probability that two randomly selected individuals from a country are from different ethnolinguistic

groups. LSSV (1999, p. 231) argue, “…political theories predict that, as ethnic heterogeneity

increases, governments become more interventionist.” Recent studies show that in highly ethnically

diverse economies, the group that comes to power tends to implement policies that: (a) expropriate

as many resources as possible from the ethnic losers, (b) restrict the rights of other groups, and (c)

prohibit the growth of industries or sectors that threaten the ruling group [Alesina, Easterly, and

Baqir (1999) and Easterly and Levine (1997)]. When this view is applied to the financial sector, the

implications are clear: greater ethnic diversity implies the adoption of policies and institutions that

are focused on maintaining power and control and not toward creating an open and competitive

financial system. Table 1 Panel B indicates that there is a significant, negative correlation between

ETHNIC FRACTIONALIZATION and PRIVATE CREDIT. We include ETHNIC

FRACTIONALIZATION in examining the independent impact of law and endowments on

financial development.

       INDEPENDENCE equals the fraction of years since 1776 that the country has been

independent. We include this since a longer period of independence may provide greater
                                                  12


opportunities for countries to develop institutions, policies, and regulations independently of their

colonial heritage. In the simple correlations, however, we do not find a significant link between

INDEPENDENCE and financial development.

       We also examine religious composition. Many scholars argue that religion shapes national

views regarding property rights, competition, and the role of the State (LLSV 1999; Stulz and

Williamson, 2002). Putnam (1993, p. 107), for instance, contends that the Catholic Church fosters

“vertical bonds of authority” rather than “horizontal bonds of fellowship”. Similarly, Landes (1998)

argues that Catholic and Muslim countries tend to develop xenophobic cultures and powerful

church/state bonds to maintain control, which limits competition and private property rights.

       CATHOLIC, MUSLIM, and OTHER RELIGION equal the fraction of the population that is

Catholic, Muslim, or of another (non-Protestant) religion. The Protestant share of the population is

omitted (and therefore captured in the regression constant). The data are from LLSV (1999).

       Table 1 Panel B shows that countries with a higher proportion of population that are neither

Catholic, nor Muslim, nor Protestant, have higher levels of financial development than countries

where a higher fraction of the country is either Catholic or Muslim. Thus, we control for religious

composition in examining the independent relation between financial development and both legal

origin and endowments.

       Note there is a very large, positive, and significant correlation between CATHOLIC and

FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN (0.48). Thus, it may be particularly difficult to distinguish fully

between CATHOLIC and the Civil law tradition.

       Finally, we include one dummy variable for countries in LATIN AMERICA and another for

countries in Sub-Saharan AFRICA. A large number of studies find that countries in Sub-Saharan

Africa and Latin America perform more poorly than countries in other regions of the world even
                                                  13


after controlling for economic policies, institutional development, and other factors. (For analyses

and citations, see Easterly and Levine, 1997.)

       There are important problems with including continent dummies. First, continent dummies

do not proxy for a clear explanation of why countries in these regions have worse institutions or

perform poorly. Second, Latin America is primarily a French legal origin continent. The correlation

between Catholic and Latin America is 0.71 and is significant at the one-percent level. Thus,

including continent dummies may weaken our ability to identify linkages between financial

development and legal origin without offering a clear, alternative explanation. Third, many Sub-

Saharan African countries have high settler mortality rates. The correlation between AFRICA and

SETTLER MORTALITY is 0.65 and is significant at the one-percent level. Thus, including the

AFRICA dummy may decrease the ability to find a link between financial development and

endowments without offering an alternative theory. Including these continent dummies, however,

may control for region-specific characteristics that are not captured by any of the other explanatory

variables. Therefore, while recognizing the problems associated with interpreting continent

dummies, we include them in assessing the relation between law, endowments, and finance.15


3. Regression Results

       This section presents regressions on the relationship between financial development and

both law and endowments while controlling for other possible determinants of financial

development. The dependent variable is one of the three measures of financial development:

PRIVATE CREDIT, STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT, or PROPERTY RIGHTS. We use a

dummy variable for French legal origin to assess the links between law and finance. We use

SETTLER MORTALITY to assess the relationship between endowments and finance. As control

variables, we use continent dummy variables (for Latin American and Africa), measures of religious
                                                  14


composition, the percentage of years the country has been independent since 1776, and ethnic

diversity.16 The reasons for including these controls were discussed above.


3.1. Law and Finance

       Table 2 presents regressions of financial development on French legal origin and various

combinations of the control variables. Table 2 does not include measures of endowments.

       The results indicate a strong, negative relation between French legal origin and financial

development. When controlling for continent dummies, religious composition, ethnic diversity, and

independence, French legal origin enters negatively and significantly at the five-percent level in all

of the financial development regressions. The results suggest an economically large impact. For

instance the smallest coefficient on FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN in the STOCK MARKET

DEVELOPMENT regressions is -0.27, where the mean value of STOCK MARKET

DEVELOPMENT is 0.19 and the standard deviation is 0.40. For illustrative purposes, the

coefficient suggests that if Argentina had a British Common law tradition, its low level of stock

market capitalization (0.10) would be substantially larger and closer to that in New Zealand (0.37).

       In sum, French Civil Law countries tend to have lower levels of financial development than

British Common Law countries after controlling for many other national characteristics. This result

is consistent with the LLSV (1998) view that the identity of the colonizer matters because of the

legal traditions they brought.

3.2. Endowments and Finance

       Table 3 indicates a robust, negative association between SETTLER MORTALITY and

financial development. SETTLER MORTALITY enters with a negative coefficient and is

significant at the five-percent level in all of the PRIVATE CREDIT and STOCK MARKET

DEVELOPMENT regressions. The coefficient sizes are economically large. According to the
                                                 15


smallest coefficient in the PRIVATE CREDIT regression in Table 3 (-0.14), a one-standard

deviation reduction in the logarithm of mortality rates (1.24) would increase PRIVATE CREDIT by

0.17 (where the mean and standard deviation of PRIVATE CREDIT are 0.32 and 0.30

respectively). More concretely, the estimates can account for why countries such as Nicaragua and

Jamaica with bad endowments (log settler mortality rates of 5.1 and 4.9 respectively) have lower

levels of financial intermediary development (0.25 and 0.27 respectively) than Chile (0.54), which

had a log settler mortality rate of 4.2. Furthermore, SETTLER MORTALITY enters all of the

PROPERTY RIGHTS regressions negatively and significantly, except those including continent

dummies. As noted, there is an extremely high correlation between AFRICA and SETTLER

MORTALITY. Also, as we report below, when we use an alternative measure of property rights

protection, settler mortality enters significantly even when controlling for AFRICA.

       These results support the view that high settler mortality rates are negatively associated with

financial development today and are robust to an assortment of control variables. These findings are

fully consistent with the AJR (2001, 2002) view that a colony’s environmental endowments

influenced how it was colonized –whether it was an extractive colony or a settler colony -- with

long-lasting implications for institutional development.


3.3. Law, Endowments, and Finance

       Table 4 presents regression results on the relation between financial development and both

law and endowments while controlling for other exogenous determinants of financial development.

       The Table 4 regressions provide strong support for the endowment view of financial

development. SETTLER MORTALITY enters all of the PRIVATE CREDIT and STOCK

MARKET DEVELOPMENT regressions significantly at the five-percent level even when

controlling for legal origin, continent dummies, religious composition, the length of time the
                                                   16


country has been independent, and ethnic diversity. The sizes of the coefficients on SETTLER

MORTALITY in the PRIVATE CREDIT and STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT regressions

are very similar to those in Table 3, which do not also control for legal origin. Also, similar to Table

3, the Table 4 regressions indicate that SETTLER MORTALITY exerts a statistically significant

impact on PROPERTY RIGHTS except when controlling for the AFRICA dummy variable

(because of the very high correlation between the rate of settler mortality and countries in Sub-

Saharan Africa). As discussed below, however, when we use an alternative measure of property

rights protection, settler mortality enters significantly even when controlling for the AFRICA

dummy variable.

       In sum, poor endowments – as measured by settler mortality – are negatively associated with

financial development today. Even when controlling for the legal tradition of the colonizers and

other possible determinants of financial development, initial endowments of the colonies help

explain cross-country variation in financial development today, which is strongly supportive of the

AJR (2001, 2002) endowment view.

       The Table 4 regressions also provide support for the law and finance view, though some

qualifications are necessary. When controlling for SETTLER MORTALITY, the relationship

between financial intermediary development (PRIVATE CREDIT) and legal origin is not robust to

the inclusion of various control variables. However, FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN is negatively and

significantly associated with PROPERTY RIGHTS in all of the regressions when controlling for

SETTLER MORTALITY. Putting aside regressions that include CATHOLIC (which is extremely

highly correlated with French Civil law), FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN is also negatively and

significantly linked with STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT. To the extent that equity markets

rely more than banking institutions on well-functioning legal systems to defend the rights of

individual investors, these findings are consistent with the thrust of the law and finance view.
                                                  17


       Subject to the qualifications discussed above, we interpret the results as generally consistent

with the LLSV (1998) theory that the French Civil law tends to place greater emphasis on the rights

of the State versus the rights of individuals, with negative repercussions on financial contracting. In

contrast, the British Common law tends to place greater emphasis on the contractual rights of

individual investors, with positive implications for financial development. While LLSV (1998)

document the link between financial development and legal origin, this paper goes much further in

controlling for alternative explanations. Our results demonstrate a strong connection between legal

origin and stock market development and the protection of private property rights, but we also show

that the link between legal origin and financial intermediary development is not robust to the

inclusion of numerous control variables.

       In comparing the explanatory power of law and endowments, Tables 2-4 indicate that

endowments explain a greater amount of the cross-country variation in financial intermediary and

stock market development than legal origin. Consider the regressions in Tables 2-4 that do not

include any regressors beyond FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN and SETTLER MORTALITY. The

adjusted R-square in the PRIVATE CREDIT-FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN regression is 0.12 (Table

2), while it is 0.44 in the PRIVATE CREDIT-SETTLER MORTALITY regression (Table 3).

Furthermore, when adding FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN to the SETTLER MORTALITY regression,

the adjusted R-square only rises from 0.44 to 0.48 (Table 4). Moreover, as indicated above, legal

origin does not enter the PRIVATE CREDIT robustly when including various control variables, but

endowments remain negatively and significantly linked with financial intermediary development

across various control variables. Turning to private property rights protection, the explanatory

power of law and endowments in the PROPERTY RIGHTS regressions is very similar. However,

the STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT regressions again illustrate the greater explanatory power

of endowments. The adjusted R-square in the STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT-FRENCH
                                                  18


LEGAL ORIGIN regression is 0.17 (Table 2), and it is 0.27 in the SETTLER MORTALITY

regression (Table 3). Furthermore, when adding FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN to the SETTLER

MORTALITY regression, the adjusted R-square only rises from 0.27 to 0.36 (Table 4). Thus, while

legal origin enters all of the stock market development regressions that do not control for religious

composition significantly (Table 4), endowments explain a greater proportion of the cross-country

variation in stock market development than legal origin.17

       Turning to the control variables, the regression analyses do not indicate a robust, consistent

relationship between the continent dummy variables, religious composition measures, the length of

national independence, nor the level of ethnic diversity and financial development when controlling

for legal origin and national endowments. The Table 4 regressions – as well those in Tables 2 and 3

– do not demonstrate a significant, robust relation between any of these control variables and any of

the measures of financial development when controlling for the law and endowments. As

emphasized above, (1) French Civil law countries also tend to be predominantly Catholic, (2) much

of Latin America adopted the French Civil law tradition, and (3) Sub-Saharan Africa had very high

rates of settler mortality. Nevertheless, while a consistent pattern of results emerges for law and

endowments, we do not observe a robust set of results on the continent dummies, religious

composition variables, independence indicator, or ethnic diversity measure.


4. Robustness Tests


4.1. Political Structure

       As a robustness check, we control for political structure. North (1990) argues that once

groups gain power, they will shape policies and institutions to their own advantages. The work of

Finer (1997) and Damaska (1986) further suggests that centralized/powerful states will be more
                                                   19


responsive to and efficient at implementing the interests of the elite than a decentralized/competitive

political system with an assortment of checks and balances. Thus, while the law and endowments

may play a role, this politics and finance view stresses that closed political systems are more likely

to impede the development of financial systems that promote competition and threaten entrenched

powers than open political systems (Rajan and Zingales, 2002). LLSV (1998) do not control for

political structure in their examination of the law and finance view.

       To assess whether law and endowments continue to explain cross-country differences in

financial development after controlling for the structure of the political environment, we use two

measures of political openness. LEGISLATIVE COMPETITION is an index of the degree of

competitiveness of the last legislative election, ranging from 1 (non-competitive) to 7 (most

competitive). CHECKS measures the number of influential veto players in legislative and executive

initiatives. These data are from Beck, Clarke, Groff, Keefer, and Walsh, (2001). The politics and

finance view predicts that greater competition and more checks and balances will limit the ability of

the elite to dictate policy and institutional development.

       To control for endogenous determination of political structures, we use instrumental

variables. 18 As instruments, we include the religious composition variables, independence, and

ethnic diversity. We include the religious variables since Landes (1998) and others argue that the

Catholic and Muslim religions tend to produce hierarchical political systems. We include

independence since more years of independence may permit greater latitude to shape domestic

political institutions. We include ethnic diversity since some theories suggest that ethnic diversity

will tend to create political systems that stymie competition and permit greater discretion on the part

of the controlling party (Alesina, Easterly, and Baqir, 1999). The instrumental variables

significantly explain cross-country variation in the political structure indexes at the one- percent

significance level. Nevertheless, given the valid skepticism associated with obtaining fully
                                                   20


acceptable instrumental variables for political structure, we (i) present these exploratory results as a

robustness check on the endowment and law theories and not as a strong test of the political channel

and (ii) we are particularly circumspect in interpreting these instrumental variable regressions.

       The Table 5 instrumental variable results (a) are consistent with the law and endowment

theories while controlling for the structure of the political system and (b) suggest that the politics

mechanisms is not the only channel via which law and endowments influence financial

development. As shown, legal origin and endowments continue to enter the financial development

regressions significantly even when controlling for the exogenous component of political structure

except for SETTLER MORTALITY in the PROPERTY RIGHTS regressions. The political

structure variables do not enter any of the financial development regressions significantly. Thus,

there is no evidence in Table 5 that political structure explains cross-country variation in financial

development beyond the explanatory power of legal origin and environmental endowments.

Furthermore, the results do not suggest that political structure is the only channel via which legal

origin and initial endowments influence financial development. If political structure were the only

channel through which law and initial endowments influence financial development, we would have

found a significant coefficient on the political structure indicators and insignificant coefficients on

the legal origin and endowment indicators. We found the opposite. Moreover, we ran two-stage

least regressions with financial development as the dependent variable and with political structure

as the only explanatory variable in the second stage. The instruments were legal origin and settler

mortality. While political structure enters the financial development regression significantly and

with the predicted sign, the instruments do not pass the test of over-identifying restrictions. These

results do not reject the compelling arguments and evidence presented in Rajan and Zingales

(2002). Rather the evidence in this paper suggests that legal origin and endowments influence

financial development beyond the political channel.19
                                                  21


4.2. Alternative Samples

        To assess the robustness of the results, we examine different sub-samples of countries. In

these robustness checks, we only include two regressions to keep the table to a manageable length.

We include one regression with only the law/endowment variables as regressors and a second

regression that includes continent dummy variables, the years of independence, and ethnic diversity.

We do not include the religious indicators because they do not enter any of Table 2-4 regressions

significantly at the five-percent level.

        Table 6 presents regression results on five different sub-samples of countries. Panel A

excludes Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States from the regression. After

omitting these countries, the data continue to support both the law and endowment views of

financial development. The results are fully consistent with the full sample results in Table 4.

FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN enters all of the STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT and

PROPERTY RIGHTS regressions significantly, but does not enter the PRIVATE CREDIT

regression significantly when controlling for other determinants. SETTLER MORTALILITY

enters all of the PRIVATE CREDIT and STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT regressions

significantly, but does not enter significantly in the PROPERTY RIGHTS regression when

controlling for AFRICA. In Panels B and C, we examine French legal origin and British legal origin

countries separately to test whether settler mortality accounts for cross-country variation in financial

development within each group. Again, the results support the view that the disease environment

encountered by European settlers shaped the formation of long-lasting financial institutions. The

results do, however, suggest that the SETTLER MORTALITY-finance relationship is stronger for

the British legal origin sample of countries than for the French legal origin sample. SETTLER

MORTALITY enters negatively and significantly in all the regressions in Panel C (only British

legal origin countries) except for the PROPERTY RIGHTS regression when we include the African
                                                 22


dummy variable (which we discussed above). It is not as robustly related to equity market

development and property rights in the French legal origin sub-sample – it does not enter

significantly once we control for AFRICA. Further, settler mortality explains less than half of the

cross-country variation in financial development among French Civil law countries than among

British Common law countries, as can be seen from comparing the adjusted R-square statistics in

Panels B and C. Finally, we also examine high and low settler mortality countries. Here, we assess

whether legal origin explains financial development within the high (above the median) settler

mortality countries and within the low (below the median) settler mortality countries.20 The results

are broadly consistent with the earlier findings. FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN is not strongly

associated with financial intermediary development (PRIVATE CREDIT) in the high-mortality

countries. Nevertheless, legal origin is strongly, negatively associated with STOCK MARKET

DEVELOPMENT and PROPERTY RIGHTS in both sub-samples and PRIVATE CREDIT in the

low-mortality sample. While there are some differences when looking across different sub-samples,

the same basic pattern emerges as in the full sample: law and endowments explain financial

development, though the endowment-intermediary (PRIVATE CREDIT) relationship is more

robust than the law-intermediary (PRIVATE CREDIT) relationship.


4.3. Alternative Indicators of Financial Development

       Next, we examine alternative measures of financial development. Specifically, instead of

examining financial intermediary credit to the private sector (PRIVATE CREDIT), we use the

demand and interest-bearing liabilities of financial intermediaries (LIQUID LIABILITIES). Instead

of market capitalization to measure stock market development, we examine the total value of stock

transactions in the economy as a share of GDP (TOTAL VALUE TRADED). Finally, instead of

the private property rights protection index used by LLSV (1999), we examine (a) the ICRG
                                                  23


measure of the degree to which the country adheres to the rule of law (RULE OF LAW) and (b) the

Kaufmann, Kraay, Zoido-Lobaton (1999) AGGREATE RULE OF LAW index. The RULE OF

LAW and AGGREATE RULE OF LAW indicators, however, are available for fewer countries, 63

and 68 respectively, than the PROPERTY RIGHTS measure used throughout the paper.

       Table 7 indicates that these alternative indicators produce results that are consistent with

those discussed above. Settler mortality is significantly, negatively associated with the new

measures of financial intermediary development, stock market development, and property rights

protection. Although the RULE OF LAW-SETTLER MORTALITY relationship weakens when

including continent dummy variables, years of independence, and ethnic diversity the

AGGREGATE RULE OF LAW-SETTLER MORTALITY relationship remains significant when

controlling for these country traits. Since it is only when including a dummy variable for AFRICA

(where settler mortality rates were very high) that SETTLER MORTALLITY loses its significant

relationship with two of our three measures of private property rights protection, we interpret these

findings as broadly consistent with the view that the initial endowments in the colonies helped

shape institutional approaches to the protection of private property rights.

       FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN is negatively associated with all the alternative financial

development indicators except financial intermediary development. As noted above, the

relationship between law and financial intermediary development is more fragile than the

endowment-intermediary relationship.21


4.4. Alternative Endowment Indicator

       Next, we use an alternative measure of endowments, LATITUDE, which equals the absolute

value of the latitude of each country normalized to lie between zero and one. We take the data from

LLSV (1999). Countries that are closer to the equator will tend to have a more tropical climate that
                                                   24


is inhospitable to European settlers and therefore more likely to foster “extractive” institutions.22

However, LATITUDE is not as precise an indicator of the conditions facing European settlers as

SETTLER MORTALITY and therefore LATITUDE is not as precise an empirical proxy for the

AJR (2001) endowment theory as SETTLER MORTALITY. LATITUDE directly measures

geographic location, not climactic conditions. Thus, we have focused our analyses on SETTLER

MORTALITY and include LATITUDE in our robustness checks.

       The Table 8 regressions with LATITUDE indicate, albeit less robustly than the SETTLER

MORTALITY regressions, that countries closer to the equator have lower levels of financial

development than countries in more temperate climates. LATITUDE is positively associated with

PROPERTY RIGHTS after using the array of control variables discussed above. LATITUDE is

also significantly and positively linked with PRIVATE CREDIT in all of the regressions that do not

include AFRICA, which is very highly correlated with LATITUDE. There is not a strong link

between LATITUDE and stock market development. Using LATITUDE, we find a strong link

between legal origin and financial development. FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN enters significantly in

all regressions and its inclusion substantially increases the adjusted R-square over those regressions

that only include LATITUDE. Given the imprecise nature of LATITUDE as proxy for the AJR

(2001) endowment theory, we attach greater weight to the results with SETTLER MORTALITY.


4.5. Tobit Estimation

       Finally, we estimate the stock market development equations using a Tobit estimator. Both

STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT (market capitalization divided by GDP) and TOTAL

VALUE TRADED (trading divided by GDP) have many countries with zero values. Thus, we re-

estimate the equation using a Tobit estimator. As shown in Table 9, we find that both law and
                                                25


endowments enter significantly in all of the regressions when using the Tobit estimator, confirming

the earlier results.
                                                   26



5. Conclusions

       This paper assessed two theories regarding the historical determinants of financial

development. The law and finance theory predicts that historically determined differences in legal

origin can explain cross-country differences in financial development today. Specifically, the law

and finance theory predicts that countries that inherited the British Common law tradition obtained

a legal tradition that tends to emphasize private property rights and support financial development

to a much greater degree than countries that obtained the French Civil law tradition. The

endowment theory predicts that the initial environmental endowments encountered by European

colonizers shaped the types of long-lasting institutions created by these colonizers. Specifically,

hospitable endowments favored the construction of “settler colonies,” where Europeans established

secure property rights. In contrast, colonies with high settler mortality rates fostered the

construction of “extractive colonies,” where Europeans established institutions that facilitated State

control and resource extraction. According to the endowment theory, the long-lasting institutions

created by colonizers continue to influence financial development today.

       Although both the law and endowment theories stress the importance of how initial

conditions influence institutions today, there are crucial differences. The law and finance theory

focuses on the legal tradition brought by the colonizer. Thus, the identity of the colonizer is key.

The endowment theory focuses on how the colony’s endowments shaped the construction of long-

lasting institutions. Thus, the endowment theory focuses on the conditions of the colony, not the

identity of the colonizer.

       The paper provides qualified support for the law and finance theory (Hayek, 1960; LLSV,

1998). One important qualification is that the connection between legal origin and financial

intermediary development is not robust to controlling for endowments and other country
                                                  27


characteristics. Legal origin, however, explains cross-country differences in private property rights

protection even after controlling for initial endowment indicators, religious composition, ethnic

diversity, and the fraction of years the country has been independent since 1776. Furthermore,

except when controlling for religious composition (there is a strong correlation between French

legal heritage and the Catholic religion), there is a robust link between legal origin and stock market

development: French Civil law countries have significantly lower levels of stock market

development than British Common law countries after controlling for other country characteristics.

       The data provide strong support for the endowment view. Countries with poor geographical

endowments, as measured by the log of settler mortality, tend to have less developed financial

intermediaries, less well-developed stock markets, and weaker property rights protection. These

results hold after controlling for legal origin, the percentage of years since 1776 the country has

been independent, the religious composition of the country and the degree of ethnic diversity. In

terms of comparing the law and endowment theories, the empirical results indicate that both the

legal systems brought by colonizers and the initial endowments in the colonies are important

determinants of stock market development and private property rights protection. However, initial

endowments are more robustly associated with financial intermediary development than legal

origin. Moreover, initial endowments explain more of the cross-country variation in financial

intermediary and stock market development than legal origin. In sum and consistent with AJR’s

(2001) endowment theory, we find a robust link between initial endowments and current levels of

financial development.
                                                 28


                                                References
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J. A., 2001. The colonial origins of comparative
development: an empirical investigation. American Economic Review 91, 1369-1401.

Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J. A., 2002. Reversal of fortunes: geography and institutions
in the making of the modern world income distribution. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117,
forthcoming

Alesina, A., Baqir, R., Easterly, W., 1999. Public goods and ethic divisions. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 114, 1243-1284.

Beck, T., Clarke, G., Groff, A., Keefer, P., Walsh, P., 2001. New tools and new tests in comparative
political economy: the database of political institutions. World Bank Economic Review 15, 165-
176.

Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Levine, R., 2000. A new database on financial development and
structure. World Bank Economic Review 14, 597-605.

Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Levine, R., 2002. Law and finance. Why does legal origin matter?
World Bank mimeo.

Beck, T., Levine, R., Loayza, N., 2000. Finance and the sources of growth. Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 261-300.

Berman, H. J., 1997. Law and Revolution: The Formation of the Western Legal Tradition. Harvard
University Press, Cambridge, MA.

Coke, E., 1628 [1979 version]. The First Part of the Institutes of the Laws of England. Garland
Publishing, Inc., New York, NY.

Coffee, J., 2000. Privatization and corporate governance: the lessons from the securities market
failure. Unpublished working paper 158. Columbia Law School, New York.

Crosby, A. W., 1989. Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 900-1900.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Curtin, P. D., 1964. The Image of Africa. University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI.

Curtin, P. D., 1989. Death by Migration: Europe’s Encounter with the Tropical World in the
Nineteenth Century. Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.

Curtin, P. D., 1998. Disease and Empire: The Health of European Troops in the Conquest of Africa.
Cambridge University Press, New York, NY.

Damaska, M. R., 1986. The Faces of Justice and State Authority: A Comparative Approach to the
Legal Process, Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.
                                                  29




Dawson, J. P., 1968. The Oracles of the Law, University of Michigan Law School, Ann Arbor, MI
(Reprinted in 1986 by William S. Hein & Co., Inc. Buffalo, New York).

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V. 1998, Law, finance, and firm growth, Journal of Finance 53,
2107-2137.

Demirguc-Kunt, A. Detragiache, E., 2002. Does deposit insurance increase banking system
stability? An empirical investigation. Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Easterly, W. Islam, R. Stiglitz, J., 2000. Shaken and stirred: Explaining growth volatility. World
Bank Conference on Development Economics.

Easterly, W. Levine, R., 1997. Africa’s growth tragedy: policies and ethnic divisions. Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112, 1203-1250.

Easterly, W. Levine, R., 2002. Tropics, germs, and crops. University of Minnesota, mimeo.

Engerman, S., Sokoloff, K., 1997. Factor endowments, institutions, and differential paths of growth
among new world economies. In Haber, S.H. (Ed.), How Latin America Fell Behind, Stanford
University Press, Stanford CA, pp. 260-304.

Engerman, S., Mariscal, E., Sokoloff, K., 1998. Schooling, suffrage, and the persistence of
inequality in the Americas, 1800-1945. Unpublished working paper. Department of Economics,
UCLA.

Ertman, T., 1997. Birth of the Leviathan. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.

Finer, S., 1997. The History of Government. Vol. I-III. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.

Franks, J., Sussman, O., 1999. Financial Innovations and Corporate Insolvency. Unpublished
working paper. London Business School.

Gallup, J.L., Sachs, J.D., Mellinger, A.D., 1998. Geography and economic development. National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6849.

Glaeser, E., Shleifer, A., 2002. Legal origins. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, forthcoming.

Glendon, M.A., Gordon, M. W., Osakwe, C., 1982. Comparative Legal Tradition in a Nutshell.
West Publishing Co., St. Paul, MN.

Gutierrez, H.,1986. La mortalite des eveques latino-americains aux XVIIe et XVII siecles,” Annales
de Demographie Historique, 29-39.

Hayek, F., 1960. The Constitution of Liberty. The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL.
                                                 30


Holmes, K.R., Johnson, B.T., Kirkpatrick, M., 1997. 1997 Index of Economic Freedom. The
Heritage Foundation, Washington, DC and Dow Jones & Co., Inc., New York, NY.

Kamarck, A., 1976. The Tropics and Economic Development: A Provocative Inquiry into the
Poverty of Nations. The Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.

Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A., Zoido-Lobatón, P., 1999. Aggregating Governance Indicators. World
Bank Research Working Paper 2195.

Landes, D., 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations. W.W. Norton, New York, NY.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 2000. Investor protection and
corporate governance. Journal of Financial Economics 58, 3-27.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1999. The quality of government.
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, 222-279.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1998. Law and finance. Journal of
Political Economy 106, 1113-1155

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1997. Legal determinants of external
finance. Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

Levine, R., 1997, Financial development and economic growth: Views and Agenda, Journal of
Economic Literature 35, 688-726.

Levine, R., Loayza, N., Beck, T., 2000. Financial intermediation and growth: causality and causes.
Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 31-77.

Levine, R., Zervos, S., 1998. Stock markets banks and economic growth. American Economic
Review 88, 537-58

Littleton, T., 1481 [1903 version] Littleton's Tenures in English. Eugene Wambaugh, (Ed.) John
Bryne & Co., . Washington, D.C.

Mahoney, P., 2001. The Common law and economic growth: Hayek might be right. Journal of
Legal Studies 30, 503-525.

Merryman, J.H., 1985. The Civil Law Tradition: An Introduction to the Legal Systems of Western
Europe and Latin America. Stanford University Press, Stanford, CA.

North, D., 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK.

North, D., Weingast, B.R., 1989. Constitutions and commitment: the evolution of institutions
governing public choice in seventeenth-century England. Journal of Economic History 49, 803-
832.
                                                  31




Pivovarsky, A., 2001.Essays on Institutions and Finance. Harvard University (John F. Kennedy
School) Ph.D. dissertation, Public Policy.

Putnam, R., 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy. Princeton
University Press, Princeton, N.J.

Rajan, R.G., Zingales, L., 1998. Financial dependence and growth. American Economic Review 88,
559-586.

Rajan, R.G., Zingales, L., 2002. The great reversals: the politics of financial development in the 20th
century. Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Stulz, R., Williamson, R., 2002. Culture, openness, and finance. Unpublished working paper,
University of Ohio.

Weber, M., 1958 The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Capitalism. Charles Scribner’s Sons, New
York, NY.

Wurgler, J., 2000. Financial markets and the allocation of capital. Journal of Financial Economics
58, 187-214.

Young, C., 1994. The African Colonial State in Comparative Perspective. Yale University Press,
New Haven CT.

Zweigert, K., Kötz, H., 1998. Introduction to Comparative Law. Oxford University Press, New
York, NY.
                                                            32


ENDNOTES

1
  While landholding rights in England were originally based on William I´s feudal system, the courts developed legal
rules that treated large estate holders as private property owners and not as tenants of the king. Indeed, the common law
at the dawn of the 17th century was principally a law of private property [e.g., Littleton, 1481, and Coke, 1628]. During
the great conflict between Parliament and the English kings in the 16th and 17th centuries, the Crown attempted to
reassert feudal prerogatives and sell monopoly rights to cope with budgetary shortfalls. Parliament (composed mostly of
landowners and wealthy merchants) along with the courts took the side of the property owners against the Crown. While
King James I argued that royal prerogative superseded the common law, the courts asserted that the law is king, Lex,
Rex. The Stuarts were thrown out in 1688.
2
  By the 18th century, there was a notable deterioration in the integrity and prestige of the judiciary. The Crown sold
judgeships to rich families and the judges unabashedly promoted the interests of the elite. [Dawson, 1968, p. 373].
Unsurprisingly then, the French Revolution strove to eliminate the role of the judiciary in making and interpreting the
law. Robespierre even argued that, “the word jurisprudence ... must be effaced from our language.” (Quoted from
Dawson, 1968, p. 426) Antagonism toward jurisprudence and the exaltation of the role of the state encouraged the
development of easily verifiable “bright-line-rules” that do not rely on the discretion of judges (Glaeser and Shleifer,
2002). Thus, codification supported the strengthening of the government and relegated judges to a relatively minor,
bureaucratic role.
3
  Mortality rates were startlingly high in some places. In the first year of the Sierra Leone Company, 72 percent of the
Europeans died. In the 1805 Mungo park expedition in Gambia and Niger, all of the Europeans died before completing
the trip.
4
  Young (1994) presents historical evidence that once authoritarian institutions are efficiently extracting resources from
the bulk of society, the post-independent rulers tend to use these institutions to their own advantage and profit. This was
the case in Sierra Leone, Senegal, and Congo. Latin America is similar. While Mexicans gained independence from
European colonialists, the elite that assumed power took advantage of the existing institutions to extract resources,
rather than creating institutions to protect private property, contracts, and foster broad-based economic development.
Furthermore, Engerman, Mariscal, and Sokoloff (1998) demonstrate the long-lasting impact of initial institutions on
voting rights: once regimes restrict voting rights to protect the elite from the masses, the government tends to resist
changes in suffrage policies for long periods.
5
  Engerman and Sokoloff (1997) note another channel through which geographical endowments shape initial institutions
with enduring effects on economic development. They show that agriculture in southern North America and much of
South America is conducive to large plantations. Thus, colonialists developed long-lasting institutions to protect the few
landowners against the many peasants. In contrast, northern North America’s agriculture is conducive to small farms, so
that more egalitarian institutions emerged. Thus, endowments influence the formation of institutions associated with
openness and competition. Our primary reason for focusing on the AJR (2001) measure of settler mortality and not also
examining agricultural endowments is that AJR (2001) have assembled data for a broad cross-section of countries.
6
  This is admittedly overstated. Proponents of the law and finance theory do not argue that endowments are irrelevant.
Similarly, proponents of the endowment theory do not contend that the law is irrelevant. Rather, each theory articulates
very distinct mechanisms about how the colonization period shaped national views toward private property rights and
financial development. We stress – and empirically evaluate -- the distinct predictions.
7
  Alexander Pivovarsky (2001) also examines the relationship between institutions and financial development. He
analyzes the impact of current institutions, instrumented by settler mortality and legal origin, on financial development
and finds a stronger effect of the exogenous component of institutions on financial development. We, however,
compare endowments and legal origin directly in their effect on financial development. We only became aware of his
insightful Ph.D. dissertation after we completed this paper.
8
  In particular, see Beck, Levine, and Loayza (2000) on the finance and productivity growth relationship, Wurgler
(2000) on the finance and industry allocation of capital relationship, Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998) on the
finance and firm growth link, Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2002) on the finance and crisis relationship, Easterly,
Islam, and Stiglitz (2000) on the finance and output volatility links, and Levine and Zervos (1998) and Rajan and
Zingales (1998) on the finance-growth relationship.
9
  For both STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT and PRIVATE CREDIT, we have conducted the analyses using data
averaged over the 1975-95 period instead of the 1990-95 period. We get the same results. Since there are fewer
countries with data over the 1975-95 period, we present the results with the 1990-95 averages.
10
   Since there are differences in ownership concentration across countries, LLSV (1998) suggest using an adjustment
whereby STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT is multiplied by one minus the median ownership share of the three
                                                           33



largest shareholder in the ten largest non-financial, privately-owned domestic firms in the country. This paper obtains
the same conclusions using this adjusted measure. Since we only have these ownership share figures for a sub-sample
of countries, however, making this adjustment substantially reduces our dataset. Thus, we report the results using the
standard STOCK MARKET DEVELOPMENT indicator for market size.
11
   We do not have data on PROPERTY RIGHTS for the Central African Republic, so there are only 69 countries in the
PROPERTY RIGHTS regressions.
12
   One may further refine the categorization of legal traditions, as described by the following examples. First, Franks
and Sussman (1999) and Coffee (2000) describe differences in the adaptability of two Common law countries: the
United Kingdom and the United States. While in the U.K there is freedom of contracting and the judiciary is therefore
not very powerful, in the U.S. the judiciary has a more important role to play in developing law. In both systems,
however, the legislature does not have a monopoly on creating law, as in the original French legal system, as designed
by Napoleon. In both the U.K and the U.S., case law is a source of law, while not in France. Second, different
colonization strategies may have intensified differences across legal traditions. England did not try to replace Islamic,
Hindu, or African law. English courts in the colonies, therefore, used local laws and customs in deciding cases. This
quickly produced an Indian Common law distinct from English Common law. While perhaps chaotic, this allowed for
the integration of common law with local circumstances. In contrast, the French imposed the Code although serious
conflicts frequently existed with local customs. Also, legal scholars study differences across the French civil law
countries of Latin America. While recognizing that each country’s legal system is special, the comparative law
literature clearly emphasizes that there are key differences across the major legal families.
13
   Although we have data on settler mortality for Vietnam and Myanmar (which are classified as socialist legal origin
countries by LLSV (1999), we do not include these two countries because we do not have comparable information on
financial development for these economies. Also, there are 70 countries in our sample of former colonies with settler
mortality data. We also constructed a larger sample of 95 non-European countries. This 95-country sample, however,
does not have settler mortality data. For the 95-country sample, we conducted the analyses using latitude instead of
settler mortality and obtained the same results reported below
14
   AJR (2001) document a negative linear relation between the logarithm of settler mortality and the absence of
expropriation risk. We are instead examining financial development indicators. When we experimented with a non-
linear transformation (e.g., the inverse of the log settler mortality rate), we obtain the same conclusions discussed
below.
15
   In a previous version, we also included GDP per capita as control variable. Institutional development, however, also
influences economic development (as shown by AJR 2001); so that including GDP per capita together with initial
endowments would bias the coefficient on legal origin and settler mortality/latitude toward zero. Further, unlike the
other regressors, GDP per capita is endogenous, which causes estimation problems as shown by AJR (2001).
16
   We also include regression where we control for continent dummies, time since independence and ethnic
fractionalization at the same time. We do not include religious composition in these regressions since they never enter
significantly at the five-percent significance level.
17
   It is difficult to compare the sizes of the coefficients on SETTLER MORTALITY and FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN
because a change in legal origin is obviously large and discrete. Nevertheless, we compare a change in legal origin with
a change in SETTLER MORTALITY from the second quintile to the fourth quintile (i.e., a change of 2.1), which is less
than a two standard deviation change in SETTLER MORTALITY (2.5). Using, for instance, the coefficients in the last
row of the stock market development indicators in Table 4, this implies a change in stock market development of 0.23
from a legal origin change and 0.34 from the endowment change. The change from the endowment change is more than
50 percent larger.
18
   We find the same results when using ordinary least squares and therefore not instrumenting for political structure.
19
   Beck, Demirguc-Kunt and Levine (2002) examine the different channels through which legal origin affects financial
development.
20
   Note there are more countries in Panel E than Panel D because Algeria and Morocco have exactly the median level of
Settler Mortality and are allocated to the below median group. When we allocate them to the above median group, or
split them between the two groups, we obtain the same results.
21
   Unlike in the PROPERTY RIGHTS regressions of Tables 2-4, SETTLER MORTALITY explains a larger share of
the variation in the RULE OF LAW and AGGERGATE RULE OF LAW regressions than FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN.
As discussed in Section 3.3, we draw this conclusion by comparing adjusted R-square statistics across regressions with
only legal origin, with only SETTLER MORTALITY, and then with SETTLER MORTAILITY and legal origin
included simultaneously. The regressions with only SETTLER MORTALITY and only the legal origin dummy variable
for this sample of countries are not reported.
                                                          34



22
  While some authors stress the direct impact of tropical environments on production (Kamarck, 1976; Crosby, 1989;
and Gallup, Sachs, and Millinger, 1998), AJR (2002) show that the environment tends to influence economic
development primarily through its impact on institutions. See Easterly and Levine (2002) for evidence consistent with
AJR (2002).
                                                                                       Table 1
                                                                           Summary Statistics and Correlations
Summary statistics are presented in Panel A and correlations are presented in Panel B, respectively. Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP.
Stock Market Development measures the value of shares listed on the stock exchange as share of GDP. Property Rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private
property, with higher numbers indicating better enforcement. French legal origin is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for countries with French civil law tradition, and zero otherwise. Settler
Mortality is the log of the annualized deaths per thousand European soldiers in European colonies in the early 19th century. Latin America and Africa are dummy variables that take the value one if the
country is located in Latin America or sub-Saharan Africa, respectively. Catholic, Muslim, and Other indicate the percentage of the population that follows a particular religion (Catholic, Muslim, or
religions other than Catholic, Muslim or Protestant, respectively). Independence is the percentage of years since 1776 that a country has been independent. Ethnic Fractionalization is the probability
that two randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language. Legislative Competition is an indicator of competition in the last legislative election. Checks measures the number
of veto-players in the political decision process. These two measures are averaged over 1990-95. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.

Panel A: Summary Statistics:
                                  N              Mean          Std. Dev.      Min          Max

Private Credit                    70            0.32           0.30           0.01         1.48
Stock Market Development          70            0.19           0.40           0            1.89
Property Rights                   69            3.12           0.99           1            5
French Legal Origin               70            0.64           0.48           0            1
Settler Mortality                 70            4.67           1.24           2.15         7.99
Africa                            70            0.40           0.49           0            1
Latin America                     70            0.36           0.48           0            1
Catholic                          70            39.44          36.89          0.10         97.3
Muslim                            70            23.90          33.87          0.00         99.4
Other religion                    70            25.79          23.58          0.30         86.0
Independence                      70            0.32           0.32           0            1
Ethnic Fractionalization          70            0.42           0.31           0            0.89
Legislative Competition           68            5.81           1.62           1            7
Checks                            68            2.68           1.40           1            6
Panel B:
Correlation Matrix of Variables
                    Private     Stock Market Property     French Legal Settler                   Latin                            Other                     Ethnic              Legislative
                    Credit      Development Rights        Origin       Mortality Africa          America     Catholic    Muslim   Religion   Independence   Fractionalization   Competition

Stock Market
Development         0.763***

Property Rights     0.618*** 0.487***

French Legal
Origin              -0.370*** -0.430***       -0.461***

Settler Mortality   -0.669*** -0.528***       -0.438*** 0.238**

Africa              -0.408*** -0.228*         -0.426*** 0.061             0.651***

Latin America.      -0.105      -0.140        0.064       0.244**         -0.178     -0.609***

Catholic            -0.133      -0.194        -0.114      0.479***        -0.118     -0.356*** 0.706***

Muslim              -0.157      -0.141        -0.103      0.006           0.271**    0.240**     -0.500***   -0.652***

Other Religion      0.283**     0.421***      0.187       -0.552***       -0.137     0.166       -0.379***   -0.548*** -0.175

Independence        0.057       -0.016        0.041       0.330***        -0.323*** -0.475*** 0.630***       0.700*** -0.421*** -0.384***

Ethnic
Fractionalization   -0.269** -0.062           -0.213*     -0.076          0.433*** 0.718*** -0.551***        -0.370*** 0.229*     0.229*     -0.437***

Legislative
competition         0.408*** 0.271**          0.401*** -0.032             -0.601*** -0.699*** 0.513***       0.425*** -0.387*** -0.143       0.392***       -0.506***

Checks              0.378*** 0.323**          0.373*** -0.202*            -0.497*** -0.543*** 0.383***       0.248**     -0.285** -0.010     0.317***       -0.306**            0.664***

*, **, *** indicate significance levels of 10, 5, and 1 percent respectively.
                                                                                           Table 2
                                                                                       Law and Finance
The regression estimated is: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 French legal origin + β2X, where Financial Sector Development is either Private Credit, Stock Market Development, or Property
Rights. Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP. Stock Market Development measures the value of shares listed on the stock exchange as
share of GDP. Property rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property, with higher numbers indicating better enforcement. French legal origin is a dummy
variable that takes on the value one for countries with French civil law tradition, and zero otherwise. The regressions also include a vector of control variables, X. Latin America and Africa are dummy
variables that take the value one if the country is located in Latin America or sub-Sahara Africa, respectively. Catholic, Muslim, and Other indicate the percentage of the population that follows a
particular religion (Catholic, Muslim, or religions other than Catholic, Muslim or Protestant, respectively). Independence is the percentage of years since 1776 that a country has been independent.
Ethnic Fractionalization is the probability that two randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language. Regressions are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares. Robust
standard errors are given in parentheses. *. **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. The sample is restricted to the countries for which data on Settler Mortality are
available. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.

                                                                                                                                                  Ethnic                                 Obs
                French legal origin    Latin America       Africa          Catholic      Muslim           Other            Independence           Fractionalization     Adjusted-R2

Private         -0.233***                                                                                                                                               0.124            70
Credit          (0.088)
                -0.136**               -0.292***           -0.417***                                                                                                    0.378            70
                (0.067)                (0.092)             (0.100)
                -0.181**                                                   -0.002        -0.003           -0.001                                                        0.121            70
                (0.086)                                                    (0.003)       (0.003)          (0.005)
                -0.275***                                                                                                  0.191                                        0.148            70
                (0.097)                                                                                                    (0.136)
                -0.247***                                                                                                                         -0.289***             0.203            70
                (0.084)                                                                                                                           (0.095)
                -0.168**               -0.352***           -0.348***                                                       0170                   -0.109                0.384            70
                (0.080)                (0.112)             (0.107)                                                         (0.179)                (0.133)

Stock           -0.356***                                                                                                                                               0.173            70
Market          (0.118)
Development     -.0.278***             -0.242*             -0.312**                                                                                                     0.240            70
                (0.101)                (0.128)             (0.143)
                -0.265**                                                   0.002         0.002            0.006                                                         0.199            70
                (0.107)                                                    (0.004)       (0.004)          (0.005)
                -0.395***                                                                                                  0.176**                                      0.179            70
                (0.111)                                                                                                    (0.082)
                -0.362***                                                                                                                         -0.121                0.170            70
                (0.117)                                                                                                                           (0.122)
                -0.308***              -0.299***           -0.315*                                                         0.224                  0.087                 0.237            70
                (0.102)                (0.104)             (0.177)                                                         (0.150)                (0.176)

Property        -0.947***                                                                                                                                               0.198            69
Rights          (0.241)
                -0.836***              -0.250              -0.969***                                                                                                    0.351            69
                (0.206)                (0.265)             (0.243)
                -1.065***                                                  -0.002        -0.005           -0.007                                                        0.182            69
                (0.291)                                                    (0.009)       (0.009)          (0.011)
                -1.103***                                                                                                  0.692**                                      0.232            69
                (0.235)                                                                                                    (0.346)
                -0.995***                                                                                                                         -0.813**              0.253            69
                (0.232)                                                                                                                           (0.339)
                -0.856***              -0.286              -1.014***                                                       0.182                  0.178                 0.334            69
                (0.203)                (0.297)             (0.293)                                                         (0.393)                (0.477)
                                                                                      Table 3
                                                                                Endowments and Finance
The regression estimated is: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 Settler Mortality + β2X, where Financial Sector Development is either Private Credit, Stock Market Development, or Property
Rights. Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP. Stock Market Development measures the value of shares listed on the stock exchange as
share of GDP. Property rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property, with higher numbers indicating better enforcement. Settler Mortality is the log of the
annualized deaths per thousand European soldiers in European colonies in the early 19th century. The regressions also include a vector of control variables, X. Latin America and Africa are dummy
variables that take the value one if the country is located in Latin America or sub-Sahara Africa, respectively. Catholic, Muslim, and Other indicate the percentage of the population that follows a
particular religion (Catholic, Muslim, or religions other than Catholic, Muslim or Protestant, respectively). Independence is the percentage of years since 1776 that a country has been independent.
Ethnic Fractionalization is the probability that two randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language. Regressions are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares. Robust
standard errors are given in parentheses. *. **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.

                                                                                                                                                     Ethnic                                Obs
                 Settler mortality     Latin America       Africa           Catholic      Muslim           Other              Independence           Fractionalization     Adjusted-R2

Private          -0.164***                                                                                                                                                 0.440           70
Credit           (0.030)
                 -0.137***             -0.230***           -0.163                                                                                                          0.500           70
                 (0.038)               (0.086)             (0.113)
                 -0.161***                                                  -0.004        -0.003           -0.002                                                          0.490           70
                 (0.028)                                                    (0.003)       (0.210)          (0.004)
                 -0.178***                                                                                                    -0.168                                       0.460           70
                 (0.031)                                                                                                      (0.138)
                 -0.166***                                                                                                                           0.025                 0.432           70
                 (0.033)                                                                                                                             (0.076)
                 -0.140***             -0.224*             -0.131                                                             -0.038                 -0.080                0.489           70
                 (0.038)               (0.128)             (0.121)                                                            (0.176)                (0.103)

Stock            -0.170***                                                                                                                                                 0.267           70
Market           (0.047)
Development      -.0.182**             -0.204              -0.008                                                                                                          0.305           70
                 (0.071)               (0.132)             (0.199)
                 -0.159***                                                  -0.001        -0.001           0.004                                                           0.372           70
                 (0.042)                                                    (0.003)       (0.003)          (0.005)
                 -0.191***                                                                                                    -0.260                                       0.297           70
                 (0.056)                                                                                                      (0.158)
                 -0.198***                                                                                                                           0.261                 0.292           70
                 (0.059)                                                                                                                             (0.167)
                 -0.189**              -0.145              -0.057                                                             -0.099                 0.141                 0.294           70
                 (0.073)               (0.127)             (0.198)                                                            (0.180)                (0.183)

Property         -0.349***                                                                                                                                                 0.177           69
Rights           (0.099)
                 -0.151                -0.489*             -0.903**                                                                                                        0.220           69
                 (0.117)               (0.290)             (0.352)
                 -0.339***                                                  -0.015*       -0.012           -0.010                                                          0.194           69
                 (0.092)                                                    (0.009)       (0.008)          (0.011)
                 -0.377***                                                                                                    -0.336                                       0.175           69
                 (0.104)                                                                                                      (0.387)
                 -0.338***                                                                                                                           -0.102                0.166           69
                 (0.113)                                                                                                                             (0.415)
                 -0.180                -0.271              -1.010**                                                           -0.418                 0.345                 0.214           69
                 (0.125)               (0.407)             (0.392)                                                            (0.550)                (0.514)
                                                                                     Table 4
                                                                           Law, Endowments, and Finance
The regression estimated is: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 French legal origin + β2 Settler Mortality + β3X, where Financial Sector Development is either Private Credit, Stock Market
Development, or Property Rights. Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP. Stock Market Development measures the value of shares listed
on the stock exchange as share of GDP. Property rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property, with higher numbers indicating better enforcement. French
legal origin is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for countries with French civil law tradition, and zero otherwise. Settler Mortality is the log of the annualized deaths per thousand European
soldiers in European colonies in the early 19th century. The regressions also include a vector of control variables, X. Latin America and Africa are dummy variables that take the value one if the
country is located in Latin America or sub-Sahara Africa, respectively. Catholic, Muslim, and Other indicate the percentage of the population that follows a particular religion (Catholic, Muslim, or
religions other than Catholic, Muslim or Protestant, respectively). Independence is the percentage of years since 1776 that a country has been independent. Ethnic Fractionalization is the probability
that two randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language. Regressions are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. *. **,
*** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.

                                                                                                                                                                      Ethnic                                  Obs
                 Settler mortality     French legal origin    Latin America       Africa          Catholic       Muslim           Other           Independence        Fractionalization   Adjusted-R2
Private          -0.151***             -0.141**                                                                                                                                           0.480               70
Credit           (0.026)               (0.059)
                 -0.130***             -0.097*                -0.194*             -0.148                                                                                                  0.514               70
                 (0.034)               (0.055)                (0.082)             (0.108)
                 -0.157***             -0.054                                                     -0.004         -0.003           -0.002                                                  0.486               70
                 (0.028)               (0.074)                                                    (0.003)        (0.002)          (0.003)
                 -0.160***             -0.115                                                                                                     -0.090                                  0.478               70
                 (0.028)               (0.077)                                                                                                    (0.134)
                 -0.148***             -0.144**                                                                                                                       -0.024              0.472               70
                 (0.028)               (0.059)                                                                                                                        (0.073)
                 -0.127***             -0.108                 -0.214*             -0.110                                                          0.029               -0.100              0.505               70
                 (0.035)               (0.069)                (0.117)             (0.121)                                                         (0.185)             (0.110)

Stock            -0.145***             -0.268***                                                                                                                                          0.358               70
Market           (0.038)               (0.085)
Development      -0.164***             -0.229***              -0.118              0.028                                                                                                   0.363               70
                 (0.061)               (0.079)                (0.123)             (0.181)
                 -0.147***             -0.146                                                     0.000          0.001            0.005                                                   0.380               70
                 (0.040)               (0.090)                                                    (0.003)        (0.003)          (0.005)
                 -0.156***             -0.240***                                                                                                  -0.095                                  0.353               70
                 (0.049)               (0.072)                                                                                                    (0.135)
                 -0.167***             -0.246***                                                                                                                      0.178               0.364               70
                 (0.049)               (0.080)                                                                                                                        (0.150)
                 -0.161**              -0.232***              -0.123              -0.012                                                          0.044               0.098               0.346               70
                 (0.063)               (0.071)                (0.115)             (0.190)                                                         (0.163)             (0.171)

Property         -0.279***             -0.781***                                                                                                                                          0.304               69
Rights           (0.080)               (0.223)
                 -0.088                -0.810***              -0.183              -0.786**                                                                                                0.348               69
                 (0.101)               (0.216)                (0.274)             (0.334)
                 -0.277***             -0.853***                                                  -0.004         -0.003           -0.008                                                  0.281               69
                 (0.082)               (0.310)                                                    (0.008)        (0.008)          (0.010)
                 -0.251***             -0.856***                                                                                                  0.256                                   0.299               69
                 (0.087)               (0.227)                                                                                                    (0.371)
                 -0.232**              -0.833***                                                                                                                      -0.398              0.307               69
                 (0.095)               (0.231)                                                                                                                        (0.401)
                 -0.082                -0.816***              -0.197              -0.860**                                                        0.091               0.184               0.328               69
                 (0.110)               (0.216)                (0.328)             (0.371)                                                         (0.434)             (0.480)
                                                                                   Table 5
                                                                      Law, Endowments, Politics, and Finance
The regression estimated in is: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 French legal origin + β2 Settler Mortality + β3 Political structure, where Financial Sector Development is either Private Credit,
Stock Market Development, or Property Rights and Political Structure is either Legislative Competition or Checks. Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector
as share of GDP. Stock Market Development measures the value of shares listed on the stock exchange as share of GDP. Property rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that
protect private property, with higher numbers indicating better enforcement. French legal origin is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for countries with French civil law tradition, and zero
otherwise. Settler Mortality is the log of the annualized deaths per thousand European soldiers in European colonies in the early 19th century. Legislative competition is an indicator of competition in
the last legislative election. Checks measures the number of veto-players in the political decision process. These two measures are averaged over 1990-95. . Detailed variable definitions and sources
are given in the data appendix. All regressions are estimated using Instrumental Variables – two stage least squares. In the first-stage regressions the political structure indicators are regressed on legal
origin, settler mortality, Catholic, Muslim, Other Religion, Independence and Ethnic Fractionalization. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. *. **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%,
and 1% level, respectively. P-values are given in parentheses for the over-identifying restrictions.

                                                                                                  Legislative                                                    Obs
                       OIR test                  Settler mortality         French legal origin    competition            Checks                 Adjusted-R2
Private                3.693                     -0.169***                 -0.123**               -0.037                                        0.429            68
Credit                 (0.449)                   (0.051)                   (0.059)                (0.048)
                       2.405                     -0.184***                 -0.160**                                      -0.083                 0.317            68
                       (0.662)                   (0.044)                   (0.064)                                       (0.060)

Stock                  1.232                     -0.199**                  -0.215**               -0.090                                        0.224            68
Market                 (0.873)                   (0.090)                   (0.083)                (0.079)
Development            2.445                     -0.177**                  -0.274**                                      -0.095                 0.192            68
                       (0.655)                   (0.074)                   (0.105)                                       (0.086)

Property               3.214                     -0.186                    -0.858***              0.093                                         0.348            67
Rights                 (0.523)                   (0.154)                   (0.223)                (0.154)
                       3.055                     -0.177                    -0.780***                                     0.160                  0.323            67
                       (0.549)                   (0.159)                   (0.225)                                       (0.243)
                                                                             Table 6
                                                         Law, Endowments, and Finance: Alternative Samples
The regressions estimated in Panel A is: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 French legal origin + β2 Settler Mortality + β3X, where Financial Sector Development is either Private Credit, Stock
Market Development, or Property Rights. Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP. Stock Market Development measures the value of shares
listed on the stock exchange as share of GDP. Property rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property, with higher numbers indicating better enforcement.
French legal origin is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for countries with French civil law tradition, and zero otherwise. Settler Mortality is the log of the annualized deaths per thousand
European soldiers in European colonies in the early 19th century. The regressions also include a vector of control variables, X. Latin America and Africa are dummy variables that take the value one if
the country is located in Latin America or sub-Sahara Africa, respectively. Independence is the percentage of years since 1776 that a country has been independent. Ethnic Fractionalization is the
probability that two randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language. The regressions in Panel A exclude Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the U.S., the regressions in
Panels B-C are: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 Settler Mortality + β2X. The regressions in Panel B include only French legal origin and in Panel C only British legal origin countries. The
regressions estimated in Panels D-E are: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 French legal origin + β2X. The regressions in Panel D include countries with settler mortality above the median and the
regressions in Panel E countries with settler mortality below the median. There are more countries in panel E than in Panel D because Algeria and Morocco have exactly the median level of Settler
Mortality and are allocated to the below median group. Regressions are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. *. **, *** indicate significance at the
10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.
Panel A: Excluding Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and the United States
                                                                                                                     Ethnic                                Obs
                Settler mortality      French legal origin     Latin America     Africa          Independence        Fractionalization   Adjusted-R2
Private         -0.129***              -0.102*                                                                                           0.379             66
Credit          (0.030)                (0.061)
                -0.127***              -0.031                  -0.072            -0.088          -0.216**            -0.063              0.419             66
                (0.041)                (0.064)                 (0.095)           (0.114)         (0.100)             (0.100)

Stock           -0.161***              -0.291***                                                                                         0.342             66
Market          (0.051)                (0.106)
Development     -0.180**               -0.281***               -0.212            -0.009          0.147               0.046               0.342             66
                (0.069)                (0.100)                 (0.158)           (0.192)         (0.212)             (0.166)

Property        -0.200**               -0.654***                                                                                         0.173             65
Rights          (0.084)                (0.233)
                -0.025                 -0.571**                0.243             -0.832**        -0.517              0.380               0.238             65
                (0.101)                (0.230)                 (0.369)           (0.323)         (0.484)             (0.478)


Panel B: French Legal Origin Countries
                                                                                               Ethnic                              Obs
                Settler mortality      Latin America         Africa        Independence        Fractionalization   Adjusted-R2
Private         -0.080***                                                                                          0.217           45
Credit          (0.029)
                -0.066**               -0.044                -0.161*       -0.243**            -0.082              0.390           45
                (0.029)                (0.088)               (0.086)       (0.095)             (0.086)

Stock           -0.037**                                                                                           0.057           45
Market          (0.016)
Development     -0.018                 0.023                 0.001         0.034               -0.054              0.018           45
                (0.024)                (0.059)               (0.065)       (0.077)             (0.065)

Property        -0.204*                                                                                            0.047           44
Rights          (0.112)
                0.015                  -0.073                -0.937**      -0.141              0.352               0.087           44
                (0.120)                (0.269)               (0.392)       (0.389)             (0.509)
Panel C: British Legal Origin Countries
                                                                               Ethnic                             Obs
              Settler mortality     Latin America   Africa      Independence   Fractionalization   Adjusted-R2
Private       -0.204***                                                                            0.532          25
Credit        (0.042)
              -0.158**              -0.074          0.017       0.561          -0.136              0.526          25
              (0.066)               (0.217)         (0.261)     (0.444)        (0.387)

Stock         -0.227***                                                                            0.330          25
Market        (0.064)
Development   -0.313**              -0.176          0.007       -0.547         0.477               0.329          25
              (0.113)               (0.313)         (0.478)     (0.573)        (0.687)

Property      -0.335***                                                                            0.205          25
Rights        (0.108)
              -0.086                0.226           -0.816      1.339          0.131               0.184          25
              (0.193)               (0.909)         (0.750)     (0.870)        (1.471)

Panel D: Countries Above Median for Settler Mortality
                                                                               Ethnic                             Obs
              French legal origin   Latin America   Africa      Independence   Fractionalization   Adjusted-R2
Private       -0.039                                                                               -0.014         34
Credit        (0.060)
              0.025                 -0.055          -0.331***   -0.356***      -0.040              0.538          34
              (0.040)               (0.046)         (0.024)     (0.082)        (0.083)

Stock         -0.082**                                                                             0.178          34
Market        (0.037)
Development   -0.062**              -0.078          -0.152***   -0.136         -0.050              0.342          34
              (0.027)               (0.047)         (0.013)     (0.097)        (0.057)

Property      -1.036***                                                                            0.249          33
Rights        (0.327)
              -0.654**              0.374           -0.783***   -2.458***      0.346               0.400          33
              (0.309)               (0.535)         (0.181)     (0.740)        (0.723)

Panel E: Countries Below Median for Settler Mortality
                                                                               Ethnic                            Obs
              French legal origin   Latin America   Africa      Independence   Fractionalization   Adjusted-R2
Private       -0.414***                                                                            0.297         36
Credit        (0.128)
              -0.303**              -0.305*         -0.012      0.197          -0.150              0.314         36
              (0.142)               (0.170)         (0.235)     (0.285)        (0.294)

Stock         -0.611***                                                                            0.313         36
Market        (0.190)
Development   -0.613***             -0.001          0.290       0.011          0.037               0.255         36
              (0.217)               (0.255)         (0.399)     (0.290)        (0.429)

Property      -0.870**                                                                             0.194         36
Rights        (0.324)
              -0.824**              -0.569*         -1.424***   0.968**        -0.120              0.358         36
              (0.318)               (0.284)         (0.473)     (0.420)        (0.775)
                                                                            Table 7
                                                   Law, Endowments, and Finance: Alternative Finance Indicators
The regression estimated is: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 French legal origin + β2 Settler Mortality + β3X, where Financial Sector Development is either Liquid Liabilities, Total Value
Traded, Rule of Law, or Aggregate Rule of Law. Liquid Liabilities is currency plus demand and interest-bearing liabilities of banks and nonbank financial intermediaries, divided by GDP. Total value
traded is the total value of shares traded as a share of GDP. Rule of law (ICRG) accounts for the degree to which a country adheres to the rule of law. Aggregate Rule of law assesses is an aggregate
indicator estimated with an unobserved components model using a large number of individual indicators from different sources (Kaufman, Kraay and Zoido-Lobatón). French legal origin is a dummy
variable that takes on the value one for countries with French civil law tradition, and zero otherwise. Settler Mortality is the log of the annualized deaths per thousand European soldiers in European
colonies in the early 19th century. The regressions also include a vector of control variables, X. Latin America and Africa are dummy variables that take the value one if the country is located in Latin
America or sub-Sahara Africa, respectively. Independence is the percentage of years since 1776 that a country has been independent. Ethnic Fractionalization is the probability that two randomly
selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language. Regressions are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares. Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. *. **, *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.

                                                                                                                       Ethnic                               Obs
                 Settler mortality     French legal origin    Latin America       Africa           Independence        Fractionalization   Adjusted-R2
Liquid           -0.150***             -0.073                                                                                              0.433            70
Liabilities      (0.02958)             (0.05731)
                 -0.148***             0.054                  -0.085              -0.210**         -0.439***           -0.015              0.604            70
                 (0.034)               (0.058)                (0.079)             (0.083)          (0.117)             (0.107)

Total            -0.058***             -0.105**                                                                                            0.274            70
Value            (0.018)               (0.041)
Traded           -0.043**              -0.081***              -0.129**            -0.109           0.035               0.049               0.292            70
                 (0.020)               (0.030)                (0.050)             (0.074)          (0.070)             (0.087)

Rule of Law      -0.285**              -0.553*                                                                                             0.141              63
                 (0.133)               (0.314)
                 0.041                 -0.668**               -1.246***           -0.764           0.881               -1.109*             0.238              63
                 (0.180)               (0.334)                (0.448)             (0.592)          (0.555)             (0.625)

Aggregate Rule -0.362***               -0.395*                                                                                             0.349              68
of Law         (0.076)                 (0.190)
               -0.292**                -0.373*                -0.494*             -0.169           0.187               -0.441              0.348              68
               (0.129)                 (0.216)                (0.262)             (0.407)          (0.303)             (0.355)
                                                                         Table 8
                                               Law, Endowments, and Finance: Alternative Endowment Indicator
The regression estimated in Panel A is: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 Latitude + β3X, where Financial Sector Development is either Private Credit, Stock Market Development, or Property
Rights. Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP. Stock Market Development measures the value of shares listed on the stock exchange as
share of GDP. Property rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property, with higher numbers indicating better enforcement. Latitude is the absolute value of
the latitude of a country, scaled between zero and one. The regressions also include a vector of control variables, X. Latin America and Africa are dummy variables that take the value one if the country
is located in Latin America or sub-Sahara Africa, respectively. Independence is the percentage of years since 1776 that a country has been independent. Ethnic Fractionalization is the probability that
two randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language. The regression estimated in Panel B is: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 French legal origin + β2 Latitude +
β3X. French legal origin is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for countries with French civil law tradition, and zero otherwise. Regressions are estimated using Ordinary Least Squares.
Robust standard errors are given in parentheses. *. **, *** indicate significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.


Panel A:
                                                                                             Ethnic                                    Obs
                 Latitude        Latin America       Africa              Independence        Fractionalization        Adjusted-R2

Private          1.048***                                                                                             0.189            70
Credit           (0.300)
                 0.423           -0.319**            -0.380***           0.034               -0.018                   0.346            70
                 (0.327)         (0.147)             (0.125)             (0.168)             (0.135)

Stock            0.491                                                                                                0.012            70
Market           (0.386)
Development      -0.171          -0.402**            -0.470*             0.085               0.121                    0.120            70
                 (0.680)         (0.198)             (0.244)             (0.126)             (0.198)

Property         3.232***                                                                                             0.165            69
Rights           (0.784)
                 2.600***        -0.040              -1.122***           -0.569              0.708                    0.267            69
                 (0.952)         (0.429)             (0.339)             (0.474)             (0.462)


Panel B:
                                                                                                                           Ethnic                            Obs
                 Latitude              French legal origin     Latin America       Africa              Independence        Fractionalization   Adjusted-R2
Private          0.970***              -0.206***                                                                                               0.286         70
Credit           (0.276)               (0.079)
                 0.381                 -0.162**                -0.288**            -0.312**            0.122               -0.055              0.392         70
                 (0.301)               (0.078)                 (0.127)             (0.122)             (0.171)             (0.141)

Stock            0.360                 -0.346***                                                                                               0.175         70
Market           (0.355)               (0.122)
Development      -0.251                -0.312***               -0.341*             -0.339              0.256**             0.051               0.229         70
                 (0.613)               (0.104)                 (0.179)             (0.134)             (0.127)             (0.173)

Property         2.924***              -0.873***                                                                                               0.335         69
Rights           (0.659)               (0.224)
                 2.398***              -0.821***               0.120               -0.783**            -0.120              0.517               0.392         69
                 (0.843)               (0.201)                 (0.341)             (0.308)             (0.353)             (0.453)
                                                                        Table 9
                                            Law, Endowments, and Stock Market Development: Tobit Regressions
The regression estimated is: Financial Sector Development = α + β1 French legal origin + β2 Settler Mortality + β3X, where Financial Sector Development is either Stock Market Development or Total
Value Traded. Stock Market Development measures the value of shares listed on the stock exchange as share of GDP. Total value traded is the total value of shares traded as a share of GDP. French
legal origin is a dummy variable that takes on the value one for countries with French civil law tradition, and zero otherwise. Settler Mortality is the log of the annualized deaths per thousand European
soldiers in European colonies in the early 19th century. The regressions also include a vector of control variables, X. Latin America and Africa are dummy variables that take the value one if the country
is located in Latin America or sub-Sahara Africa, respectively. Independence is the percentage of years since 1776 that a country has been independent. Ethnic Fractionalization is the probability that
two randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language. Regressions are estimated using Tobit, censored-normal. Standard errors are given in parentheses. *. **, *** indicate
significance at the 10%, 5%, and 1% level, respectively. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the data appendix.

                                       French legal origin                                                            Ethnic                               Obs
                 Settler mortality                            Latin America      Africa           Independence        Fractionalization   Adjusted-R2
Stock            -0.269***             -0.353***                                                                                          0.337            70
Market           (0.051)               (0.116)
Development      -0.207***             -0.413***              -0.087             -0.347           0.246               0.342               0.329            70
                 (0.069)               (0.140)                (0.177)            (0.234)          (0.244)             (0.291)

Total Value      -0.117***             -0.144***                                                                                          0.792            70
Traded           (0.024)               (0.055)
                 -0.059*               -0.170***              -0.121             -0.301***        0.142               0.176               1.014            70
                 (0.031)               (0.064)                (0.080)            (0.108)          (0.111)             (0.134)
                                              Figure 1: Financial Development Across Common and Civil Law Countries


     0.5


   0.45


     0.4


   0.35


     0.3

                                                                                                                                                                                        Civil Law
   0.25
                                                                                                                                                                                        Common Law

     0.2


   0.15


     0.1


   0.05


       0
                               Private Credit                                  Stock Market Development                             Property Rights (divided by ten)

Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP. Stock Market Development measures the value of shares listed on the stock exchange as share of
GDP. Property rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property, with higher numbers indicating better enforcement. Civil law countries are countries whose
legal system is of French civil law origin, whereas Common Law countries are countries whose legal system is of British Common Law origin. The sample is restricted to the 70 countries for which
data on Settler Mortality are available.
                                          Figure 2a: Private Credit in Civil Law Countries
                     0.9

                                                                                                                      MLT
                     0.8



                     0.7



                     0.6
                                                                                                                                                                        TUN
    Private Credit




                                                          CHL
                     0.5                                                                                                                          PAN

                                                                                                                IDN
                     0.4                                                                                                                                          SUR
                                                                                                                             MUS
                                                                                                                           MRT
                                   BOL                                                                                                MAR
                     0.3                                    COL        CIV
                                        BRA                                       EGY                                            MEX
                                                                                                           HND                          NIC
                                                                                        SLV                                                                  SEN TGO URY
                                                                            DOM
                     0.2   DZA                                                            ETH                                                       PRY                       VEN
                                              CMR                            ECU
                                 ARG                              CRI                                             MDG
                                          BFA                   COG                             GTM
                                                                                              GAB    HTI            MLI                      NER
                     0.1                                                                          GIN
                                                  TCD                                                                                                   PER
                                                                                                                                                          RWA
                                                CAF
                             AGO
                      0                                                                                                                                                         ZAR




                                                          Figure 2b: Private Credit in Common Law

                     1.6

                                                                                                                                                                        USA
                     1.4
                                                                            HKG


                     1.2



                      1
    Private Credit




                                                                                                                                SGP
                                                                                                    MYS                               ZAF


                     0.8    AUS                     CAN                                                   NZL



                     0.6
                                  BHS
                                                                                                                                                            TTO
                     0.4                      BRB
                                                                                              KEN
                                                                                        JAM
                                                                                  IND
                     0.2                BGD                           GUY                                       NGA PAK                     LKA

                                                          GMB
                                                                GHA                                                       SLE                     SDN TZA         UGA
                      0



Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP. Civil law countries are countries whose legal system is of
French civil law origin, whereas Common Law countries are countries whose legal system is of British Common Law origin. There are 45 Civil Law and 25
Common Law countries in the sample.
                                                            Figure 3a: Settler Mortality and Private Credit
                              1.6


                                                                                        USA
                              1.4
                                                                                        HKG



                              1.2
  Private Credit




                                          1
                                                                                        ZAF          SGP
                                                                                                     MYS
                                                                            NZL          MLT
                              0.8
                                                                                         CAN



                              0.6
                                                                                                                             TUN               BHS
                                                                                                                                 CHL                             PAN
                                                                                                                                                TTO
                                                                                                           SUR                                                   IDN
                                                                                                                                                BRB
                              0.4
                                                                                                       MUS                                                                  MRT
                                                                                                                          BOL                 MAR
                                                                                                                      EGYCOL                        KEN                                           CIV
                                                                                                                         MEX
                                                                                                                       ARG                  HNDJAM     NIC
                                                                                                                PAK IND BRA                 SLV DOM                                               TGO
                                                                                                                       BGD
                                                                                                                         URY                PRY        SEN CMR                                                         NGA
                              0.2
                                                                                                     ETH          GUY LKAECU                CRI                              BFA
                                                                                                                         GTM                VEN         COG                  GAB NER        MDG
                                                                                                                                             DZA                                                                                     MLI
                                                                                                                                                   HTI                                  GIN                      GMB
                                                                                                                                                                             RWA
                                                                                                                                                                             CAF
                                                                                                                                        PER   SDN                                                GHA
                                          0                                                                                                                                   TZA
                                                                                                                                                                                       SLE
                                              0             1               2                    3                            4                            5             ZAR UGA6                        7                       8                9
                                                                                                                                                                             AGO

                                                                                                            Log (Settler mortality)



                                                            Figure 3b: Settler Mortality and Stock Market Development
               Stock Market Development




                                                   2
                                                                                                           MYS
                                                  1.8                                                HKG


                                                  1.6
                                                                                                      ZAF

                                                  1.4
                                                                                                           SGP

                                                  1.2


                                                   1


                                                  0.8                                                                                          CHL
                                                                                                     USA
                                                  0.6
                                                                                         AUS          CAN
                                                                                                                                                               JAM
                                                  0.4                                    NZL
                                                                                                                                               MEX
                                                                                                                              IND
                                                                                                                                                LKA   PRY   BHS
                                                  0.2                                                                   PAK                                  KEN
                                                                                                                 COL                           GTM URY
                                                                                                      MLT                         TUN                            IDN                               GHA
                                                                                                                                    EGY        ARG MAR                                                                     NGA
                                                                                                                     GUY            VEN             CRI HTI     PAN                              CIV
                                                                                                               ETH                               BGD                             NER SLE                                              MLI
                                                   0
                                                                                                                                         BOL     DZA    TZA          SEN ZAR BFA        MDG     TGO              GMB
                                                        0           1             2                    3             SUR            4    BRA    SLV SDN  5                   GAB 6                           7                   8                9
                                                                                                                                                HND                  COG
                                                                                                                                         PER     BHS DOM                MRT  AGO         GIN
                                                                                                                                        ECU                                  CMR
                                                                                                                                                                       TCD   UGA            NIC

                                                                                                                                                                     RWA        CAF


                                                                                                                     Log(Settler Mortality)



                                                                        Figure 3c: Settler Mortality and Property Rights

                                              6


                                                                                               USA
                                                                                  AUS           HKG CAN
                                                                                                     SGP                                  CHL          TTO
                                              5
                                                                                  NZL                                                                  BHS
                     Property Rights




                                                                                                                                             ARG     MAR       JAM                    UGA
                                                                                                 MYS                   PAK                                                SEN                                        GMB
                                              4
                                                                                                                                       URY
                                                                                                                                      BOL
                                                                                                                                   MEX BRA EGY
                                                                                                                                    ECU GTM                                                       GHA
                                                                                               ZAF     MLT                  GUY    COLPER DZA KEN PAN IDN                             BFA NER MDG TGO                       NGA             MLI
                                              3                                                                             SUR               BRB                                     GAB
                                                                                                                                IND TUN PRY HND                                        TZA
                                                                                                                                      LKA CRI
                                                                                                                                         VEN SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                       CMR
                                                                                                               MUS         ETH                 BGD SDN          DOM       NIC COG      TCD
                                              2
                                                                                                                                                                                ZAR    MRT      SLE     CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                       AGO      GIN


                                                                                                                                                           HTI                  RWA
                                              1



                                              0
                                                  0             1                 2                        3                             4                           5                      6                    7                            8       9
                                                                                      UGA

                                                                                                                     Log (Settler Mortality)


Private Credit is the value of credits by financial intermediaries to the private sector as share of GDP. Stock Market Development measures the value of shares
listed on the stock exchange as share of GDP. Property rights reflects the degree to which government enforces laws that protect private property, with higher
numbers indicating better enforcement. Settler Mortality is the log of the annualized deaths per thousand European soldiers in European colonies in the early 19th
century. The sample comprises 70 countries of Common Law and French Civil Law origin.
                                                   Appendix Table A:
                                 Financial Development and Institutions Across Countries
                                                       Stock Market   Property                                      Legislative
         Country Name      Country Code Private Credit Development     Rights    Legal origin   Settler mortality   Competition   Checks


Algeria                        DZA          0.19           0.00          3            F               78.2             3.50        1.00
Angola                        AGO           0.03           0.00          2            F               280              4.83        2.00
Argentina                     ARG           0.15           0.10          4            F               68.9             7.00        4.00
Australia                      AUS          0.81           0.54          5            B               8.55             7.00        4.33
Bahamas                        BHS          0.55           0.00          5            B                85              7.00        4.00
Bangladesh                    BGD           0.21           0.02          2            B              71.41             6.67        3.17
Barbados                       BRB          0.39           0.21          3            B                85              6.67        3.67
Bolivia                        BOL          0.34           0.01          3            F                71              7.00        5.33
Brazil                         BRA          0.27           0.16          3            F                71              7.00        4.17
Burkina Faso                   BFA          0.12           0.00          3            F               280              4.00        1.00
Cameroon                      CMR           0.18           0.00          2            F               280              5.75        2.00
Canada                        CAN           0.80           0.51          5            B               16.1             7.00        4.00
Central African Republic       CAF          0.06           0.00                       F               280              5.17        1.67
Chad                           TCD          0.08           0.00          2            F               280              2.50        1.00
Chile                          CHL          0.54           0.79          5            F               68.9             7.00        4.00
Colombia                       COL          0.30           0.12          3            F                71              7.00        2.00
Congo                         COG           0.13           0.00          2            F               240              5.00        2.00
Costa Rica                     CRI          0.15           0.06          3            F               78.1             7.00        2.33
Cote d'Ivoire                  CIV          0.31           0.05          2            F               668              5.67        1.83
Dominican Republic            DOM           0.22           0.00          2            F               130              7.00        5.00
Ecuador                        ECU          0.18           0.10          3            F                71              7.00        3.67
Egypt                          EGY          0.28           0.07          3            F               67.8             6.00        2.00
El Salvador                    SLV          0.23           0.06          3            F               78.1             7.00        3.33
Ethiopia                       ETH          0.19           0.00          2            F                26              2.67        1.00
Gabon                         GAB           0.11           0.00          3            F               280              6.50        1.67
Gambia                        GMB           0.11           0.00          4            B              1470              5.50        2.67
Ghana                         GHA           0.05           0.12          3            B               668              3.00        2.00
Guatemala                     GTM           0.13           0.01          3            F                71              7.00        3.17
Guinea                         GIN          0.09           0.00          2            F               483              1.00        1.00
Guyana                        GUY           0.20           0.00          3            B              32.18             6.50        1.50
Haiti                          HTI          0.12           0.00          1            F               130              6.00        1.83
Honduras                      HND           0.26           0.05          3            F               78.1             7.00        2.00
Hong Kong                     HKG           1.36           1.79          5            B               14.9
India                          IND          0.24           0.27          3            B              48.63             7.00        5.83
Indonesia                      IDN          0.44           0.14          3            F               170              6.00        1.00
Jamaica                        JAM          0.27           0.42          4            B               130              6.67        3.67
Kenya                          KEN          0.31           0.15          3            B               145              5.50        2.00
Madagascar                    MDG           0.14           0.00          3            F             536.04             6.33        2.83
Malaysia                      MYS           0.93           1.89          4            B               17.7             7.00        6.00
Mali                           MLI          0.12           0.00          3            F              2940              5.00        2.00
Malta                         MLT           0.84           0.12          3            F               16.3             7.00        3.00
Mauritania                    MRT           0.37           0.00          2            F               280              3.50        2.50
Mauritius                     MUS           0.37           0.22          2            F               30.5             7.00        5.00
Mexico                        MEX           0.27           0.32          3            F                71              6.83        2.00
Morocco               MAR   0.34   0.08   4   F    78.2    7.00   1.00
New Zealand           NZL   0.81   0.40   5   B    8.55    7.00   2.83
Nicaragua             NIC   0.25   0.00   2   F   163.3    7.00   2.25
Niger                 NER   0.11   0.00   3   F    400     3.67   1.67
Nigeria               NGA   0.22   0.05   3   B   2004     1.00   1.00
Pakistan              PAK   0.23   0.16   4   B   36.99    7.00   5.50
Panama                PAN   0.50   0.07   3   F   163.3    7.00   3.17
Paraguay              PRY   0.20   0.01   3   F    78.1    7.00   3.00
Peru                  PER   0.08   0.08   3   F    71      7.00   3.67
Rwanda                RWA   0.07   0.00   1   F    280     4.17   1.00
Senegal               SEN   0.24   0.00   4   F   164.66   6.50   2.00
Sierra Leone          SLE   0.03   0.00   2   B    483     2.67   1.00
Singapore             SGP   0.96   1.33   5   B    17.7    6.00   2.00
South Africa          ZAF   0.94   1.56   3   B    15.5    7.00   2.00
Sri Lanka             LKA   0.20   0.17   3   B    69.8    7.00   3.17
Sudan                 SDN   0.05   0.00   2   B    88.2
Surinam               SUR   0.41   0.00   3   F   32.18    7.00   4.33
Tanzania              TZA   0.05   0.00   3   B    145     4.50   1.00
Togo                  TGO   0.24   0.00   3   F    668     4.33   1.50
Trinidad and Tobago   TTO   0.48   0.12   5   B    85      6.67   3.67
Tunisia               TUN   0.58   0.08   3   F    63      5.17   1.00
Uganda                UGA   0.03   0.00   4   B    280     4.00   1.00
Uruguay               URY   0.23   0.01   4   F    71      7.00   4.00
USA                   USA   1.48   0.69   5   B    15      7.00   4.67
Venezuela             VEN   0.19   0.12   3   F    78.1    7.00   4.67
Zaire                 ZAR   0.00   0.00   2   F    240     2.83   1.00
                                                                Appendix Table B
                                                         Variable Descriptions and Sources

              Variable                                                 Description                                                            Source


Private Credit             {(0.5)*[F(t)/P_e(t) + F(t-1)/P_e(t-1)]}/[GDP(t)/P_a(t)], where F is credit by deposit money banks Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and
                           and other financial institutions to the private sector (lines 22d and 42d in International Financial Levine (2000), IFS, WDI and own
                           Statistics, IFS), GDP is line 99b, P_e is end-of period CPI (line 64) and P_a is the average CPI for calculations
                           the year. Average for 1990-95. Data for Angola, Guinea, and Tanzania were calculated using data
                           from IFS and World Development Indicators (WD)I; for Angola IFS data for 1996-98 were used and
                           GDP data from WDI; for Guinea GDP data from WDI were used and given the lack of CPI
                           indicators the ratio of line 22d plus 42d divided by GDP calculated.
Stock Market Development   {(0.5)*[F(t)/P_e(t) + F(t-1)/P_e(t-1)]}/[GDP(t)/P_a(t)], where F is the total value of outstanding    Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and
                           shares, GDP is line 99b (IFS), P_e is end-of period CPI (line 64, IFS) and P_a is the average CPI for Levine (2000), IFC, IFS and own
                           the year. Average for 1990-95. For Guatemala and El Salvador IFC data from 1996 and 1997 were calculations
                           used to calculate the variable. For Malta data for 1994 and 95 from the stock exchange's web-page
                           were used. For all countries that do not have stock markets or that introduced stock markets after
                           1995 a zero was entered. Also, for Nicaragua a zero was entered, since no data were found, the
                           exchange was founded in 1993, and it is reported to be very small.
Property Rights            An index of the degree to which government protects and enforces laws that protect private property. La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                           Measured in 1997 and ranges from 1-5.                                                                  Shleifer, and Vishny (1999),
                                                                                                                                  Heritage Foundation
Liquid Liabilities         {(0.5)*[F(t)/P_e(t) + F(t-1)/P_e(t-1)]}/[GDP(t)/P_a(t)], where F is currency plus demand and
                           interest-bearing liabilities of banks and nonbank financial intermediaries (line 55l in International
                           Financial Statistics, IFS), GDP is line 99b, P_e is end-of period CPI (line 64) and P_a is the average
                           CPI for the year. Average for 1990-95. Data for Angola, Guinea, and Tanzania were calculated
                           using data from IFS and World Development Indicators (WD)I; for Angola IFS data for 1996-98
                           were used and GDP data from WDI; for Guinea GDP data from WDI were used and given the lack
                           of CPI indicators the ratio of line 55l divided by GDP calculated
Total Value Traded         The total value of shares traded as a ratio of GDP. Average for 1990-95. For Guatemala and El          Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and
                           Salvador IFC data from 1996 and 1997 were used to calculate the variable. For Malta data for 1994 Levine (2000), IFC, IFS and own
                           and 95 from the stock exchange's web-page were used. For all countries that do not have stock          calculations
                           markets or that introduced stock markets after 1995 a zero was entered. Also, for Nicaragua a zero
                           was entered, since no data were found, the exchange was founded in 1993, and it is reported to be
                           very small.
Rule of Law                An indicator of the degree to which the country adheres to the rule of law (ranging from 0 to 6).      International Country Risk Guide
                           Average for 1990-95                                                                                    (ICRG)
Aggregate Rule of Law      An indicator of the strength and impartiality of the legal system. Aggregate indicator that is       Kaufman, Kraay and Zoido-
                           estimated with an unobserved component model from individual indicators of the efficiency of the     Lobatón (1999)
                           legal system from 11 sources. Measured in 1998.
French Legal Origin        Dummy variable that takes on value one if a country legal system is of French Civil Law origin.      La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                                                                                                                                Shleifer, and Vishny (1999)
Settler Mortality          Log of the annualized deaths per thousand European soldiers in European colonies in the early 19th Acemoglu, Johnson, and
                           century.                                                                                           Robinson (2001)
Latitude                   Absolute value of the latitude of a country, scaled between zero and one                              La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                                                                                                                                 Shleifer, and Vishny (1999)
Africa                     Dummy variable that takes on value one if country is in Sub-Saharan Africa.                           Easterly and Levine (1997)
Latin America              Dummy variable that takes on value one if country is in Latin America.                                Easterly and Levine (1997)
Catholic                   Percentage of population that follows Catholic religion, in 1980. Ranges from 0-100.                  La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                                                                                                                                 Shleifer, and Vishny (1999)
Muslim                     Percentage of population that follows Muslim religion, in 1980. Ranges from 0-100.                    La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                                                                                                                                 Shleifer, and Vishny (1999)
Other Religion             Percentage of population that follows religion other than Catholic, Muslim, or Protestant, in 1980.   La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
                           Ranges from 0-100.                                                                                    Shleifer, and Vishny (1999)
Independence               Percentage of years since 1776 that a country has been independent.                                   Easterly and Levine (1997)
Ethnic Fractionalization   Probability that two randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language.     Easterly and Levine (1997)
Legislative Competition    Index of the number of parties competing in the last legislative election, ranging from 1 (non-       Beck, Clarke, Groff, Keefer, and
                           competitive) to 7 (competitive). Average for 1990-95.                                                 Walsh (2001)
Checks                     Measure of the number of veto-players in the political decision process, both in the executive and the Beck, Clarke, Groff, Keefer, and
                           legislature. Average for 1990-95.                                                                      Walsh (2001)
