NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ANNUITIES FOR AN AGEING WORLD

Olivia S. Mitchell
David McCarthy

Working Paper 9092
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9092

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002

This paper was prepared for presentation at the June 2002 Conference entitled “Developing an Annuity
Market in Europe”, sponsored by the Center for Research on Pensions and Welfare Policies, University of
Turin, Italy. The research was supported in part by the Pension Research Council at the Wharton School, the
National Bureau of Economic Research, and the Economic and Social Research Institute of Japan. This paper
was written in part during Dr. Mitchell’s time as the Metzler Visiting Professor to the Johann Wolfgang
Goethe Universitat, Lehrstuhl fur Investment, Portfolio Management und Alterssicherung. Helpful comments
were provided by E. Philip Davis. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Olivia S. Mitchell and David McCarthy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Annuities for an Ageing World
Olivia S. Mitchell and David McCarthy
NBER Working Paper No. 9092
August 2002
JEL No. G2, H4, J1
ABSTRACT
Substantial research attention has been devoted to the pension accumulation process, whereby
employees and those advising them work to accumulate funds for retirement. Until recently, less analysis
has been devoted to the pension decumulation process -- the process by which retirees finance their
consumption during retirement. This gap has recently begun to be filled by an active group of
researchers examining key aspects of the pension payout market. One of the areas of most interesting
investigation has been in the area of annuities, which are financial products intended to cover the risk of
retirees outliving their assets. This paper reviews and extends recent research examining the role of
annuities in helping finance retirement consumption. We also examine key market and regulatory factors.

Olivia S. Mitchell
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk, 307 CPC
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
Tel: 215-746-5706
Fax: 215-898-0310
mitchelo@wharton.upenn.edu

David McCarthy
Dept. of Insurance and Risk Management
The Wharton School
University of Pennsylvania
3641 Locust Walk, 307 CPC
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218

1

Annuities for an Ageing World
Olivia S. Mitchell and David McCarthy
The recent passing of the British Queen Mother at age 101 has brought home to many
observers the very real possibility that living to be quite old is a risk to which many of us are
increasingly exposed. Longevity patterns throughout the developed world indicate that many
more of us will live beyond what was once considered the "normal" retirement age, surviving to
celebrate our 100th birthdays and beyond. One long-term consequence of global demographic
aging is that it will become increasingly challenging to maintain a decent standard of living
during such a long retirement period. Planning ahead for retirement requires confronting and
managing a host of risks that threaten to undermine our prospect of retirement wellbeing.
Over the next half-century, global aging trends will imply that more of the world’s
population will attain the age of 60 and over than ever before, amounting to a higher fraction
than children under 15. By 2050, there will be several million centenarians alive on earth, more
than at any prior time in human civilization (Desai, 2002). This dramatic global aging process
represents an historical “first” by world standards, and it prompts a fundamental question for
retirement systems experts: namely, how can societies finance longevity risk, in the light of everlonger- lived populations?
In this light, the appeal of life annuities is that they offer retirees an opportunity to protect
against the risk of outliving their assets, by exchanging these assets for a lifelong stream of
guaranteed income (BMPW, 2001). That is, life annuities are financial products, which, in
exchange for an initial premium, pay beneficiaries a periodic benefit as long as the annuitant
lives. Contracts protecting people from outliving their life expectancies have been around since
at least the 1300s (Jennings and Trout, 1982). Insurance companies have taken on the task of
pooling annuity purchasers with similar life expectancies but different longevity realizations, to
help protect them against longevity risk. In many countries, however, life annuity products have
tended to be sold as retirement accumulation vehicles, rather than as decumulation products.
This may explain why annuity markets in the OECD countries have been relatively
underdeveloped to date. 1

1

See for instance BMPW (2001); Doyle, Mitchell and Piggott (2001); Finkelstein and Poterba (2000); Murthi et al.,
(1999); Sheshinki (2002); and Tonks (1999).

2

Nevertheless, global interest in annuity markets is beginning to grow. In Latin America,
for instance, more than a dozen countries have recently converted their unfunded national
defined benefit (DB) pension plans into funded defined contribution (DC) pensions. 2 With the
new models well in place, these nations have now begun to consider how the payout phase of
these benefit programs will be handled. Many European countries have also begun moving
toward funded pension systems and these reforms are focusing attention on European annuity
markets. 3 This paper identifies factors shaping annuity markets in the past, with a primary focus
on longevity protection in developed nations. We then identify developments that promise
potential growth for annuity markets, over the near term as the baby boom generation retires.

I. Is Longevity Insurance a Good Deal?4
In a world with no uncertainty, it would be straightforward for a retiree to allocate his
wealth at retirement by spreading payments over his remaining life years. If no formal retirement
system were in place, the life-cycle model predicts that rational decisionmakers would save
optimally; at retirement, they would merely divide their assets over years remaining, so as to
ensure optimal retirement consumption (and cover bequest motives, if any). 5
In reality, of course, many sorts of uncertainty make it far more difficult to decide how
much to consume in old age. One risk is that associated with unknown longevity: retirees could
outlive their expected lifespans, and run the risk of exhausting assets before passing away.
Retirees can reduce this risk by consuming less per year, but such a tactic then boosts the chance
that they might die with too much wealth left unconsumed. In other words, dying with too little
wealth is undesirable, but having too much wealth is also undesirable since it represents forgone
consumption opportunities.
Retirement security can potentially be enhanced with the purchase of a life annuity which
provides a steady income stream until the insured party’s death. The annuity thus involves a

2

See Mitchell and Barretto (1997) and Palacios and Rofman (2001) for a discussion of the Latin reforms.
See Cardinale (2002 and Cardinale et al. (2002); Blake (1999); Disney (2000); Disney and Johnson (2000);
European Commission (1997), and Maurer and Schlag (2002) among others, for discussions of the European
reforms.
4
This discussion draws on BMPW (2001).
5
The classic references are Ando and Modigliani (1963), and Modigliani (1986).
3

3

premium paid to an insurer, who then pools retirees with similar ex ante longevity expectations
but different ex post survival outcomes (MPWB, 1999; Warshawsky 1998a).
To illustrate these issues, data from 2000 indicate that 65- year old US males could have
anticipated a life expectancy of age 81, but some 18% would anticipate living to age 90 or older.
Analogously a 65-year old female expected 19.6 more years of life, but she had a 31% chance of
living to age 90 or older (Table 1). The high probability of living to very old age underscores the
important degree of uncertainty facing people as they allocate their retirement assets. An
alternative approach is depicted in Figure 1, where we illustrate alternative consumption profiles
generated by alternative wealth drawdown rules. The profile labeled “1/LE” assumes that the
retiree draws down his retirement wealth completely by the time he has reached his life
expectancy at age 65. The individual consumes a level amount each year, which takes into
account any investment earnings on his retirement wealth (here assumed to earn 4% p.a. fixed).
Clearly this strategy has the retiree running out of money if he outlives his life expectancy
(probability = 43%). A smoother but declining consumption path is represented by the profile
labeled “1/Rem LE,” which assumes that each year the retiree recomputes the level fraction of
retirement wealth he can consume based on his updated life expectancy. For comparison, the
profile labeled “Life Ann” assumes the retiree’s entire wealth is used to purchase an actuarially
fair life annuity which smoothes consumption from 65.
Table 1 here
Figure 1 here

Alternative Payout Profiles
Recent research has sought to explore the pros and cons of alternative wealth drawdown
patterns in retirement, to determine whether higher returns on non-annuitized investments might
offset the value of the longevity insurance (which also must take into account insurance loads
and fees).
Some might think that an older person might do better by holding onto his assets and
investing them directly early in retirement, and waiting to buy an annuity later. This perception
arises because annuity payouts are higher for those who purchase them later in life, reflecting
higher expected mortality of older purchasers. But as Figure 2 shows, this is not necessarily a
good strategy. Buying an annuity implies that survivors share the assets of those who died

4

prematurely – essentially pooling the mortality risk of longer and shorter- lived people. As
individuals age, mortality increases, implying that this effect becomes relatively more important.
Consequently, the rate of return that a surviving retiree who had not annuitized his wealth would
have to “beat” in order to be at least as well off as if he had annuitized his wealth rises with age.
In other words, older people’s money must work harder “if they are not to lose by delaying
buying an annuity” (Inland Revenue, 2002:15).
Figure 2 here
As an alternative approach, Albrecht and Maurer (2002) using German data demonstrate
that the probability of exhausting one’s assets prior to death without an annuity can be quite
substantial, though how likely this is will depend on the asset allocation of the retiree’s nonannuity wealth. Not only does the volatility of the self- insurer’s investment portfolio matter, but
also so does the interest rate assumed on the annuity asset. In this case an actuarially fair annuity
is used as a benchmark (see Figure 3). In the German case, holding some equities provides
higher expected returns as compared to annuities, depending on the assumed interest rate (AIR)
used in pricing the annuity product.
Figure 3 here

Assessing Payoffs from Life Annuities
One way to assess the value of longevity protection is to measure the “money’s worth”
(MW) of life income products. This is facilitated by computing the expected present discounted
value (EPDV) of the lifelong benefit stream paid out to the annuitant, and comparing this
discounted cashflow to the annuity premium. In the economics literature, the MW is most easily
understood in the instance of an immediate single- life annuity which pays out $A per period for
life, in exchange for an initial purchase price (e.g. $100,000).
For a nominal annuity, MPWB (1999) specifies that qa,t is the probability that an amonth-old individual alive at the beginning of month t will die during that month. Pj is the
probability that a 65- year old retiree survives for at least j months after he purchases a lifelong
annuity: 6
(1)

6

P j = (1 − q780,1 ) * (1 − q781,2 ) * ...* (1 − q780+ j1,j ).

To compute the EPDV of an annuity purchased by a 65-year-old, one must forecast future mortality probabilities,
discussed below. Computations also assume that no one lives beyond age 115 years; our calculations are insensitive
to this upper limit on lifespan.

5

In this context, the EPDV of a life annuity with monthly payout A purchased by an individual of
age b is Vb(A), which can depend on a term structure of interest rates, ik , expressing the nominal
short rate k periods into the future:
(2)

600
V b ( A) = ∑ j=1

A* P j
Π

j
k =1

(1 + i k )

In much annuity research, the term structure of yields on Treasury bonds is used to estimate the
time series of expected future nominal short-term interest rates. 7 For inflation indexed, or real
annuities, equation (2) incorporates the fact that payout is fixed in real terms (but varies in
nominal terms). As BMP (2002) illustrate, this is easily expressed by letting Ar represent the real
annual payment (and nominal interest rates in the denominator of equation (2) are replaced with
real interest rates rk ). Then the EPDV of the real annuity becomes:
(3)

115− b
Vb (A r ) = ∑ j=1

A r * Pj
j
Π k=1(1 + rk )

.

Irrespective of the payout format, an annuity product’s “money’s worth” is then defined
as the ratio of the EPDV of the annuity’s payout stream to its purchase price. For instance, a
nominal annuity selling for $100,000 has a money’s worth defined as Vb(An )/100,000. Such a
money’s worth ratio represents a currency- independent metric for comparing annuities across
different groups, over time, and across countries.

Annuity Prices and Benefit Flows
In practice, constructing MW measures requires that the analyst obtain data on several
key parameters, some of which are difficult to obtain and complicated to understand. Most
importantly, data are needed regarding the payout stream and the premium charged by the
annuity issuer. These are not always simple to model, since many products are on the market
taking many different payout forms and structured with a wide range of premium payment paths.
For example, a buyer may pay for the annuity with one lump sum or in many payments over a
long period of time. Further, the benefit payments may be fixed in nominal terms for the life of
the annuity contract, or they may rise at a predetermined rate over time. In yet other cases a

7

In addition we evaluate the responsiveness of conclusions to taxes; in the US, federal tax treatment of annuities is
quite complex (BMWP, 1999). A useful comparison of tax treatment for annuities across Europe is provided in
Wadsworth et al. (2001).

6

retiree may receive dividends that vary with the value of the underlying assets in which the
premium is invested, and/or an annuity policy may include a feature guaranteeing a death benefit
to one’s heirs.
The complexity of the annuity product market and the fact that products are not widely
advertised makes it relatively difficult to compare them around the world. In some countries,
such as the US and Singapore, prices and structures of annuity products are available on the
internet; in other countries, however, it is more difficult to compare annuity benefit and cost
structures (Doyle et al, 2001). The simplest product is a single premium immediate annuity, for
which data appear in Table 2 for men and women at alternative ages in the US. Several sensible
conclusions emerge from a scan of these data. First, monthly payouts are higher for older people,
given the same immediate premium, due to the higher expected mortality of the older buyers.
Second, men receive higher payouts than women, due to their higher anticipated mortality.
Third, the dispersion across insurance companies indicates that it would pay to shop around, and
fourth, payout levels are not closely correlated with the strength of the insurer.
Table 2 here

Mortality Tables
To convert annuity payout data of this sort into money’s worth measures, it is critical to
obtain high-quality information on mortality tables depicting a particular group’s distribution of
expected remaining lifetime. Many developed nations have their own mortality tables, 8 having
invested in the substantial effort and cost of collecting data on the incidence of deaths by age and
sex. Then experts convert these raw data into projection tables by estimating the probability that
a group member aged x will die in the next year of life by fitting hazard models to observed
distributions of deaths, or by applying a smoothing algorithm to the raw maximum likelihood
estimates (McCarthy and Mitchell, 2002). Of course mortality rates tend to be low except at the
oldest ages, so obtaining reliable estimates of small probabilities depends on observing a large
number of lives. It is also important to recognize that these tables are not fixed, but rather
change due to improvements in life expectancies. Particularly among older people, mortality

8

The Society of Actuaries maintains an excellent database of international mortality tables on its website
www.soa.org. Recent European population, insured lives, and annuitant mortality tables may be obtained from
MacDonald (1997). The Berkeley Mortality Database (http://demog.berkeley.edu/wilmoth/mortality) is an
invaluable resource for those investigating population mortality in developed countries.

7

experiences have declined rapidly in developed countries, and this trend is expected to carry over
to the future (Executive Committee, 1999). Consequently, those seeking to value future annuity
payouts must take this into account by developing forward- looking cohort mortality tables,
generally based on past trends.
Not only do mortality patterns change over time; there are important cross-country
differences as well. 9 Inasmuch as US and UK data collection efforts are relatively consistent,
these tables have been adopted by numerous other developed and developing countries: we have
observed that US mortality tables tend to be used in the Western hemisphere, while UK tables
are often adopted in former British colonies or where British influence was strong. Frequently
local actuarial adjustments are applied to the tables so as to make them more reflective of local
conditions, though without good mortality data it is probably impossible to know whether the
adjustments are adequate. Unfortunately uncertainty regarding mortality tables can also cause
insurance companies to raise prices, with adverse consequences for annuity markets in general. 10
Conversely, countries seeking to develop annuity markets may find there is a strong public good
aspect to the development and dissemination of mortality data.
There is no single metric to assess such mortality differences, but the A/E (“A over E”)
method expresses the number of deaths anticipated in a given group with a specified age
structure using one mortality table, and compares these to the expected number of deaths in a
population of the same size using a second mortality table. This is equivalent to a ratio of the
weighted average probabilities of death for the two mortality tables, using a specific population
structure for the weights (McCarthy and Mitchell, forthcoming):
(4)

A/E =

∑w q
∑w q
x

*
x

x

x

x

× 100

x

where q *x is the probability that an individual of age x dies according to the table in question, and
q x is the probability that an individual of age x dies according to the base table. The weights,
wx , are set so that w65 = 100,000, and wx = wx −1 (1 − q x−1 ) .
Two examples of A/E measures are provided in Figures 4 and 5. Figure 4 represents
mortality trends for US men age 65+ over time, using the 1991 male population table as the
9

This discussion draws on McCarthy and Mitchell (forthcoming).
Of course errors in the other direction may lead to insolvency.

10

8

benchmark. The trend sho ws clearly that men’s mortality has fallen by just under one-third since
1965, a rather remarkable achievement; results are similar for women. A/E population metrics
that can be computed across the OECD appear in Figure 5. All statistics assume a benchmark of
US age 65+ male population tables using the US 1991 tables as a benchmark. These data show
that Canada and Australia have very similar mortality patterns as the US, whereas Japan has
much lower male population mortality rates. Results for Italy as well as Germany indicate
substantially higher mortality patterns (among others).
Figures 4 and 5 here
An additional, and key aspect, of cross-national mortality table comparisons for annuity
purposes pertains to the role of adverse selection. This arises in the present context if buyers of
annuities prove to be longer lived than average, prompting actuaries to devise separate mortality
tables for annuitants versus the general population. Whether adverse selection is quantitatively
important may depend on whether annuitization is optional or mandatory: for example, in the
US, purchase of annuities has become increasingly a matter of personal choice, since defined
benefit pension plans are in decline (Brown and Warshawsky, 2000). As a result there are
substant ial differences in the US between population and annuitant mortality tables, as well as
many other countries as illustrated in Figure 6.
Figure 6 here
Measuring the extent of adverse selection among annuity purchasers as compared to the
population is critical for proper annuity pricing, but some countries lack the data necessary to do
this with care. Table 3 present A/E results for men and women age 65 in the US, UK, and Japan,
for voluntary as well as compulsorily purchased annuities (where available). In the UK, for
example, a portion of retirement benefits is subject to mandatory annuitization, with other
benefits voluntarily annuitized. As a result, insurers have generated separate UK mortality tables
for both voluntary and compulsory-purchase annuitants, each of which differs from that of the
general population (Finkelstein and Poterba, 1999; Murthi et al, 1999). In this case, the
reference or “base” table is the population table for that country. Patterns for men, in the top
panel, as well as women, in the bottom panel, indicate that voluntary annuitants experience much
lower mortality than do compulsory annuitants. Results for Japan are markedly different, with
male insurance purchasers having apparently heavier mortality than voluntary annuitant holders,
but rates equalizing for women.

9

Table 3 here
Next we use available population and annuitant mortality data from a range of developed
countries, to measure the empirical degree of adverse selection in annuitant mortality tables
internationally. 11 The derived average measure of adverse selection then becomes a benchmark
that can be held up against results for specific countries, to evaluate whether and how far a
particular country may deviate from the standard. 12 The dependent variable in this analysis is the
A/E value for each table relative to the US Male Population period table (=100). The model
relates this to the degree of selection associated with annuitants, controlling on regressors
including country-specific indicators (the US is the omitted category), indicators of whether the
table was for male or female (male is the omitted category), for period or cohort (period is the
omitted category), and whether the table was a population or compulsory or voluntary annuitant
table (population is the omitted group). Other cross-country effects are assumed to be
uncorrelated and captured in a disturbance term in the following regression model:

(5)

Yijkl = α + ß' C i + ?' S j + dG k + ζTl + θ ( S * G ) + λ (T * G ) + ε ijkl

where Yijkl refers to the A/E metric for the mortality table in question; Ci is a vector of indicator
variables representing country; Sj is a vector representing the degree of selection; Gk is a scalar
representing gender; and Tl is a scalar representing table type (cohort or period). Remaining
noise is summarized in the error term ε ijkl , modeled as independent, identically distributed
random variables. 13 If mortality tables display no additional statistically significant adverse
selection, after controlling on the country-specific effects as well as table and gender

11

This section draws on Mitchell and McCarthy (2002).
Our work acknowledges that the distinctions between population versus compulsory and voluntary annuitant
tables may not be precisely identical across countries. Selection is defined here as ‘compulsory’ if the mortality table
relates to annuitants of pension plans, and ‘voluntary’ if it refers to voluntary individual annuitants. Countries may
have different voluntary or compulsory selection effects, even within these categories, due to different labor force
demographics (including participation rates), compensation packages, tax codes, and legislation.
13
Our earlier work also explored results in which “table type” was treated as a random effect with non-zero mean
12

σ T2 , to allow for the possibility that cohort mortality tables may be based on period mortality tables.
2
We reject the null hypothesis that σ T = 0 using a likelihood ratio test and coefficient estimates are virtually
and variance

unchanged. We also estimated standard errors robust to heteroskedasticity and found these to be lower than OLS
standard errors; here we report the more conservative OLS results.

10

differentials, γ will equal 0. Our alternative hypothesis is that ? ≠ 0 ; the coefficient magnitude is
then an indication of the extent of predictable adverse selection in annuitant mortality tables.
Regression results appear in Table 4, based on data on over 60 population and annuitant
mortality tables for ten countries including Australia, Austria, Canada, Chile, Germany, Israel,
Italy, the United Kingdom, and the US, representing more over half a billion lives. 14 Estimated
results show the model fits very well overall with an adjusted R-squared of 98.8%. Turning to
specific coefficients, we find that the “female effect” turns out to be negative and statistically
significant for the A/E measure, and implies that mortality rates for women are 35 percent lower
than the benchmark US male population rates. This is comparable to the 33 percent and 26
percent lower relatively mortality experienced for voluntary and compulsory annuitants, versus
the population. Only one of the interaction terms is statistically significant, indicating that
selection between female voluntary annuitants and the population is one-third lower than among
men.
Table 4 here
The results also show no significant difference between estimated coefficients for the
voluntary versus compulsory selection variables. This implies that the extent of compulsory and
voluntary selection overlaps in different countries to some extent. The data series are consistent
with an average degree of adverse selection for annuitants versus the general population, of at
least 25 percent. This difference in mortality is on the order of the difference between males and
females in the population at large. The cohort effect is much smaller, on the order of 12 percent
relative lower mortality. Another factor to emphasize is fact that many of the country-specific
effects are statistically significant, with the exception of Italy and Germany. Some countries,
such as Austria and Israel, have substantially higher (12-13%) mortality than the US benchmark,
while Japan, Switzerland, and Canada have 10-14% lower mortality than the US.
Predicted male A/E cohort values derived from this regression analysis are provided for
male population and annuitant mortality in Figure 7. The results indicate that according to our
model, Italy and Germany both have higher annuitant mortality than US tables, but Switzerland,
Australia, Canada and Japan appear well below the US benchmark.
Figure 7 here

14

For sources see McCarthy and Mitchell (2002 and forthcoming).

11

While some countries have the necessary mortality data needed to produce annuitant
tables for voluntary versus compulsory annuities, others do not. For instance, Italy does not –
the 1995 RG48 annuitant mortality table used in our analysis was constructed by applying an
estimate of adverse selection obtained from UK annuitant tables. 15 Therefore in Figure 8 we use
the results of the regression analysis to generate predicted values of the A/E metric, and also we
represent male and female voluntary annuitant tables for Germany and Italy, as well as Japanese
compulsory and voluntary annuitant tables. The vertical axis represents the A/E measure, while
the vertical bars represent confidence intervals for predicted levels of the A/E metric. The points
show where we calculated that these tables actually lie. Examination of the results indicates that
predicted values for the German annuitant tables are well within estimated confidence intervals.
However, results for Italian male annuitants fall outside the confidence intervals, as do the results
for Japanese male and female tables (circled in the Figure). In other words, these findings
indicate excess mortality as compared to what international norms would suggest for tables of
this type.
Figure 8 here
The fact that annuitant tables differ so much in Japan and Italy from the international
norms could indicate either that these countries have annuity markets that are unusual in an
international context, or that there is some problem with the way the annuitant mortality tables
are computed. In fact, in both cases, these mortality tables are derived without reference to the
mortality of actual annuitants, suggesting a possible reason why they fall outside our predicted
confidence intervals. Of course, these results need not imply that annuity prices or liability
estimates are incorrect for the annuity business in those countries. This is because actuaries use
many different assumptions to value annuities, and it is not uncommon to alter one or more other
assumptions to compensate for a mortality assumption known to be inaccurate. But there is a
chance that using offsetting assumptions can lead to inaccurately estimated reserves, distort
sensitivity estimates, and complicate analyses of insurer surplus/strain. In general, such practice
is best avoided.

Discount Rate Assumptions
15

In fact, when we performed this analysis we did not have the actual RG48 table. We used life expectancies of
individuals on the RG48 tables, obtained from MacDonald (1997) and the fact that life expectancy is very closely
related to the A/E measure to derive confidence intervals for the actual A/E metric for the RG48 tables.

12

As with all economic assumptions, there is no single and clear-cut rule about what
discount rates to use when deriving annuity valuation formulas. One approach uses term
structures for yields on government bonds, on the argument that the annuity payoff depends on
an individual’s mortality, which is essentially uncorrelated with market risk. Yields closer to
those on government bonds may be appropriate if insurers are backed by government bonds or
mutual solvency funds, as is often the case. Another tactic uses riskier corporate bond yields to
proxy for expected future interest rates, on the view that insurers often hold such instruments to
back their annuity promises. Others argue that discount rates for annuity computations should
recognize that governments frequently regulate insurance company investment practices. For
instance, the fraction of annuity assets that insurers can hold in equities is capped at 30% in Peru
and 40% in Chile; no real estate investment is permitted in Argentina (Palacios and Rofman,
2001). In other countries there may be few or no long-term government bonds, and even when
they exist, markets may be thin and yields distorted (James and Song, 2001).
In our research on US annuities, we use nominal yields on US Treasury bonds to estimate
the term structure of expected short-term interest rates; the expected nominal short rate in each
future period is computed as the nominal short rate that would satisfy the expectations theory of
the term structure for the two adjacent long-term bonds (BMP, 2000 and 2002). We also explore
the sensitivity of results to flat term structures, with the discount rate given various ly by the tenyear Treasury bond yield, the thirty-year Treasury bond yield, and the BAA corporate bond
yield.

Utility Value of Annuity Products
Before turning to the results, we note that risk-averse consumers would be expected to
value annuities more highly than the simple financial money’s worth ratio, since the insurance
component provides additional utility against the shortfall risk. It is not surprising that the
economics literature shows that annuities should appeal most to risk-averse consumers, 16 while
less risk-averse retirees, and people seeking to provide their heirs with bequests, will be likely to
want to self- insure with some portion of their assets.

16

See, for instance, Albrecht and Maurer (2002); Milevsky (1998, 1999); Blake and colleagues (1999, 2001, 2002);
and Warshawsky (1998a and b).

13

A commonly-used metric for the utility value of annuities is the equivalent wealth
measure. Specifically, this concept identifies the additional wealth a consumer would require, if
he did not have longevity protection, to achieve the same lifetime utility as with that annuity
(MPWB, 1999) . This approach assumes that the consumer elects an optimal consumption path
{Ct } from time 0 to time T (the maximum possible lifespan), given his rate of time preference ρ
and a vector of cumulative survival probabilities {P t } to maximize an expected utility function
T

V: Max ∑
{Ct }

t= 0

PtU (Ct )
. The cons umer’s budget constraint depends on whether he has access to a
(1 + ρ ) t

fair annuity market. If he does not, the present value of future consumption, discounted using
T

the riskless interest rate r, must equal to his initial wealth, W0 : W0 = ∑
t= 0

Ct

. If he can

(1 + r )t
T

purchase actuarially fair annuities, the budget constraint then becomes: W0 = ∑
t= 0

Pt Ct

(1 + r )t

. The

difference between the two budget constraints is due to survival probabilities. That is, lacking
access to annuity markets, a retiree’s future consumption cannot exceed his initial wealth; by
contrast with an annuity, his expected future consumption cannot exceed his initial wealth. In
other words, access to annuity markets reduces the relative price of future consumption and
lowers the amount of precautionary saving that he must undertake.
To actually measure how much a consumer might value an annuity requires that the
researcher specify the functional form for the utility function, along with the relevant riskaversion parameters. In much economic research, a one-period utility function, U(C t ), is assumed
to exhibit constant relative risk aversion: U (Ct ) =

Ct1− β
, where β is the Arrow-Pratt coefficient
1− β

of relative risk aversion, and 1/β is the elasticity of intertemporal substitution in consumption.
The indirect utility function V(.) which corresponds to the budget constraint permits evaluation
of the maximum utility that an individual might attain by following his optimal consumption
path. Finally, it is possible to evaluate the utility gain in financial terms by computing how much
additional wealth the retiree would require if he lacked access to annuities, if he were to be made

14

as well off as with annuities. This computation requires solving for α such that:
V0 (α W0 )

no annuities

= V0 (W0 )

annuities

. In this formulation, α is the “Annuity Equivalent Wealth .”17

Illustrative Money’s Worth and Annuity Equivalent Wealth Computations18
Panel A of Table 5 presents money’s worth calculations for annuities offered across a
range of developed countries, specifically, for the Australia, Canada, Switzerland, the UK, and
the US. 19 These results were developed using both annuitant as well as population mortality
tables, in order to indicate the extent to which adverse selection may play a role.
Table 5 here
These estimates indicate that annuities computed in each of these countries using
population tables prove to have very high money’s worth ratios. Estimates are at 0.90 or better in
all countries but the US. This implies that a typical member of the population could anticipate
receiving at least 90 percent of his premium from the single life annuity. The results also imply
that adverse selection as well as loadings and administrative charges must be below ten percent
of the purchase price. 20
Results are even more consumer- favorable using the figures computed with annuitant
mortality tables. In the US, for instance, the MW ratio with annuitant survival rates stands at
around 93% for both men and women, versus figures of 81-85% using population tables. The
difference between these numbers, 8-11%, is indicative of the extent of adverse selection. That
is, the difference is a measure of how much longer annuity buyers live than people in the general
population. The remaining load of 7% indicates relatively low charges and fees levied by US
insurers; this number is half what it was in the previous decade (Brown et al. 2000). Panel A
also implies that annuity products are exceptionally good investments in a few countries –
perhaps too good to be believable. In Canada, for ins tance, the estimated values using annuitant
tables are above 1.0, meaning that an annuitant could anticipate receiving more than his money
back on this financial asset. This may be the result of using overly conservative discount rates to
17

The derivation requires dynamic programming algorithms described in MPWB (1999) for the case of a single
individual; Brown and Poterba (1999) discuss the case of couples: and BMP (2002) discuss the case with uncertain
returns and/or inflation.
18
This discussion draws on Mitchell (2002).
19
For other countries see Cardinale et al. (2002), Doyle et al. (2001), Finkelstein and Poterba (2001), James and
Song (2001), James and Vittas (1999), and Murthi et al. (1999).
20
The Swiss money’s worth figures may be overly high, the result of quite conservative discount rates; see James
and Song (2001).

15

compute the expected present values. In any event, a financial assessment of these life annuity
products indicates that (a) adverse selection explains a substantial portion of the load perceived
by potential purchasers in the general population, and (b) these products wo uld be expected to be
quite valuable to annuitant purchasers.
Panel B moves from a strict financial computation to the broader utility-based measure of
annuity values. Specifically we report computations on annuity equivalent wealth for the US
case, which it will be recalled represents the amount of wealth that a consumer would need if he
did not have access to an annuity market, in order to achieve the same lifetime expected utility
level that he could achieve by using that wealth to purchase a nominal annuity. 21 To illustrate the
results, we employ a logarithmic utility function to represent the consumer’s utility and assume a
relatively low level of risk aversion (CRRA = 1). For such a person, a real (inflation-protected)
single annuity would be valued at 1.5, assuming the retiree had no other annuitized wealth. This
signifies that such a consumer lacking access to an annuity, would be willing to give up half of
his investment to obtain a real lifetime annuity with the same investment. At higher levels of
risk aversion, the annuity equivalent wealth value rises to 2, meaning that access to a real annuity
is worth double the wealth than the same value invested in a nominal annuity. Evidently, an
annuity would be valued much more highly in utility terms, than in money’s worth terms.
Results in Panel B also show that an inflation protected annuity is more valuable to the
risk-averse consumer than is a nominal annuity. The CRRA=1 consumer, for instance, finds the
real annuity worth 5-8 cents more per dollar invested versus a nominal annuity, and the value
rises with higher risk aversion (at CRRA=10, the gap is 40-60 cents). Our results do show that
the valuation depends on how inflation is expected to move, however, since a real annuity is
valued at 1.451 with i.i.d. inflation and 1.424 in the case of persistent inflation. 22 It is also
critical to take into account the fact that the AEW measure depends on whether a retiree has
some portion of his wealth already annuitized. The leftmost subsection of Panel A (labeled I)

21

This section draws on MPWB (1999) and Mitchell (2002).
BMP (2001) note that risk aversion and annuity equivalent wealth are not linearly related for nominal annuities in
the presence of uncertain inflation, because risk aversion works in opposing directions in the face of inflation
uncertainty. On the one hand, higher risk aversion makes the consumer value an annuitized payout more highly
since he avoids the risk of outliving his resources, and this is all that matters in the case of the real annuity. On the
other hand, a risk-averse consumer dislikes the uncertainty introduced into the nominal annuity stream by stochastic
inflation. Increased variability in the real value of the nominal annuity payouts reduces utility, and this effect is
larger for those with the highest degree of risk aversion. At low levels of risk aversion, the first effect dominates,
and the annuity equivalent wealth for a nominal annuity rises with risk aversion.
22

16

assumes no other annuities, while the rightmost (II) section assumes that half of retiree wealth is
already annuitized, perhaps through Social Security or occupational pensions. 23 In this case, the
AEW associated with annuities is still substantial, but its value is reduced. For instance, the halfannuitized consumer with CRRA=1 would need only one-third more wealth to be made as well
off as if he had a real annuity, compared to 50% in the case where he lacked an annuity
altogether. Clearly having a pre-existing real annuity provides retirees with insurance against
very low consumption values, and it drives down the value of additional privately-purchased
annuities.

II. Future Determinants of Annuity Markets
The economics literature over the last decade underscores the conclusion that annuities
deserve an important role in retiree portfolios of the future. Though annuity markets in the past
might have been underdeveloped, there are several reasons for optimism about their future
potential. 24 We discuss these next in terms of demand-side factors, pertaining to reasons that
retirees might find them more attractive in the future, and supply-side factors, relevant to the
enhanced role that providers might play. Public policy factors that could foster stronger annuity
markets are also mentioned.

Demand-side Factors
Some have claimed that retirees have shied away from annuities in the past because they
were perceived to be “too expensive.” But the evidence presented above indicates that this is not
true at present in many countries, and other information implies that it is even less valid now
than in the past (BMPW, 2001). Our finding of relatively moderate adverse selection and
relatively low administrative loadings relative to the past, as well as relative to the value of the
premium paid, suggests that such charges can be and are being moderated over time. In addition,
the research shows that retirees should reap substantial utility benefits from insurance protection
against longevity risk. Thus well- managed annuity markets with charges of the magnitudes seen
should be appealing to purchasers. Competition among insurers in Europe and Asia should also

23

For instance, the median US older household holds about three-fifths of its retirement resources in the form of
expected future Social Security and pensions benefits, payable only as life annuities (Moore and Mitchell 2000).
24
For further discussion of these points see Mitchell (2002) and BMWP (2001)

17

hold down costs. Along the way, of course, it will still be essential to understand that consumers
will expect reasonable money’s worth from the products.
Retirees’ decisions are also driven by people’s perceptions about the appeal of alternative
retirement investments. For instance, some financial planners have advised retirees to avoid
annuitizing, on the grounds that they can manage their money better than institutional pension
managers. Others propose that annuitization decisions be delayed to older ages, on the grounds
that young retirees can then benefit from the upside potential of investment portfolios (Milevsky,
1999). Still others argue that retirees should invest in financial assets since these may keep up
with inflation better than annuities. This is an area of substantial ongoing research, though the
prediction has been inaccurate for the US at various times (BMP, 2000), but may be better
supported in Europe (Albrecht and Maurer, 2002).
A different reason that older people might avoid buying annuities is than some might
wish to remain somewhat financially liquid in old age, whereas the traditional immediate annuity
does not provide this option. For instance, the risk of perhaps having to pay large medical bills or
cover nursing home costs could induce many elderly to hold on to the assets they have, instead of
annuitizing them. This concern may be mitigated in the future for several reasons. One is that
some insurers have brought to market new financial products that merge life annuities with
nursing home insurance (Warshawsky et al., 2002). Related to this point is the finding that
improved health among older people may actually reduce the need for nursing home care, as a
consequence curtailing the demand for long-term care (Lakdawalla and Philipson, 2002). Yet
another factor that can enhance the demand for annuities is that financial products are being
devised to help meet liquidity requirements, affording older people the chance to consume the
net equity in their homes (Caplin, 2002). This of course may conflict with older peoples’
desires to leave bequests, but economic research has no clear answer regarding just how a
bequest motive can best be incorporated into models of annuity demand (Gale and Slemrod,
2001). Brown (2001) argues that most specifications imply that full annuitization is no longer
optimal, and Blake et al. (2000) explore a range of possible and interesting alternative
formulations.
Yet a further concern regarding the future demand for annuities is the possibility that
retirees might seriously underestimate their survival prospects, which, if true, would lead them to
downvalue longevity insurance. An interesting survey on this point finds, however, that older

18

people in the US at least are in fact very well- informed about their survival probabilities. That is,
their expected survival patterns track actuarial tables quite closely (see Figure 9). Whether this is
more of a problem in Europe would be worth investigating empirically. It is our impression that
recent discussion of plummeting fertility and population aging in Europe would likely imply that
many older people are reasonably well- informed about future survival patterns.
Figure 9 here
Looking ahead, there are a number of other reasons that one might anticipate growth in
demand for annuities in the European market. One is that mortality patterns are continuing to
decline, and in many countries, actual longevity may be even higher than reported in official
government statistics (Schieber and Hewitt, 2000). This is tied up with major changes forecasted
in the role and function of traditional old-age retirement systems in the European region.
Paralleling a movement that began in the US two decades ago, many countries have recently
witnessed a trend toward company-sponsored defined benefit plan termination (Mitchell,
forthcoming). Furthermore, in much of Europe, state- financed public pensions will be forced to
moderate benefit promises going forward. Both these factors imply a drop in the fraction of
retirees’ retirement wealth that is a mandatory annuity, and in turn, they suggest that insurancebased and privately-purchased annuity products will be in increasing demand as substitutes.

Supply-side Considerations:
In many ways, the successful development and growth of annuity markets must depend
on supportive public policy.
In the past, large government social security systems may have crowded out annuity
demand in many European countries. This may explain why there is a small market for private
annuities in European countries with the largest social security systems. Figure 10 and Table 6
report after-tax replacement rates for selected OECD countries in 1995, divided by source of
income. Germany, Sweden, and Italy have the highest proportion of retirement income coming
from government transfers, over 55%, and it is probably no coincidence that in these countries,
the private annuity market is fairly small. Nevertheless, as these countries’ populations age, their
PAYGO systems will have to be reformed. Consequently the proportion of retirement income
coming from government transfers will likely decrease, implying potential for growth in
annuities markets.

19

Figure 10 here
Table 6 here

The Need for Better Mortality Information and Clear Supervision
Regulatory policy regarding mortality tables can drive both the demand and supply of
annuities. Well- functioning annuities markets depend on accurate mortality data. Insurance
companies that do not have access to high quality data will tend to price annuities conservatively,
exacerbating adverse selection problems and lowering access to annuities markets. Not only the
mortality of current annuitants is needed, but also good projections about how mortality is likely
to change in the future. In most countries, this data is simply not available. Cardinale et al.
(2002) hypothesize that mortality data may in fact be a public good whose production costs are
outweighed by positive externalities.
Regulations regarding how mortality data are used are also key to shaping the annuity
market. For example the UK requires that unisex mortality tables are used to compute pension
payouts (for benefits offered under “protected rights” legislation). As a result, mortality
differences between men and women cannot be used to price payouts, which generates crosssubsidization between male and female retirees on average. The common mortality table
combined with mandatory annuitization thereby restrict the potential for adverse selection that
otherwise might occur in voluntary annuitizations. By contrast, unisex tables are required for
employer pension calculations in the US but are not imposed on individual purchases; moreover
many workers are permitted to take lump-sum cashouts from their company pension. This
structure implies that informed and rational workers anticipating shorter-than-average life
expectancies have incentives to cash out rather than take life annuity streams. The policy issue,
then, is how to integrate pension and insurance regulations so as not to detract too strongly from
the appeal of annuities (Mitchell, 2000b). Prior to the introduction of the Third Life Directorate
of the European Union in 1994, many European countries regulated the tariffs that insurance
companies were able to charge, often specifying out-of-date mortality tables or unisex tables
(Davis 2002). MacDonald (1997) reports that, since this time, many countries in Europe have
started to collect and use annuitant mortality data in pricing, although this practice continues in
countries such as Japan and Mexico.

20

New Roles for Government Provision of Financial Products.
One supply-side explanation for thin annuity markets in some countries may be that
insurers lack assets with which to back the long-term promises represented by annuities.
Standard theory suggest that, in order to immunize themselves from small changes in interest
rates, insurance companies would do well to back their annuity portfolios with assets whose
duration equals the duration of the annuity liabilities. This is difficult to do in practice if longterm bonds are not available in national markets.
Figure 11 shows the term of the financial instruments needed to back actuarially fair
annuities priced using US male voluntary annuitant cohort mortality tables. As is evident from
the figure, the term varies with the bond interest rate. This is due to so-called “convexity risk”,
which results from the fact that the incidence of payments on an annuity portfolio and that of a
coupon-bearing bond portfolio are necessarily different. 25 The figure indicates that in the US
market, at least, insurers would require twelve-year par bonds to exactly immunize themselves
from interest rate changes, at zero interest rates. If the company wished to sell annuities to
females, it would require 13-year bonds trading at par (results not shown). Should interest rates
rise, the implied bond terms required fall somewhat, but only slowly.
Figure 11 here
While the US does have a relatively well-developed long-term bond market, many other
countries lack long-term assets. This implies that annuity markets would likely benefit from the
issuance of longer term government bonds than are currently available. In addition, if real
annuities are to be provided, real long bonds will have to be provided as well. At present, only a
select handful of countries currently offers inflation-linked bonds, including the US, UK, Israel,
and most recently France. Down the road, European insurers may therefore benefit from the
recent entry by France into the Euro-denominated inflation-protected bond market.
Insurers, and customers purchasing the insurance products, should also consider the
quality of the assets concerned. Recent events in Argentina and Russia have shown that it is
possible for governments to default on their debt. The risk increases with the term of the bond,
25

Of course, an insurer could exactly match the outgo of an annuity portfolio and the income of a bond portfolio by
investing in zero-coupon bonds of varying terms. However, zero coupon bonds of the term and quality required
(>35 years, AAA+) currently exist in no bond market.

21

implying that insurers in emerging economies may be unwilling to sell annuities even if assets of
sufficient term are available. It is worth noting in this context that the debt rating of the Japanese
government was recently cut by Moody’s to the same risk class as Cyprus, Greece, Latvia and
South Africa, indicating that this problem may not be confined to emerging markets. 26
There also remains a very real concern over cohort mortality risk. This is due to the
chance that entire cohorts live longer than anticipated, which is of grave concern to those selling
the products since substantial changes in mortality patterns could seriously challenge their
profitability. Some contend that governments will have to issue cohort “survivor bonds” (Blake,
et al. 2002). On the other hand, this problem may be resolved in the private market, by annuity
providers which hedge longevity risk with offsetting life insurance contracts. Initial research on
this topic using international data suggests, however, that this may be difficult to do in practice
(McCarthy and Mitchell, forthcoming), though more research is needed on this point.
A related argument was made by financial experts and economists seeking to encourage
the US government to issue inflation- linked bonds (Brynjolfosson and Fabozzi, 1999). Retiree
demand for these products in the US has been modest, though inflation rates have been quite low
of late. In other pension markets, including the UK and Israel, inflation- linked bonds have
become a mandatory component of the retiree portfolio and demand for these assets has been
more substantial.

Regulatory Policy Toward Annuities
Insurers’ long-term liquidity and solvency should also be important factors to consider
when individuals purchase annuities. In an environment where the liquidity position of
insurance companies is sometimes in question due to the lack of an effective regulatory
environment – as is the case in many emerging and developed countries – workers and retirees
may be deterred from participating in the annuities market (Mitchell, 2000a). In some cases,
individual policyholders are protected by solvency funds in the event of insurance company
insolvency. In turn, this highlights the importance of effective solvency regulation, because it
introduces the possibility of moral hazard on the part of the annuity seller. In some cases, the

26

Standard and Poor’s (2002) also warns that the sovereign credit ratings of the majority of highly rated European
Union members (EU-15) could fall to non-investment grade unless governments bring debt and deficit burdens
under control.

22

regulation of reserves can be a barrier to sellers because it imposes a large or highly variable
need for capital or onerous reporting or valuation requirements (Lemaire, 1997).
A key policy level influencing the future shape and form of annuity offerings is how
governments encourage or discourage the growth of annuity products via tax incentives. Across
Europe and around the world, the range of tax programs is so extensive and complex as to be
bewildering, most likely the result of tax law accretion over many years, and often producing
conflicts with sensible social policy. In Italy and France, for example, tax policy discourages
companies from building up collateral assets that back pension promises, and also it encourages
workers to take lump-sum withdrawals of deferred earnings instead of periodic payments or
annuities (Cardinale, 2002; Wadsworth et al., 2001). In the US, tax policy favors funding and
provision of employer-sponsored annuity promises (to a limit), but it also establishes a rather
undesirable profile of taxation on private annuity payouts that taxes people more heavily after
retirees attains one’s life expectancy (BMPW, 1999). In Australia, tax and transfer policy favors
purchase of fixed nominal annuities, but inflation- linked payouts and variable annuity programs
are not similarly tax- favored.
Other regulations also apply to annuity products, and it is fair to say that in general, these
are often complex and differ widely across countries. Yermo’s (2001) review of annuity
regulation across OECD countries illustrates for example that Italy requires mandatory
annuitization of half workers’ accumulated pension balances while Portugal requires annuitizing
two-thirds of the balance; and Spain offers free choice between lump sum, term and life
annuities. Germany’s new Riester-reform law permits workers to take 20% of their accumulated
assets at retirement in a lump sum, another 20% as a graduated withdrawal payment, and the
remainder can be paid out in periodic payments with the stipulation that at age 85, the retiree
must annuitized his balance and the benefit cannot be less than the periodic payment received
before that age (Maurer and Schlag, 2002). Similarly, retirees at age 75 in the UK are required to
annuitize their pension assets.

The Need for Consumer Education
Some countries have taken the perspective that it is the government’s responsibility to
promote public education and understanding regarding annuity products. Thus, for instance, the
Financial Services Authority (FSA) in the United Kingdom was recently charged with statutory

23

responsibility for enhancing consumer understanding and protection regarding annuity products
(Inland Revenue, 2002). This is to take the form of internet and paper explanations of terms and
pricing, as well as annuity types. Not only will this agency help new purchasers, but it will also
take on the task of helping people contemplating switching providers, with a focus on fees and
switching costs. As a different approach, the Italian government requires that annuity payouts be
explicitly described to purchasers using real returns of 1% and 3%, so that buyers can compare
payouts across products (Cardinale, 2002). In Mexico and several other Latin American
countries, annuity providers must submit competitive bids to workers as they draw near their
retirement dates, so as to enhance comparability and competition across insurers (Palacios and
Rofman, 2001).

III. Conclusions
As the world ages, it will become increasingly critical to develop and offer new financial
products that help protect economic security during the retirement period. This paper
demonstrates that several factors will drive modernization of global annuity markets in the
future, particularly in European nations which are among the most challenged by rapid
population aging.
Our review suggests several conclusions. First, the demand for annuities is likely to rise
in the future, even for risk averse elders who want to keep some portion of their assets liquid.
This will be driven by increased longevity, diminished public and corporate pensions, and the
availability of new annuity linked products. Second, the supply of annuities is likely to grow, but
here, thoughtful public policy can play a beneficial role. Specifically, there are important ways in
which governments can play a potent role in strengthening annuity markets. These include
developing and disseminating high-quality data on mortality tables, enhancing consumer
education and awareness of longevity insurance, standardization of cost reporting, and
streamlining tax policy to make it more attractive to invest in sensible products. It may also be
useful for governments to mitigate the potential problems caused by adverse selection, including
encouraging group annuities and possibly requiring some minimum level of annuity provision.
Finally, there may be a new role required for oversight groups, if annuity markets are to thrive.
Specifically, they can serve as sponsors of new financial products that can help insurers provide

24

annuities more efficiently. These could include longer term government bonds that can be used
to match annuity liability patterns, inflation- indexed bonds, and possibly, survivor bonds.

25

References
Albrecht, Peter and Raimond Maurer. 2002. “Self-Annuitization, Consumption Shortfall in Retirement and Asset
Allocation: The Annuity Benchmark.” Pension Research Council Working Paper 2002-6. Wharton School.
Philadelphia, PA.
Ando, Albert and Franco Modigliani. 1963. “The Life Cycle Hypothesis of Saving.” American Economic Review.
53(1): 55-74.
Blake, David. 1999. “Annuity Markets: Problems and Solutions”. The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance. July:
359-375.
Blake, David, William Burrows, and J. Michael Orszag. 2002. “Survivor Bonds and Compulsory Annuitization:
Helping Reduce the Cost of Pension Provision.” In Zvi Bodie, Brett Hammond, and Olivia S. Mitchell, eds.
Innovations in Financing Retirement. Pension Research Council. Philadelphia, PA: University of
Pennsylvania Press.
Blake, David, Andrew Cairns, and Kevin Dowd. 2000 (revised 2001). “Pensionmetrics: Stochastic Pension plan
Design During the Distribution Phase.” Proceedings of the 3rd Annual BSI Gamma Foundation Conference
on Global Asset Mgmt, Lugano, November, BSI Working Paper No. 19.
Blake, David, Andrew Cairns, and Kevin Dowd. 2001. “Pensionmetrics: Stochastic Pension Plan Design and ValueAt-Risk During the Accumulation Phase.” Insurance: Mathematics and Economics. 29: 187-215.
Bodie, Zvi, Brett Hammond, and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2002. “A Framework for Analyzing and Managing Retirement
Risks”. In Zvi Bodie, Brett Hammond, and Olivia S. Mitchell, eds. Innovations in Financing Retirement.
Pension Research Council. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press: 3-19.
Brynjolfsson, John B. and Frank J. Fabozzi, Editors. 1999. The Handbook of Inflation-Indexed Bonds. F.J. Fabozzi
Associates. New Hope, PA.
Brown, Jeffrey. 2000. “How Should We Insure Longevity Risk in Pensions and Social Security?” Issue in Brief,
Center for Retirement Research, Boston College, Boston, MA.
Brown, Jeffrey. 2001. “Redistribution and Insurance: Mandatory Annuitization with Mortality Heterogeneity”, JFK
School, Harvard, Cambridge, MA.
Brown, Jeffrey, Olivia S. Mitchell, and James Poterba. 2000 [BMP2000]. “The Role of Real Annuities and Indexed
Bonds in an Individual Accounts Retirement Program.” In Risk Aspects of Investment-Based Social
Security Reform. Ed. John Y. Campbell & Martin Feldstein. NBER: University of Chicago Press: 321-360.
Brown, Jeffrey, Olivia S. Mitchell, and James Poterba. 2002. [BMP2002a] “Mortality Risk, Inflation Risk, and
Annuity Products.” In Zvi Bodie, Brett Hammond, & Olivia S. Mitchell, eds. Innovations in Financing
Retirement. Pension Research Council. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press: 175-197.
Brown, Jeffrey, Olivia S. Mitchell, James Poterba, & Mark Warshawsky. 2001. [BMPW 2001]. The Role of Annuity
Markets in Financing Retirement. MIT Press.
Brown, Jeffrey, Olivia S. Mitchell, James Poterba, & Mark Warshawsky. 1999. [BMWP 1999]. “Taxing Retirement
Income: Nonqualified Annuities and Distributions from Qualified Accounts”. National Tax Journal. LII,3,
September: 563-592.
Brown, Jeffrey R. and James M. Poterba. 1999. “Joint Life Annuities and Annuity Demand by Married Couples.”
NBER Working Paper No. 7199, June.
Brown, Jeffrey R. and Mark J. Warshawsky. 2000. “Longevity-Insured Retirement Distributions from Pension
Plans: Market and Regulatory Issues”. Working paper prepared for the Brookings/SIEPR/TIAA-CREF
Institute Conference on Public Policies and Private Pensions. Washington, D.C: September 21-22.
Cantor, ACM, and JA Sefton. 2002. “Personal Pensions and Future Rates of Return.”
www.actuaries.org.uk/sessional/sm0110.pdf.
Caplin, Andrew. 2002. “Turning Assets into Cash: Problems and Prospects in the Reverse Mortgage Market.” In
Zvi Bodie, Brett Hammond, and Olivia S. Mitchell, eds. Innovations in Financing Retirement. Pension
Research Council. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press: 234-253.
Cardinale, Mirko, Alec Findlater, and Mike Orszag. 2002. “Paying Out Pensions: A Review of International
Annuities Markets.” Watson Wyatt LLP. London, May.

26

Cardinale, Mirko. 2002. “Annuities in Italy.” Watson Wyatt. Working Paper, April.
Davis, E. Philip. 2002. "Ageing and Financial Stability." In H Herrmann and A Auerbach, eds. Ageing and
Financial Markets. Springer Verlag - Deutsche Bundesbank. Berlin: 191-227.
Desai, Niti. 2002. Press Conference, World Assembly on Aging. Second World Conference on Ageing, United
Nations. www.un.org/ageing.
Disney, Richard. 2000. “Crises in Public Pension Programmes in OECD: What are the Reform Options?” Economic
Journal 110, 461: F1-F41.
Disney, Richard and Paul Johnson. 2000. “Pension Systems and Retirement Incomes Across OECD Countries”.
Institute for Fiscal Studies Working Paper. London.
Doyle, Suzanne, Olivia S. Mitchell, and John Piggott. 2001. “Annuity Values in Defined Contribution Retirement
Systems: The Case of Singapore and Australia”. NBER Working Paper No. W8091.
European Commission, 1997. Supplementary Pensions in the Single Market: A Green Paper.
http://europa.eu.int/comm/internal_market/eu/finances/pensions/gppensen.pdf
Feldstein, Martin and Horst Siebert, editors. Social Security Pension Reform in Europe. The University of Chicago
Press, 2002
Feldstein, Martin and Elena Ranguelova. 2000. “Accumulated Pension Collars: A Market Approach to Reducing the
Risk of Investment-Based Social Security Reform. ” NBER Working Paper No. W7861. August.
Finkelstein, Amy and James Poterba. 2000. “Adverse Selection in Insurance Markets: Policyholder Evidence from
the U.K. Annuity Market”. NBER Working Paper No. W8045.
Gale, William G. and Joel B. Slemrod. 2001. “Overview”. In Rethinking Estate and Gift Taxation. Eds. William
Gale, James Hines and Joel Slemrod. Washington, D.C: Brookings: 1-64.
Hurd, Michael D. and Kathleen McGarry. 1997. “The Predictive Validity of Subjective Probabilities of Survival.”
NBER Working Paper 6193. September.
Inland Revenue. 2002. Modernising Annuities. Consultative Document. Department for Work and Pensions,
http://www.actuaries.org.uk/pensions/mod_annuities_resp.pdf
James, Estelle and Xue Song. 2001. “Annuities Markets Around the World : Money’s Worth and Risk
Intermediation.” Presented at the AEA meetings. www.estellejames.com/downloads/aea_annuities.pdf
James, Estelle and Dimitri Vittas. 1999. “Annuities Markets in Comparative Perspective.” Presented at the World
Bank Conference on New Ideas About Old Age Security, Washington, D.C.
Jennings, Robert M., and Andrew P. Trout. 1982. The Tontine: From the Reign of Louis XIV to the French
Revolutionary Era. Huebner Foundation Monograph Number 12.Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania. Philadelphia, PA.
Lachance, Marie-Eve, Olivia S. Mitchell, and Kent Smetters. Forthcoming. “Guaranteeing Defined Contribution
Pensions: The Option to Buy Back a Defined Benefit Promise”. Journal of Risk and Insurance.
Lakdawalla, Darius, and Tomas Philipson. 2002. “The Rise in Old-Age Longevity and the Market for Long-Term
Care.” American Economic Review. March. 295-306.
Lemaire, Jean with the assistance of Krupa Subramanian. 1997. Insurance Regulation in Europe and the United
States. Huebner Foundation Monograph Number 16. Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania.
Philadelphia, PA.
MacDonald, A.S. 1997. The Second Actuarial Study of Mortality in Europe. Groupe Consultatif des Associations
d’Actuaires des Pays des Communautés Européennes, London.
Maurer, Raimond and Christian Schlag. 2002. “Money-Back Guarantees in Individual Account Pensions: Evidence
from the German Pension Reform.” Paper presented at the Wharton School’s Pension Research Council
Conference on Risk Transfers and Retirement Income, April.
<prc.wharton.upenn.edu/prc/PRC/WP/WP2002-11.pdf>
McCarthy, David and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2002. “Estimating International Adverse Selection in Annuities”. North
American Actuarial Journal, October.

27

McCarthy, David and Olivia S. Mitchell. Forthcoming. “International Adverse Selection in Life Insurance and
Annuities.” In Population Aging in the Industrialized Countries: Challenges and Explorations. Ed. S.
Tuljapurkar. Forthcoming. Pension Research Council Working Paper, Wharton School.
Milevsky, Moshe. 1998. “Optimal Asset Allocation Toward the End of the Life Cycle”. Journal of Risk and
Insurance. 65: 401-26.
Milevsky, Moshe. 1999. “Optimal Annuitization Policies: Analysis of the Options.” North American Actuarial
Journal. http://www.soa.org/library/naaj/1997-09/naaj0101_4.pdf
Mitchell, Olivia S. 2000 (a). “Building an Environment for Pension Reform in Developing Countries”. In
Foundations of Pension Finance. Eds. Zvi Bodie and E Phillip Davis. London: Edward Elgar: 480-503.
Mitchell, Olivia S. 2002. “Developments in Decumulation: The Role of Annuity Products in Financing
Retirement.” In A. Auerbach and H. Herrman, Ageing, Financial Markets and Monetary Policy. Berlin:
Springer-Verlag: 97-125.
Mitchell, Olivia S. 2000 (b). “Developments in Pensions”. Handbook of Insurance. Ed. Georges Dionne. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Boston:873-899.
Mitchell, Olivia S. Forthcoming. “New Trends in Pension Benefit and Retirement Provisions.” In Benefits for the
Future Workplace. Eds. O.S. Mitchell, B. Hammond, and A. Rappaport. Pension Research Council.
Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press
Mitchell, Olivia S. and Flavio Barreto. 1997. “After Chile, What? Second-Round Social Security Reforms in Latin
America”. Revista de Analisis Economico, 12(2) November 1997: 3-36.
Mitchell, Olivia S. Brett Hammond, and Anna Rappaport. 2000. Forecasting Retirement Needs and Retirement
Wealth. Pension Research Council. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Mitchell, Olivia S., James Poterba, Mark Warshawsky, Jeffrey Brown [MPWB]. 1999. “New Evidence on the
Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities”. American Economic Review. December: 1299-1318.
Modigliani, Franco. 1986. “Life Cycle, Individual Thrift, and the Wealth of Nations.” American Economic Review.
76 (3): 297-313.
Moore, James and Olivia S. Mitchell. 2000. “Projected Retirement Wealth and Saving Adequacy”. In Forecasting
Retirement Needs and Retirement Wealth. Eds. O.S. Mitchell, B. Hammond, and A. Rappaport. Pension
Research Council. Philadelphia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press: 68-94.
Murthi, Mamta, Michael Orszag, and Peter Orszag. 1999. “The Value for Money of Annuities in the UK”.
Economics Department Working Paper, Birkbeck College. August.
OECD Tables and Figures on Aging. http://www.nber.org/pensioncrisis/oecd-toc1.doc
Palacios, Robert and Rafael Rofman. 2001. “Annuity Markets and Benefit Design in Multipillar Pension Schemes:
Experience and Lessons for Four Latin American Countries”. World Bank Pension Reform Primer.
Schieber, Sylvester J. and Paul S. Hewitt,. 2000. “Demographic Risk in Industrial Societies: Independent
Population Forecasts for the G-7 Countries.” An Analysis for the Global Aging Commission.
Sheshinski, Eytan. 2002. “Equilibrium and Optimality In Annuity Markets.” Four lectures given by at the Stockholm
School of Economics, February. http://www.hhs.se/secs/MiniCourses/RefListSheshinski.doc
Standard and Poor’s. 2002. “Western Europe Past Its Prime: Sovereign Rating Perspectives in the Context of Aging
Populations.” Ratings Direct Report, London, January.
Tonks, Ian. 1999. "UK Pensions Policy" November 1999. www.ecn.bris.ac.uk/www/ecit/research/paper99c
Wadsworth, Mike, Alec Findlater, and Tom Boardman. 2001. “Reinventing Annuities.” Staple Inn Actuarial
Society. http://www.sias.org.uk/papers/reinvann.pdf
Warshawsky, Mark J. 1998 [a]. “The Optimal Design of Minimum Distribution Requirements for Retirement
Plans.” Benefits Quarterly. 14(4): 36-53.
Warshawsky, Mark J. 1998 [b]. “Private Annuity Markets in the US.” Journal of Risk and Insurance. 55(3): 518-29.
Warshawsky, Mark J., Brenda Spillman and Chris Murtaugh. 2002. “Integrating the Life Annuity and Long-term
Care Insurance: Theory, Evidence, Practice, and Policy” In Zvi Bodie, Brett Hammond, and Olivia S.

28

Mitchell, eds. Innovations in Financing Retirement. Pension Research Council. Philadelphia, PA:
University of Pennsylvania Press.: 198-221.
Yermo, Juan. 2001. “Private Annuities in OECD Countries.” OECD Insurance and Private Pensions Unit, Financial
Affairs Division. Working Paper. www.oecd.org/daf/insurance-pensions

29

Consumption

Figure 1: Alternative Consumption Profiles as a Function of Age

0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0
65

70

75
1/LE

80
Life Ann

85

90
1/Rem LE

95

100

Age

Note: Figure assumes worker attains retirement age with assets normalized at 1.0, and he draws
down fractional amounts of remaining assets over his remaining lifetime. The “1/LE” profile
assumes that the retiree consumes a level proportion of his retirement wealth each year, at a rate
sufficient to completely draw down all his wealth (and investment earnings) by the time he
reaches his life expectancy (as of age 65). The “Life Ann” profile assumes that the retiree’s
entire wealth is converted into an actuarially fair life annuity payable from 65. The profile
labeled “1/Rem LE” assumes that the retiree recomputes the level consumption that will draw
down his wealth over his remaining life expectancy each year, based on annually updated life
expectancy. All profiles assume retirement at 65 and a real investment return of 4%.
Source: Authors’ computations using US Male population cohort table from McCarthy and
Mitchell (2002).

30

Total Return

Figure 2. Return Benchmark On Residual Capital That Would Have to Be Earned to
Compensate For “Mortality Drag”

0.3

Male
Female

0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
65

70

75

80

85

90 Age

Note: Figure shows the return required to be earned on privately invested capital to compensate
for the risk pooling aspect of annuities (which increases with age). Figure assumes a real annual
interest rate underlying annuity prices and US Male population cohort mortality from McCarthy
and Mitchell (2002).
Source: Authors’ calculations.

31

Figure 3: Shortfall Risk From Self-Insuring

45
40
35
30
25
20
15
10

100
4
5,5
7

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

Investment in stock (%)

20

0

10

5
0

Probability of Consumption Shortfall

50

AIR(%)

Note: Probability of consumption shortfall in retirement for a male retiring at age 60 who does
not annuitize, but instead invests his portfolio in the specified mix of German stocks and bonds.
The shortfall is computed compared to consumption that could be purchased with an annuity
priced using the specified Assumed Interest Rate (AIR).
Source: Albrecht and Maurer (2002).

32

Figure 4: Time Series Decline in US Male Mortality: 1965-1995

140
130
120
110
100
90
1965

1970

1975

1980

1985

1990

1995

Note: Data represent Actual/Expected death rates for US males, standardized so the 1991 table is
equal to 100.
Source: Social Security Administration, Male Population Mortality, reported on Berkeley
Mortality Database, http://demog.berkeley.edu/wilmoth/mortality.

33

Figure 5: A/E Metrics for Selected OECD Countries

Japan
Canada
Australia
US
Sweden
Norway
NZ

93
96
98
100
103
105
106
108
109
112
112

UK
Italy
Denmark
Austria
Germany
Neth.
Finland

113
116
123
0

20

40

60

80

100

120

140

Notes: The following male mortality tables from ~1991 were used for these computations (in
some cases these were extended to 111):
Finland
Central Bureau of Statistics 1986-1990
NetherlandsCentral Bureau of Statistics 1985-1990
Germany Federal Statistics Office 1990-1992
Austria
Statistische Zentralamt 1990-1992
Denmark Danmarks Statistik, Statistical Yearbook 1990-1992
UK
Government Actuaries Department 1999
NZ
Statistics New Zealand, 1990-1992
Norway
Statistics Norway, 1993
Sweden
National Central Bureau of Statistics, 1993
Australia Statistics Australia 1990-1992
Canada
Statistics Canada Life Tables, 1990-1992
US
Social Security Administration, 1991
Japan
Japanese Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare, Statistics Division, 1990
Italy
National Institute of Statistics, 1991

Source: Authors’ computations; see McCarthy and Mitchell (2002).

34

Figure 6: Distribution of US Male Population versus Annuitant Age at Death, Conditional
on Survival to Age 65 (US Male)

US M Ann
US M Pop

0.045

0.04

0.035

0.03

0.025

0.02

0.015

0.01

0.005

Source: Mitchell (2002)

119

117

115

113

111

109

107

105

103

99

101

97

95

93

91

89

87

85

83

81

79

77

75

73

71

69

67

65

0

35

Figure 7: Predicted Male Cohort A/E Values for Variety of Countries; Male Population
Mortality and Annuitant Mortality
48

Japan

81
52

Canada

85
53

Switzerland

86
53

Australia

86
62

US

95
68

Italy

101
68

Germany

101
69

Chile

102
69

UK

102
73

Israel

106
76

Austria

109
0

20

40

60

80

100

Notes: Figure derived from A/E values predicted using regression estimates in Table 4.
Source: Authors’ computations.

120

36

Figure 8: Cross-national Predicted Values: Actual and Predicted Values of A/E Metrics

120

100

80

60

40

20
MALE

FEMALE

0
Italy
Vol Ann

Germany
Vol Ann

Japan
Comp Ann

Japan
Vol Ann

Italy
Vol Ann

Germany
Vol Ann

Japan
Comp Ann

Japan
Vol Ann

Note: A/E values for male and female annuitant mortality computed from RG48 tables for Italy
(estimated from MacDonald, 1997), DAV1994R tables for Germany (MacDonald, 1997), EPF
and TQPP mortality tables for Japan compulsory annuitants (data kindly provided by the
Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare) and the Japan Institute of Actuaries for Japan annuitants.
Figure shows actual A/E values and 95% confidence intervals for predicted A/E values from
model described in Table 4. Circled values fall outside the 95% confidence intervals; see text.
Source: Authors’ computations fo llowing methodology described in McCarthy and Mitchell
(2002).

37

Figure 9: Objective and Anticipated Survival Probabilities to Ages 75 and 85

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
All-Age 75 All-Age 85 F-Age 75

1990 Life Table

F-Age 85 M-Age 75 M-Age 85

Anticipated Survival Prob.

Note: Subjective probabilities of survival to age 75 and 85 reported by Wave 2 respondents in the
Health and Retirement Study, born 1931-1941 and interviewed in 1994. Responses weighted by
sample weights.
Source: Hurd and McGarry (1997)

38

Figure 10: Old Age Replacement Rates for Selected OECD Countries

Germany
Netherlands
United States
Greece
Italy
Sweden
Mexico
Finland
Australia
Norway
Denmark
0

10

20
30
Govt transfers

40
50
60
Capital Inc. Earnings

70

80

90

Note: Figure shows show disposable income for persons aged 65-74 as a percentage of those age 55-64.
Source: Table 6

39

Figure 11: Term of Bond Required to Match Mean Duration of Life Annuity, As a
Function of the Interest Rate

Term of bond

12
11.6
11.2
10.8
10.4
10
0

0.02

0.04

0.06

0.08

0.1
Yield to maturity

Notes: Bonds assumed to trade at par with coupons paid continuously.
Source: Authors’ computations using US Male Voluntary Annuitant Cohort Mortality (see
McCarthy and Mitchell, 2002).

40

Table 1: Life Expectancy Remaining and Probabilities of Survival to Selected Ages: Men and
Women at Age 65 (in 2000)

Men

Women

Remaining Life
Expectancy (years):

16.4

19.6

Probability of Surviving to Age:
70
75
80
85
90
95
100

88%
74
56
36
18
6
1

92%
82
69
51
31
14
4

Source: Brown (2000)

41

Table 2: Immediate Monthly Annuity Payouts Per $1000 Premium, By Age and Sex

Age 55
All Companies, Average:
Men
Women
Ten Highest Payouts, Average:
Men
Women
Ten Lowest Payouts, Average:
Men
Women
Twenty Highest Rated Firms, Average:
Men
Women
Ten Largest Annuity Firms, Average:
Men
Women

Age 65

Age 75

6.64
6.24

7.94
7.17

10.52
9.22

7.38
6.88

8.72
7.76

11.61
9.99

5.98
5.59

7.25
6.56

9.45
8.63

6.50
6.09

7.78
7.07

10.35
9.09

6.72
6.31

7.98
7.21

10.43
9.14

Note: Each entry indicates the monthly income payable as a life annuity, based on the purchase
of a $100,000 single premium immediate policy at the ages specified. The $100,000 purchase
price is inclusive of policy fees but exclusive of annuity premium taxes. Data are for 1995.
Source: MPWB (1999).

42

Table 3: Comparative Data on Actual/Expected (A/E) Mortality Measures for Purchasers
of Voluntary and Compulsory Life Annuities versus Population: Age 65 by Sex.

Voluntary
Annuities

Males
UK
US
Japan
Females
UK
US
Japan

Compulsory Population
Annuities

67.5
65.3
81.8

82.6
84.0
na

100
100
100

73.5
73.6
100.7

84.9
90.8
na

100
100
100

Notes: na means not available. Base table (=100) is population table for each country and
gender.
Source: McCarthy and Mitchell (forthcoming).

43

Table 4: Regression of A/E Metrics on Type of Mortality Table, Country Effects, and
Interactions

Coeff.

Std Err

-34.68**
-26.17**
-32.95**
-12.33**

2.79
3.47
3.01
2.85

6.88
11.48**
3.33

4.65
4.14
3.79

UK
Canada
Chile
Australia
Israel
Italy
Austria
Germany
Switzerland
Japan

7.79**
-9.93**
7.57*
-8.95**
11.68**
6.14
13.94**
6.49
-9.10**
-13.91**

2.91
3.35
4.31
3.67
4.31
5.66
4.17
4.19
3.72
5.66

Intercept
Adj R-square
N of Obs

106.97**
98.8%
64

2.94

Female
Comp Ann
Vol Ann
Cohort
FxCompAnn
FxVolAnn
FxCohort

Notes: * = significant at 10%; ** = significant at 5%.
Source: Authors’ computations following McCarthy and Mitchell (forthcoming).

44

Table 5: Comparisons of Annuity Values: Money’s Worth and Annuity Equivalent Wealth
A: Money’s Worth of Nominal Annuity Payouts: Single Premium Nominal Life Annuities
Offered to 65-Year Olds Across Countries

UK
Pop

Ann

Australia
Pop

Ann

Canada
Pop

Ann

Switzerland
Pop

Men
0.897 0.966 0.914 0.986 0.925 1.014 0.965
Women 0.910 0.957 0.910 0.970 0.937 1.015 1.115

Ann

NA
NA

US
Pop

Italy
Ann

0.814 0.927
0.852 0.927

Pop

Ann

NA
NA

0.958
0.965

Note: Computations use country Treasury yield curve. Pop refers to population mortality table
while Ann refers to annuitant mortality table.
Source: James and Vittas (1999) for UK, Australia, Canada, and Switzerland; MPWB (1999) for
US; Cardinale (2002) for Italy.

B: Annuity Equivalent Wealth Values: US Male Age 65
(I)
(II)
Annuity Equivalent Wealth for Real and Nominal Annuities
Coefficient of
Relative Risk
Aversion
(CRRA)

1
2
5
10

Consumer with No Pre-Existing
Annuity Wealth
Nominal
Nominal
Real
Annuity:
Annuity:
Annuity
i.i.d.
Persistent
inflation
Inflation
1.502
1.451
1.424
1.650
1.553
1.501
1.855
1.616
1.487
2.004
1.592
1.346

Consumer With Half of Initial
Wealth in Pre-Existing Real Annuity
Nominal
Nominal
Real
Annuity:
Annuity:
Annuity
i.i.d.
Persistent
inflation
Inflation
1.330
1.304
1.286
1.441
1.403
1.366
1.623
1.515
1.450
1.815
1.577
1.451

Note: The annuity equivalent wealth calculation for the nominal annuity assumes inflation takes
one of six possible values, roughly capturing the distribution of inflation outcomes over the
1926-1997 period. Inflation shocks are assumed independent across periods in the i.i.d. case and
follow a stylized AR(1) process in the persistent inflation case.
Source: Mitchell (2002)

45

Table 6: Old Age Replacement Rates for Selected OECD Countries

Country
Denmark
Norway
Australia
Finland
Mexico
Sweden
Italy
Greece
United States
Netherlands
Germany
Average

Govt Tsfr Capital/SEInc.
37.6
22.3
36.1
24.5
39.5
24.7
17.1
54
9.7
25.6
64.6
6
56.2
7.2
48.3
21.6
28
30.2
38.6
35
59.6
14.4
39.57
24.14

Earnings
9.6
11.7
10.9
4.4
40.3
5.5
15.3
10
21.7
7.2
10.4
13.36

Total
69.4
72.3
75
75.5
75.6
76.1
78.7
79.9
79.9
80.8
84.4
77.05

Note: Table reports show total disposable income for persons aged 65-74 as a percentage of those age 5564.
Source: OECD data from Feldstein and Seibert (2002).

46

Table 7: Implicit Tax Rates on Continued Work at Older Ages, due to Benefit Programs
for the Elderly: OECD countries, 1995

Old-age
pensions

Old age pensions plus:
Unemployment
related benefits 1

Disability
benefits 1

Special earlyretirement 2

United States
Japan
Germany
France

12
28
14
14

..
..
37
49

..
..
46
..

..
..
..
57

Italy
United Kingdom
Canada
Australia
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Finland
Ireland
Luxembourg

79
5
6
0
34
23
0
22
14
29

.. 3
15
..
20
34
37
51
42
32
65

..3
..
..
21
64
44
37
71
32
63

..3
..
..
..
..
56
22
..
..
51

Netherlands
8
57
41
.. 4
New Zealand
9
27
..
..
Norway
15
..
65
17
Portugal
4
33
66
..
Spain
18
33
53
..
Sweden
18
..
76
..
Switzerland
0
..
..
..
Notes:
1. ".." denotes that early retirement into non-employment benefit system is
not an option because of entitlement conditions.
2. ".." denotes no public schemes or such schemes are not much used.
3. Schemes not relevant for a worker with a long contribution history
as he can retire prior to standard retirement age with full old-age pension.
4. Special early retirement schemes in the Netherlands are not mandatory.
Source : Feldstein and Seibert (2002)

