                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




    IS THERE AN EFFECT OF INCREMENTAL WELFARE BENEFITS ON FERTILITY
                   BEHAVIOR? A LOOK AT THE FAMILY CAP


                                        Melissa Schettini Kearney


                                           Working Paper 9093
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9093


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       August 2002




The author thanks Joshua Angrist, David Autor, Amy Finkelstein, Jonathan Gruber, Jonathan Guryan, Phil
Levine, Sean May, Sendhil Mullainathan, Diane Whitmore, and participants of the MIT labor and public
finance lunches for helpful comments. She also thanks Bob Schoeni, Phil Levine, and Diane Whitmore for
sharing CEA welfare policy data. Three anonymous referees provided thoughtful comments and suggestions.
The National Science Foundation provided financial support through a Graduate Research Fellowship. The
analyses, interpretations, and conclusions of this paper are attributable to the author, and not to the National
Center for Health Statistics, which is responsible only for the initial natality data. The views expressed
herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Melissa Schettini Kearney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Is There an Effect of Incremental Welfare Benefits on Fertility Behavior?
A Look at the Family Cap
Melissa Schettini Kearney
NBER Working Paper No. 9093
August 2002
JEL No. H53, I18, I38, J13


                                               ABSTRACT

        A number of states have recently instituted family cap policies, under which women who
conceive a child while receiving cash assistance are not entitled to additional cash benefits upon the birth
of the child. This paper takes advantage of the variation across states in the timing of the policy’s
implementation to determine if family cap policies are discouraging women from having additional
births. Vital statistics birth data for the years 1989 to 1998 offer no evidence that family cap policies lead
to a reduction in births to women ages 15 to 34. The data reject a decline in births of more than one
percent. The finding is robust to multiple specification checks. The data also reject large declines in
higher-order births among demographic groups with relatively high welfare participation rates. Curiously,
the data suggest increases in higher-order births to unmarried black and white high-school dropouts and
to unmarried black teens approximately one year after the implementation of a family cap. The data reject
a decline in births of more than four percent for unmarried white high-school graduates and unmarried
white teens.




Melissa Schettini Kearney
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
mkearney@wellesley.edu
I. Introduction

           Over the past decade, states across the country have been experimenting with welfare
reform. One of the most controversial reform policies, the “family cap” or “child exclusion,” is
motivated by the notion that an incremental increase in cash assistance for each additional child
increases a woman’s propensity to bear additional children. With the intention of heightening
personal responsibility, 18 states have responded to this concern by implementing family caps that
end the traditional practice of providing families on welfare with additional cash benefits when a
new child is born into the family. An additional five states have altered the form of the additional
benefit, but not eliminated it entirely. This paper uses the variation across states in the timing of
family cap implementation to identify whether the denial of incremental benefits leads to a
reduction in births.
           A woman’s decision to give birth is part of a complex series of decisions influenced by
social, religious, economic, and other demographic and personal factors. The question of how
welfare benefits affect this decision focuses on the role of economic factors in determining this
choice. The primary economic question is whether the availability of fewer resources at the margin
decreases a woman’s propensity to bear additional children. The potential direct effect of the policy
is to reduce higher-order births: a decrease in marginal resources raises the price of an additional
child and may thereby deter a woman from having additional births. Insofar as the policy sends a
message that welfare is less generous than previously, it may also lead a woman to delay
childbearing until she is financially secure and thereby reduce first births as well.
           The economic theory underlying this question is that of rational choice, and in particular the
role of incentives as important determinants of behavior. There is an extensive literature on various
potential incentive effects of the welfare system. Econometric studies generally show that labor
supply is reduced by the Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program and that higher
potential benefits induce greater participation in this program. The evidence regarding the effects of
AFDC on family structure is more mixed, but recent studies have found a weak effect.1
           Identifying the causal effects of welfare on fertility decisions is not straightforward. A
regression of the number of births a woman has on the welfare benefits she receives confounds the
direction of causality. The amount of cash assistance a woman receives is determined by the
number of children she has. Many studies have tried to identify the causal relationship by

1
    For a survey of the literature see Moffitt (1998, 1992).
                                                                                                        2
exploiting cross-sectional variation in state benefit levels and birth rates. The main weakness of this
strategy is that there may be fixed differences in birth rates across states that can not be controlled
for in a cross-sectional analysis.
       This paper addresses these problems by using a plausibly exogenous source of variation in
incremental benefits and data from a panel of states. The nineties was a decade of unprecedented
welfare reform and experimentation at the state level. The implementation of family caps does not
appear to be driven by movements in birth rates. Rather, welfare reform has been a political
movement during the time period being studied and state policies have been adopted based on the
politics and priorities of the state. For this reason, the legislative “quasi-experiment” is reasonably
considered exogenous. Furthermore, the variation in timing across the 18 states that eliminate
incremental benefits provides us with multiple quasi-experiments from which we can identify the
effect of the policy. The effect of the family cap on fertility behavior is identified using state-level
panel data: the analysis compares the change in birth rates for a state that implements a family cap
in a given period to the change in birth rates among states that do not implement a family cap in the
given period. The analysis controls for level differences in birth rates across states, level differences
in birth rates across years that are common to all states, and differences in (linear) birth rate trends
among states.
       Vital statistics birth data for the years 1989 to 1998 offer no evidence that family cap
policies lead to a reduction in births to women ages 15 to 34. When state effects, month effects, and
state-specific linear time trends are controlled for, a decline in births of more than one percent can
be rejected at the 95 percent confidence level. (The upper bound of the confidence interval is an
increase in births of 1.1 percent.) This finding of no effect on births is maintained across multiple
specification checks. The set of confidence intervals around six alternative estimates has a lower
bound of a one percent decline and an upper bound of a two percent increase. The data also reject
large declines in higher-order births among demographic groups with relatively high welfare
participation rates. Curiously, the data suggest increases in higher-order births to unmarried black
and white high-school dropouts and to unmarried black teens approximately one year after the
implementation of a family cap. The data reject a decline in births of more than four percent for
unmarried white high-school graduates and unmarried white teens.


II. Background


                                                                                                           3
a. Family cap policies


        In August of 1996 the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act
(PRWORA) replaced the AFDC program with a block grant program called Temporary Assistance
for Needy Families (TANF) and gave states flexibility to create new cash assistance programs for
families with dependent children, effective July 1997. Before the passage of the PRWORA
legislation, many states received waivers from the federal government allowing them to experiment
with the rules of welfare. Starting with New Jersey in 1992, nineteen states received approval to
implement family cap policies under waivers. An additional four have implemented family cap
policies as part of their state TANF programs.
        The AFDC program required all states to increase a family’s benefit amount when an
additional child was born into the family. In contrast, under most family cap policies there is no
increase in cash assistance when a child is born to a mother who was receiving welfare at the time
of conception. 2 Some states have implemented partial family cap policies: two states provide only a
partial increase in benefits for an additional child; two others provide the increase in assistance in
the form of in-kind benefits; and one state gives the incremental increase in cash benefits to a third
party (e.g., church) to act on behalf of the child. Appendix Table 1 lists policy types and approval
and implementation dates by state.


b. Other recent welfare reforms


        The time period being studied was a time of active welfare reform and experimentation.3
Since 1962 the Social Security Act has authorized the Secretary of the Department of Health and
Human Services to waive specified requirements of the act in order to enable a state to carry out any
experimental, pilot, or demonstration project that the Secretary deems in accordance with the
objectives of AFDC. The Reagan, Bush, and Clinton administrations all granted such waivers



2
  The following example is taken from Camasso et. al. (1999): in the state of New Jersey, under AFDC, a woman on
welfare with one eligible child would receive $322 per month in cash assistance. If the woman gave birth to another
child, the family would receive an additional $102 per month, and an additional $64 per month for any additional births.
Food stamp benefits would also increase, but by less than the maximum due to the incremental income from AFDC
benefits. Under the family cap, the family would continue to receive $322 with the birth of any additional child. The
food stamp benefit would increase by more, however, though not enough to offset the decline in cash assistance.
3
  Information in this section is taken from the 1998 Green Book, Section 7, From the U.S. Government Printing office
Online via GPO Access. http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov/.../105_green_book.
                                                                                                                       4
liberally. By mid-August 1996, the Clinton administration had approved more than 70 waivers for
more than 40 states.
         Many AFDC waiver projects were aimed at encouraging labor force participation and
human capital development. Restrictive reforms in this vein include tightened work requirements,
time limits on benefit durations, and benefits linked to school attendance or performance.
Liberalizing reforms include a more generous treatment of earnings and resources and an increased
vehicle asset limit. Some states received waivers to expand transitional medical and childcare
benefits in an effort to encourage recipients to leave the welfare program. Some waivers authorized
states to expand eligibility for two-parent (unemployed) families, mitigating the discriminatory
affect of AFDC against dual parent families. Many states incorporated provisions of their AFDC
waiver projects into their TANF plans. Appendix Table 2 lists approval and implementation dates of
states’ first major waivers.
         To empirically identify the effect of family cap policies on birth rates, it is necessary to
control for the effect that other welfare initiatives might have had on fertility decisions. Tightened
work requirements in the form of less generous child exemptions are such a policy. Under AFDC,
primary caretaker relatives of children up to six years of age, or up to three if the state guaranteed
childcare, were exempt from the requirement that adults participate in the Job Opportunities and
Basic Skills Training (JOBS) program. Thirteen states received waivers to alter their JOBS
requirements, most commonly to lower the age of the youngest child that qualifies a recipient for a
work exemption and in some cases to eliminate the caretaker exemption. All states imposed
tightened work requirements under TANF requiring welfare recipients to work sooner in terms of
the age of their youngest child. The implementation of stricter requirements may affect fertility
behavior, since the cost to a woman of having a child is higher when the child does not qualify her
for a work exemption or does so for a shorter amount of time. The econometric analysis below
therefore controls for changes in work exemption rules. Appendix Table 3 lists work exemption
policies and implementation dates by state.
         If women perceive children to be a hindrance to financial self-sufficiency, time limits on
benefits may affect reproductive decisions by signaling that welfare assistance is only temporary.4
AFDC imposed no restrictions on the length of time a family could receive welfare assistance.
Twenty-four states received waivers to implement benefit time limits and under PRWORA, all

4
  A time limit refers to a length of time for which a family can receive cash assistance and after which a family’s benefit
is either terminated or reduced or the family is required to participate in work requirements
                                                                                                                          5
states are required to impose benefit time limits. PRWORA also mandates that state TANF plans
subject teen parents to stay-in-school and live-at-home provisions. In order to isolate the effect of a
family cap policy from any effect these restrictive provisions might have had on birth rates, the
econometric estimation controls for the implementation of time limits and state TANF plans.
Appendix Table 2 lists time limit and TANF implementation dates.


c. Previous studies on the effect of welfare on fertility


       There is a large body of research from the past three decades on the effects of the welfare
system on family structure. Studies from the 1970s and early 1980s generally fail to demonstrate an
effect of welfare on marriage and fertility outcomes. Moffitt (1992) provides an overview of this
early research. A second-wave of studies dating back to the mid-1980s offers mixed findings but
has led to a tenuous consensus that the welfare system probably does affect marriage and fertility
outcomes. However, as Moffitt (1998) observes, “there is considerable uncertainty surrounding this
consensus because a significant minority of the studies finds no effect at all, because the magnitudes
of the estimated effects vary widely, and because there are puzzling and unexplained differences
across the studies by race and methodological approach.”
       Many studies utilize cross-state comparisons of benefit levels to estimate the effect of
welfare on fertility. Using data from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), Lundberg
and Plotnick (1990, 1995) find strong effects on pregnancy probabilities and resolution decisions
for white teenage women but not for blacks. On the other hand, Acs (1994, 1996) analyzes data
from the NLSY and finds no effect of welfare for either whites or blacks on the probability that a
woman age 23 to 25 has a second birth nor on the probability that a woman age 14 to 23 has a first
birth. Duncan and Hoffman (1990) and An, Haveman, and Wolfe (1993) also rely on cross-state
comparisons of benefit levels but these studies use data from the Panel Study on Income Dynamics
(PSID). The former analyze the fertility decisions of black teens and do not find a significant effect
of welfare on AFDC-related births. The latter do not find a significant effect on the probability that
a woman age 13 to 18 has a non-marital birth.
       A weakness of these studies, as well as other studies relying on cross-state comparisons, is
that the results are potentially biased by unobserved differences across states. Benefit levels and
fertility decisions may covary across states for reasons other than a direct welfare effect. In an
analysis of PSID data from 1969 to 1989, Hoynes (1997) confirms that results are sensitive to the
                                                                                                          6
inclusion of state fixed effects and explores the possibility that population composition varies across
states in ways related to welfare program generosity. Her results show that when the estimation
procedure controls for individual effects, there is no evidence that welfare raises the propensity to
form female-headed households for either whites or blacks. Similarly, Moffitt (1994), using Current
Population Survey (CPS) data from 1968 to 1989 and a cross-state comparison of levels, finds
positive welfare effects for whites on the probability that a woman with less than 12 years of
education is a household head. But when he controls for state fixed effects in the estimation, he
finds a negative effect. In contrast, Rosenzweig’s (1999) analysis of NLSY data controls for state
and cohort fixed effects and finds a significant and quantitatively large positive effect of AFDC on
nonmarital childbearing through age 22. Hoffman and Foster (2000) demonstrate the sensitivity of
estimates to the age group examined. They reproduce Rosenzweig’s main findings using data from
the PSID, but when they examine fertility separately by age, they find an AFDC effect only for
women in their early twenties and not for teenage women.
       Some recent work focuses on the effect of marginal welfare benefits. Argys and Rees (1996)
examine the relationship between welfare generosity and fertility behavior using data on an NLSY
sample of 1,344 unmarried women who received welfare payments at some point between 1979 and
1991. Controlling for state fixed effects, they find neither the welfare guarantee level nor the
marginal benefit level to be a significant determinant of conception probability. Robins and Fronstin
(1996) estimate the effects of changes in benefit increments on family-size decisions among a CPS
sample of never-married women. Their analysis finds that both the benefit level and the incremental
benefit for a second child positively affect family size decisions of black and Hispanic women, but
not of white woman. Fairlie and London (1997) estimate the probability of a higher-order birth for a
sample of AFDC recipients and a comparison sample of non-AFDC women using data from the
Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). They find a stronger effect for the non-AFDC
sample than for the AFDC sample and therefore conclude that the observed relationship is spurious.
       The literature has demonstrated that the estimation of a fertility effect of welfare is sensitive
to the data set being analyzed, the age of the population being studied, and the methodology
employed. The majority of studies have relied on cross-state comparisons, which are potentially
unable to identify a causal link between welfare and fertility. The present study improves upon
previous studies in a number of ways. To identify an effect of incremental welfare benefits on
fertility decisions, the analysis relies on an arguably exogenous source of change in incremental
benefit levels induced by the political welfare reform movement. The changes in benefits
                                                                                                        7
implemented under family cap policies occur at different times across states, so the estimation can
control for the effects of time. In addition, the analysis uses state-level panel data so the estimation
can control for state fixed effects. Furthermore, the present study uses vital statistics data on all
births to all women and can therefore directly observe whether results extend across race and age
groups.


d. Studies of family cap policies


          Two states, Arkansas and New Jersey, have released evaluations of their family cap policies.
Both evaluations employ an experimental design: women receiving welfare were randomly assigned
to a treatment group that was subject to a benefits cap, and a control group that was not. The
Turturro et al. (1997) evaluation of the Arkansas program for years 1994 to 1997 finds no statistical
difference in the number of births born to women in the two groups. Camasso et al. (1999) use two
analytical approaches to evaluate New Jersey’s experience: an experimental design as described
above and a pre-post analysis of the entire welfare caseload over a 6-year period that includes the
implementation of the family cap. Both analyses suggest that pregnancies and births among women
on welfare declined after program implementation and that the number of abortions increased.
          Studies of targeted experiments such as these are always open to questions about whether
the results apply to other contexts. In addition to this general problem, methodological weaknesses
inherent in the Arkansas and New Jersey studies make the results of these studies difficult to
interpret. First, there is evidence that the experimental design was contaminated in both
demonstrations. Loury (2000) reports that in both demonstrations many members of the treatment
and control groups did not know which policy applied to them.5 Furthermore, in New Jersey, more
than one-quarter of case workers admitted to evaluators that they used discretion when making
treatment or control assignments, thereby negating the randomness of the assignment. Loury also
points out that the surveys on which the evaluations were based had low response rates and that the
respondents were not representative of the larger AFDC caseload.
          In addition to implementation problems, the Arkansas and New Jersey evaluations both
restrict the analysis to women on welfare, which makes it impossible to identify the effect of the

5
  In Arkansas, 46 percent of women in the treatment group and 52 percent in the control group indicated to evaluators
that they did not know how much more money that would receive if they had an additional child. In New Jersey, only
39 percent of the actual control group members knew they were in the control group and only 65 percent of treatment
group members knew that they were subject to new rules (Loury 2000).
                                                                                                                        8
family cap on fertility behavior separately from the effect on welfare participation. The existence of
a family cap may lead to compositional changes among the welfare population that preclude the
analysis from estimating a causal effect on births. On the one hand, a family cap policy may
encourage women who desire multiple children to find alternative means of financial support, e.g. a
paying job or a husband. To the extent that this occurs, the welfare population post-family cap
includes fewer women who desire multiple children. Ceteris paribus, birth rates are unchanged, but
there are fewer births to women on welfare. On the other hand, the presence of a family cap may
signal that welfare is not a generous source of financial support, leading some young women to
delay becoming a mother until they are more financially secure. Some women who might have
given birth and enrolled in welfare pre-family cap do neither when a family cap policy is in effect.
Ceteris paribus, birth rates are lower as a consequence of the family cap but there is no change in
the number of births to women on welfare. Due to these concerns, the empirical analysis below is
not conditioned on welfare receipt and avoids confounding the effect of the family cap on birth rates
with the effect on participation. 6
        In a contemporaneous working paper, Horvath-Rose and Peters (2000) examine aggregate
vital statistics birth data from 1984 to 1996 to analyze the effect family cap policies have had on
state-level non-marital birth ratios.7 Their study concludes that the family cap decreases non-marital
fertility for all race and age groups. The main regressions of their study control for state and year
fixed effects, high-school completion rate by adults age 18 to 24, proportion of state population
living in urban areas, proportion of state population that are fundamentalist adherents, and indicator
variables for the following welfare policies: minor parent provision waiver, time limit waiver, work
requirement waiver, AFDC-UP waiver, child support waiver, expanded income disregard and asset
limit waiver, school attendance and performance requirement waiver, parental consent requirement
for an abortion, requirement for sex education in schools.
        There are three major limitations to the Horvath-Rose and Peters (2000) framework. First,
by defining the dependent variable in terms of the non-marital birth ratio, the analysis confounds the
marriage and fertility responses to the family cap. Furthermore, though marital status is key to their
study, the authors do not account for the changes in the reporting of marital status in vital statistics



6
  Declines in welfare caseloads over the 1990s are well-documented (see Ziliak et al. 2000). Whether welfare reform or
the robust economy are responsible for the declines, if the composition of the welfare caseload has been altered then
conditioning the analysis sample on welfare-receipt is problematic.
7
  The non-marital birth ratio is defined as the number of non-marital births divided by the total number of births.
                                                                                                                         9
data that occurred during the time period they study.8 Second, there are potential problems with
their waiver variables, which differ substantially from those in the 1999 CEA report and 1998
Urban Institute report. Third, the results appear to be implausible. For women ages 20 to 49, the
analysis finds an immediate decrease of 1.4 percentage points off a base of 21 percent for white
women and an immediate decrease of 3.1 percentage points off a base of 51 percent for black
women. For teenage women, their analysis finds immediate decreases of 4.5 percentage points off a
base of 58 percent among whites and 3.2 percentage points off a base of 87 percent among blacks.
These results imply an immediate marriage response, third trimester abortions, or large anticipation
effects. Additionally, it is curious that such a large effect is observed for the entire population of
women aged 20 to 49, most of whom will never be at-risk of welfare receipt.


III. Data and Empirical Strategy


a. Data
          Data on births are from the 1989 to 1998 Vital Statistics Natality Data, Public-Use Data
Files compiled by the U.S. National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS). The public-use data files
include all births occurring within the United States. I limit my sample to births occurring to women
ages 15 to 34 because women in this age group are more likely to be at-risk of welfare dependence
– and hence affected by a family cap policy – than older women. The vital statistics data files
identify the state of residence and month of birth, as well as mother’s education, mother’s race,
mother’s marital status, and live-birth order. I use this information to create a data file of state birth
counts.
          Information on welfare policies is obtained from three sources. The first source is a 1999
technical report of the Council of Economic Advisors (CEA), which relied on experts from the
Department of Health and Human Services as well as non-governmental research institutions. The
second source is a 1998 Urban Institute report on state TANF programs. The third is a report by
Crouse (1999), prepared for the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, which summarizes


8
  As reported in the technical appendix of the 1997 vital statistics report, birth certificates in 46 states and Washington
D.C. include a direct marital status question. Nevada collects marital status information from the electronic birth
registration process, though it is not included on the birth certificate. This procedure was started in Nevada in 1997,
after 1995-1996 procedures overestimated the number of births to unmarried women. The remaining three states of
Connecticut, Michigan, and New York make marital status determinations based on whether a paternity
acknowledgement was received, the father’s name is missing, and lastly, whether the father’s and mother’s surnames
are different. A direct question was not added in Texas and California until 1994 and 1997, respectively.
                                                                                                                           10
information contained in a 1997 report of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
Setting the Baseline: A Report on State Welfare Waivers.


b. Empirical Strategy


        The effect of the family cap on fertility can occur through two channels: conception and
abortion. Economic reasoning predicts that the existence of a cap on benefits for additional children
raises the price of a child and might therefore lead some women to avoid pregnancy or, once
becoming pregnant, avoid a birth by having an abortion. This reasoning finds a foundation in
Becker’s models of the family. Becker (1981) uses the price of children and the real income to
explain, among other things, why a rise in the wage rate of employed women reduces fertility and
why various government programs - such as AFDC - might significantly affect the demand for
children. Assuming that women, on average, respond to a price increase of an additional child, we
expect that the number of higher-order births in a state that has effectively raised the price of
additional children will fall relative to a state that has not, all else being constant.
        The analysis of this paper identifies the sum of the conception and abortion responses and
reports the net effect of the family cap on reproductive behavior. It is estimated at the aggregate
level, looking at the number of births in a state-month cell. The identification strategy of this paper
is to compare the change in the number of births occurring in a state that becomes a family cap state
to the change in the number of births that occurs in states that do not make the family cap transition
in the same period. Relative to states that have not yet passed a family cap, or that did so in the past,
this analysis identifies the incremental change in births that is associated with the introduction of the
family cap.
        The estimation technique applies ordinary least squares (OLS) regression to model fertility
in state s in month t. The base estimating equation, eq. (1), takes the following form:
                ln(y) st = α + β1*famcapst + β2*wke1st + β3*wke2st + β4*wke3st + β5*ln(welfare
                benefits)sy + β6*TANFst + β7*time limitst + β8*ln(female pop 15-34)sy + β9*(prop15-
                19) sy +β10*(prop20-24)sy + β11*(prop25-29) sy + β12*(unemp rate) s(t-9) + γs +
                σt + ξs ∗time + εst
The variables are defined as follows:
                yst     – total number of births in state s in month t to women age 15 to 34


                                                                                                       11
               famcapst – a binary indicator for whether state s implemented a family cap at least
                       six-months prior to month t
               wke1st – work exemption 1 – a binary indicator for whether state s implemented an
                       exemption for mothers with a child as old as six months to three years
               wke2st – work exemption 2 – a binary indicator for whether state s implemented an
                       exemption for mothers with a child newly born to six months old
               wke3st – work exemption 3 – a binary indicator for whether state s removed
                       exemptions based on the age of a mother’s child
               welfare benefitssy – the maximum monthly benefit for a family of three on
                       AFDC/TANF in state s in year y, expressed in 1998 dollars9
               TANFst – a binary indicator for whether a state implemented its TANF plan at least
                       six-months previous to month t
               time limitst – a binary indicator for whether a state implemented a time limit on
                       welfare benefits at least six-months previous to month t
               female pop 15-34sy – the female population age 15 to 34, in state s in year y, based on
                       U.S. census figures
               prop15-19 sy, prop20-24 sy, prop25-29 sy – the proportion of the female population
                       age 15 to 34 in the different five-year age groups, in state s in year y; omitted
                       category is the proportion age 30 to 34.
               unemp rate s(t-9) - the average unemployment rate in state s in the six months around
                       the month of conception, t-9
               γs      – a binary indicator for state s
               σt      – month fixed effects for month t
               ξs ∗time − linear time trend specific to state s


       The analysis sample consists of 6,120 observations (51 states over 120 months). The
dependent variable is the natural logarithm of the total number of births in state s in month t to
women age 15 to 34. In subsequent specifications, the model is estimated for higher-order births to
women in more narrowly defined demographic groups. The distribution of total monthly births in a
state is highly skewed, so a log transformation of the birth count is used. An advantage of this
transformation is that coefficients reflect percentage changes, which aids in the interpretation of


                                                                                                      12
results. A potential problem with defining the dependent variable at the state-level is that the
analysis will provide unbiased estimates of the effect of the family cap on birth rates only if there is
not widespread migration in response to family cap policies. This assumption finds support in
Levine and Zimmerman (1999), which evaluates the extent to which differences in welfare
generosity across states leads to interstate migration and concludes that welfare-induced migration
is not a widespread phenomenon.
           The variable of primary interest is the binary indicator for a family cap. I refer to the 18
states that between 1989 and 1998 eliminate additional cash assistance for a child born to a mother
on welfare as “ever-treated” states and to the other 32 states and the District of Columbia as “never-
treated” states. For the never-treated states, the family cap indicator is always equal to zero. For the
ever-treated states, the family cap indicator takes on a value of one if the observation represents a
month that occurs at least six months after the state’s family cap policy was implemented. Allowing
a six-month lag recognizes that conception responses can not take place within nine months of the
policy implementation and that most abortion responses will occur in the first trimester of
pregnancy. An alternative specification defines the family cap to incorporate a 12-month lag, which
assumes that there is no immediate abortion response.
           The three work exemption variables are included in the model to control for the effect that
tightened work restrictions might have on fertility decisions. They are mutually exclusive and the
omitted category is the traditional AFDC/JOBS exemption policy. As discussed above, the relative
cost of having a child is higher when the child does not exempt the mother from work requirements.
Economic reasoning thus implies the sign of β2, β3, and β4 to be non-positive, and since wke1
represents the least strict non-AFDC policy and wke3 represents the strictest, we expect that
β4 <= β3 <= β2. Τhe welfare benefit level is controlled for in the model to account for any change in
benefit levels that may be correlated with the introduction of a family cap policy and affect fertility
decisions. Eleven states explicitly changed their benefit levels under TANF and the inflation-
adjusted level of benefits declined in almost all states during the nineties. All else equal, a higher
benefit level makes raising a family on welfare less-costly, and economic reasoning thus predicts
that the sign on β5 is positive.
           The model also controls for the implementation of time limits and state TANF plans. As
discussed above, a time limit on benefit durations may affect reproductive decisions insofar as it
signals that assistance is temporary and encourages women to delay childbearing until they are

9
    I thank Robert Shoeni for providing me with this data, which was used in the 1999 CEA report.
                                                                                                          13
financially secure. TANF plans may affect fertility behavior through mechanisms other than a
family cap; all state TANF plans subject teen parents to stay-in-school and live-at-home provisions.
The advantage of including these control variables in the model is that the estimated effect of the
family cap will not include any effect these restrictive provisions may have on birth rates. A
potential disadvantage is that the data may not have enough statistical power to separately identify
partial effects for highly correlated welfare reform variables, especially in empirical specifications
that limit the sample to narrowly defined demographic groups. Robustness checks are performed to
determine whether the estimated effect of the family cap is sensitive to the inclusion of these
controls.
       The regression model explicitly controls for the natural logarithm of the female population
age 15 to 34. If the female population is trending non-linearly, then the state-specific linear time
trend will not adequately capture population movements, which undoubtedly affect birth counts.
The proportion of women in each five-year age group is also controlled for, to account for
idiosyncratic demographic shifts that might be spuriously correlated with the implementation of
family cap policies. Data on population are obtained from the U.S. census bureau. The model also
explicitly controls for the average state unemployment rate in the three months before and three
months after conception. This variable is included to capture shifts in economic conditions that are
not uniform across states nor are adequately described by a linear state trend. Individual state fixed
effects are accounted for in the regression to control for level differences in birth rates across states.
(Ever-treated states have higher birth totals than never-treated states on average.) Indicator
variables for the particular month are included to account for any idiosyncratic movements in birth
rates common to all states.
       The identification strategy relies on the assumption that birth rates in states that implement
family caps are not trending differently than birth rates in other states pre-family cap. This
assumption is tantamount to assuming that the introduction of family cap legislation is exogenous to
birth rate trends. Two empirical tests support this assumption. First, Figure 1 plots annual fertility
rates, defined as births per 1,000 women in the relevant age group. The data reveal no sign of
divergent trends prior to the mid-1990s for either women age 15 to 19 or women age 20 to 34.
Second, as discussed below, the data suggest that the approval of a family cap waiver is not
positively associated with births, which would be the case if an increase in birth rates led a state to
request a waiver to implement a family cap. Nonetheless, one would prefer not to have to rely on
this assumption. To relax it to some degree, the model is estimated with controls for state-specific
                                                                                                          14
time trends, denoted in months. These controls allow fertility rates to trend uniquely, albeit linearly,
for each state without undermining the viability of this empirical strategy.


IV. Results and Conclusion


a. Differences in fertility rates, by treatment status and demographic group


          Table 1 lists mean total monthly births and fertility rates for the overall sample of states. It
also lists birth counts separately for never-treated states pre- and post-1996 and for ever-treated
states pre- and post- family cap implementation (with a six-month lag).10 The first row of the table
reports that for women age 15 to 24, the average monthly fertility rate – defined as births per 1,000
women – declines from an average of 7.6 to 7.4 in ever-treated states and from 7.6 to 7.3 in never-
treated states. There was no change in the average monthly fertility rate among women age 20 to 34
in either group of states. The fall in the fertility rate of teens was slightly greater in never-treated
states. Under the assumption that fertility rates would have trended similarly in the two groups of
states in the absence of the policy intervention, these unadjusted “difference-in-differences” imply
that the family cap did not noticeably affect fertility rates of women age 15 to 34. Figure 1 makes
the point visually that at no point between 1989 and 1998 does average monthly fertility decline
more sharply (or increase less steeply) for states that implement caps relative to states that do not.
          One problem with looking at the fertility rates of all women age 15 to 34 is that many
women will never be at-risk of welfare dependence and therefore will not respond to welfare reform
initiatives such as the family cap. To narrow the analysis, twelve demographic groups are identified
based on race11, marital status, and education. Women age 20 to 34 are divided into high-school
graduates and high-school dropouts; women age 15 to 19 are classified simply as teens in order to
avoid mislabeling young women still in school as dropouts. According to data from the March 1989
Current Population Survey (CPS), unmarried high-school dropouts have the highest welfare
participation rate – 61.9 percent among black women and 36.9 percent among white women. The
rate among unmarried high-school graduates is 22.0 percent among blacks and 5.5 percent among
whites.


10
   The year 1996 is chosen as the breakpoint for never-treated states because only one state implements a family cap
after 1996.
11
   For ease of exposition, women whose race is not classified as “black” in the natality files are considered “white”.
                                                                                                                         15
           Unadjusted difference-in-difference calculations suggest that relative to states that did not,
states that implemented family caps experienced a greater decline in the number of births born per
month to white unmarried high-school dropouts, but not in the number of births born to black
unmarried high-school dropouts. The same is true for births born to unmarried high-school
graduates. However, states that implemented family caps also experienced larger relative declines in
the total number of births born to married white women. As the proportion of married women who
receive welfare is extremely low (5.3 percent among high-school dropouts and 1.2 percent among
graduates), this suggests that something other than the family cap is driving these trends. Indeed, the
regression-adjusted estimates for these groups show no relative decline, as discussed below.
           Population estimates are not available for these narrowly defined demographic groups so it
is not easily determined whether differential demographic shifts are behind these trends. To be
clear, the birth totals listed for the twelve demographic groups in Table 1 do not account for
demographic shifts in the composition of the female population. The top panel of Table 1 shows
that mean monthly birth totals fall more in ever-treated states even though fertility rates do not. This
discrepancy suggests that population demographics shifted differently between the two groups of
states. This highlights the importance of accounting for state-specific time trends and population
demographics in the regression analysis.

b. Regression results - all births to women 15 to 34


           Table 2 displays the results from estimating equation (1) and six specification checks for the
full sample of women age 15 to 34. In the base specification the dependent variable is the natural
logarithm of the total number of births in state s in month t. The family cap indictor equals one if
the state of observation eliminated benefits for an additional child six or more months previous to
the month of observation. The base specification controls for state effects, month effects, state-
specific linear time trends, population demographics, lagged state unemployment, and the full set of
welfare reform variables. The table reports robust standard errors that incorporate White’s
correction for an arbitrary covariance structure between observations within a state and year (see
Bertrand et al. 2001)12.
           The estimation of equation (1) yields a point estimate of the effect of a family cap of 0.002,
with a standard error of 0.005. The 95% confidence interval around this estimate ranges from a


12
     This is implemented using the “cluster” command in STATA.
                                                                                                            16
negative effect of 0.8 percent to a positive effect of 1.1 percent. The data reject the hypothesis that a
family cap leads to a decline in births of one percent or more. Benefit levels have a statistically
significant positive effect on birth rates and unemployment has a statistically significant negative
effect. Controls for the implementation of tightened work exemptions, a time limit on benefits, and
a state TANF plan enter the model insignificantly. This finding of no effect is maintained across the
six alternative specifications. The set of confidence intervals around the six alternative estimates has
a lower bound of –0.01 and an upper bound of .02.
        The specification presented in column 2 removes the time limit and TANF variables from
the model. The motivation for this specification is that it may be difficult for the data to parse out
the effects of highly correlated welfare reform variables, and perhaps this is why estimation of
equation (1) fails to detect a negative effect of the family cap. The results do not support this
explanation; the estimated coefficient on the family cap indicator is unchanged. Column 3 displays
the estimated coefficients when the model does not account for differential time trends across states.
Perhaps the time trend variables in the base specification are capturing the variation in birth rates
that would otherwise identify a family cap effect. The results do not support this explanation either.
The point estimate of β1 remains 0.002.
        In the specification listed in column 4, the family cap indicator incorporates a twelve-month
lag. The base case of a six-month lag allows an initial abortion response from women in their first
trimester of pregnancy; a twelve-month lag assumes more time is needed for a response. The
estimated coefficient is positive and significant: 0.009 with a standard error of .004. This is a
surprising result, as there is no reason to suspect that the elimination of benefits for an additional
child leads to an increase in births. The result will be explored in more detail below.
        The specification in column 5 investigates the effect of the approval of a family cap policy,
rather than the implementation. The estimated coefficient is 0.002, the same as in columns 1, 2, and
3. This finding affirms the assumption that family cap policies are not adopted in response to
positive shifts in birth rates. A more skeptical interpretation is that the adoption of a family cap is
positively correlated with births, but that it is offset by an “anticipation” effect whereby women
avoid pregnancy when they learn that a family cap will soon be imposed. Because there appears to
be no decline in births after the family cap is implemented, this interpretation seems highly
unlikely.13

13
 Another way to potentially address endogeneity is to distinguish between states that adopted the family cap as part of
TANF and those that requested family cap waivers. States that request waivers are arguably more likely to be
                                                                                                                      17
         The two final specification checks reported alter the form of the dependent variable. The
regression reported in column 6 estimates the equation for the natural logarithm of the fertility rate.
The mean fertility rate across the 6,120 state-month cells in the sample is 7.6 births per 1,000
women. Defining the dependent variable this way essentially moves the natural logarithm of the
female population age 15 to 34 from the right-hand side of the equation to the left- hand side, i.e. it
restricts the coefficient on the population variable to be one. In this specification, the estimated
effect lies between a decrease of 0.6 percent in the fertility rate and a 1.1 percent increase. Again,
the data suggest that if the effect of the family cap is negative, it is smaller in absolute terms than
one percent.
         The final specification defines the dependent variable as the natural logarithm of the non-
marital birth ratio – defined as the number of births to unmarried women divided by the total
number of births – as do Horvath-Rose and Peters (2000). The estimated coefficient on the family
cap indicator is –0.0003 with a standard error of 0.006. In contrast, Horvath-Rose and Peters (2000)
find a statistically significant lagged decline in the non-marital ratio of women age 20 to 49: they
estimate a decline of eleven percent for white women and approximately eight percent for black
women. The data in the present analysis reject a negative effect larger than 1.2 percent for all
women age 15 to 34 at the 95 percent confidence level.


c. Regression results – higher-order births, by demographic group


         The above analysis fails to detect a decline in births associated with the implementation of a
family cap. But perhaps additional births to women at-risk of welfare dependence comprise only a
small fraction of births born to women ages 15 to 34, making it statistically difficult for the analysis
to detect an effect. In order to target the analysis to fertility decisions that are potentially affected by
welfare reform, I limit the analysis on higher-order births.14 In addition, equation (1) is estimated
separately for the twelve demographic groups defined above to so that we can compare estimated
effects across populations with different welfare participation rates. The trade-off inherent to this


responding to shifts in birth outcomes than are those states that implement a cap as part of the national reform of
welfare. However, 19 out of the 23 states that enact any type of family cap legislation requested waivers to do so,
making the exercise meaningless. Instead, I re-estimate equation (1) after dropping the set of five states that had waivers
approved before 1995 when a family cap was still a novel idea. The point estimate in this specification is –0.002, with a
standard error of .009.
14
   Point estimates for the effect of the family cap on first births are not significantly different from zero; results are listed
in Schettini (2000).
                                                                                                                               18
approach is that while the power of the analysis is strengthened by the focus on a more targeted
sample, it is weakened by a decrease in sample size.
        Table 3a reports the results for the eight demographic groups age 20 to 34 and Table 3b
reports results for the four groups of teenage women. The estimated effect of the family cap is not
statistically different from zero for any of the groups, but the standard errors are roughly five times
as large as the standard errors for the full sample estimates. Estimating equation (1) for higher-order
births born to black, unmarried high-school dropouts yields a coefficient of 0.057 on the family cap
indicator, with a standard error of 0.025. With a welfare participation rate of 62 percent, this is the
group most likely to be affected by welfare reform. The estimated coefficient on the family cap
indicator for white, unmarried high-school dropouts – the group with the second highest rate of
welfare participation – is also curiously positive and statistically significant.15 It is investigated
further in Table 4.
        A sizeable percentage of black, unmarried high-school graduates receive welfare – 22
percent, according to the 1989 March CPS. But the data provide no evidence that a family cap leads
to a decrease in higher-order births among this group either. The estimated coefficient is 0.010; the
95 percent confidence interval for additional births extends from a decline of 2.7 percent to an
increase of 4.7 percent. Black, married high-school dropouts also report a relatively high rate of
welfare participation, 12.9 percent. But women in this group also appear to be unresponsive to the
family cap. The data yield a point estimate of 0.042, with a 95 percent confidence interval ranging
from –0.033 to 0.118.
        The other demographic groups listed in Table 3a have low rates of welfare participation and
not surprisingly, do not appear to respond to the implementation of a family cap. As shown in Table
3b, the data do not suggest a family cap effect among teenage women either. The estimated
coefficient on the family cap indicator is –0.012 for higher-order births to unmarried white teens,
with a standard error of 0.014. The data reject a decline of more than four percent at the 95 percent
confidence level. The estimated coefficient is 0.069 for unmarried black women and is curiously
statistically significant.
        A potential objection to looking separately at births to unmarried and married women is that
marriage decisions may be affected by the introduction of a family cap. Some pregnant unmarried
women may respond to a family cap by getting married. If this were the case, the data would




                                                                                                          19
indicate a decrease in births to unmarried women and a corresponding increase in births to married
women. However, the results in Tables 3a and 3b do not suggest that the introduction of a family
cap is associated with an increase in the number of higher-order births born to married women.
         Table 4 explores the positive coefficient on the family cap indicator found among three
samples of women: black unmarried high-school dropouts, white unmarried high-school dropouts,
and black unmarried teens. For the sake of completeness, the table also reports results for white
unmarried teens. The family cap indicator is replaced with a set of seven indicator variables that
control for three-month intervals before and after the implementation of the family cap: three to six
months before, zero to two months before, one to three months after, four to six months after, seven
to nine months after, ten to twelve months after, and more than a year after. If the positive
coefficient is picking up a spurious correlation between birth rates and the introduction of a family
cap policy, this might be evidence that the policy “exogenous” to birth rates. The results of this
exercise suggest that this is not the case. For unmarried high-school dropouts, the positive
association does not appear until more than a year after the family cap has been implemented. For
unmarried black teenagers the positive association does not appear until several months after the
policy. There is some spurious positive association that is not explained by population shifts nor
unemployment rates. When additional years of data become available, future research should
explore this curious finding.
         To explore this positive estimate further, I estimate equation (1) for higher-order births to
high-school dropouts with the dependent variable specified as the natural logarithm of the non-
marital birth ratio, rather than the natural logarithm of the total number of births. The estimated
effect on the non-marital birth ratio of high-school dropouts is not significantly different from zero
for either white or black women. The estimated coefficient on the family cap indicator is –0.015 for
blacks, with a standard error of 0.013, and 0.012 for whites, with a standard error of 0.013. This
implies that there was not an upward shift in births to unmarried women relative to married women,
which provides some assurance that there is not some confounding factor affecting the fertility
decisions of women with high rates of welfare participation.


d. Discussion and policy implications


15
  This finding stands in stark contrast to the finding of Camasso et al. (1999) in the case of New Jersey’s family cap.
Their study reports that births declined by nine percent among longer-term welfare recipients and by twelve percent

                                                                                                                          20
        This paper has found no systematic effect of the family cap on fertility rates. The data reject
a decline in births of more than one percent to women age 15 to 34. The data detect no significant
decline in higher-order births among demographic groups with relatively high welfare participation
rates. If this empirical result is correct, then the widespread adoption of the family cap as a state
welfare policy appears ineffective at best and misguided at worst. Women are not responding by
having fewer additional births, and consequently, fewer resources are being provided per child on
welfare.
        Future research could help determine whether these results are conclusive. The data suggest
that for some demographic groups there is a positive shift in births several months after a family cap
policy is implemented. The present analysis is unable to account for this curious result. In addition,
the analysis incorporates limited post-family cap data. Most states that eliminated cash assistance
for additional children did so in 1995 and 1996 and vital statistics birth data is only available
through 1998. It is possible that effects on fertility will not be evident for another couple years.
When additional years of natality data become available, future research should examine the
positive association and investigate whether the finding of no response holds in the long run.




among their sample of new applicants.
                                                                                                        21
                                 Figure 1: Monthly Fertility Rates

                                           All women age 15 to 34


                  8.60
                  8.40
                  8.20                                                                  all states
Births/1,000



                  8.00                                                                  ever-treated
                  7.80                                                                  never-treated
                  7.60
                  7.40
                  7.20
                        89

                        90

                        91

                        92

                        93

                        94

                        95

                        96

                        97

                        98
                      19

                      19

                      19

                      19

                      19

                      19

                      19

                      19

                      19

                      19
                                           All women age 20 to 34

               8.80
               8.60
               8.40
Births/1,000




                                                                                         all states
               8.20
                                                                                         ever-treated
               8.00
                                                                                         never-treated
               7.80
               7.60
               7.40
                 89

                        90

                               91

                                      92

                                             93

                                                    94

                                                           95

                                                                  96

                                                                         97

                                                                                98
               19

                      19

                             19

                                    19

                                           19

                                                  19

                                                         19

                                                                19

                                                                       19

                                                                              19




                                           All women age 15 to 19


               7.00
               6.50
Births/1,000




               6.00                                                                     all states
               5.50                                                                     ever-treated
               5.00                                                                     never-treated

               4.50
               4.00
                   89

                           90

                                  91

                                         92

                                                93

                                                       94

                                                              95

                                                                     96

                                                                            97

                                                                                   98
                 19

                         19

                                19

                                       19

                                              19

                                                     19

                                                            19

                                                                   19

                                                                          19

                                                                                 19




                                                                                                         22
                                                      Table 1
                                               Mean Monthly Birth Totals
                                                    1989 to 1998
                                    Overall              Never-treated                    Ever-treated               Diff-in-
                                                    1989-95        1996-98            pre-           post-              diff
                                                      (a)             (b)           famcap          famcap          (d-c)-(b-a)
                                                                                      (c)             (d)

all women age 15-34                  5,809           5,221           4,933           7,362           6,152            -922
        per 1,000 women               7.6             7.6             7.3             7.6             7.4               0

all women age 20-34                  4,988           4,486           4,222           6,328           5,288            -776
        per 1,000 women               8.5             8.5             8.5             8.5             8.5               0

all female teens 15-19                820             735             711            1,034            863             -147
          per 1,000 women             5.0             4.7             4.1             4.8             4.4               0



unmarried HS dropouts age 20-34
(1)               black               130             127             105             153             136               5
(2)               white               283             196             228             472             291             -213

unmarried HS grads age 20-34
(3)                black              371             332             316             450             463              29
(4)                white              546             466             554             666             583             -171

married HS dropouts age 20-34
(5)                black              30              32              23              35              25               -1
(6)                white              432             346             307             690             392             -259

married HS graduates age 20-34
(7)                black              252             233             200             303             306              36
(8)                white             2,996           2,806           2,530           3,630           3,118            -236

unmarried teens
(9)                  black            236             212             191             295             288              14
(10)                 white            380             318             378             480             408             -132

married teens
(11)                  black              21             21                11              21              12             1
(12)                  white             276             209              150             276             167            -50
Sources: Vital Statistics Natality Data, Public-Use Data Files, years 1989 to 1998, compiled by the U.S. National Center for
Health Statistics (NCHS); annual population estimates by state and age group are from the U.S. census bureau (figures are
not available by race.)
Notes: The set of "ever-treated" states includes the 18 states that eliminated additional cash benefits between 1989 and 1998;
“post-family cap” is defined as six months after the implementation of the family cap policy.
The proportion of demographic group on welfare (not restricted to mothers), based on weighted means from the 1989 March
Current Population Survey: 1) 61.9, n= 267; 2) 36.9, n=820; 3) 22.0, n=1,077; 4) 5.5, n=5,843; 5) 12.9, n=75; 6) 5.3,
n=1,129; 7) 2.7, n=556; 8) 1.2, n=8,240; 9) 8.77, n=642; 10) 1.72, n=4,394; 11) 40.4 , n=6; 12) 5.3, n=203.




                                                                                                                                  23
                                                                              Table 2
                                                                    Dependent variable: ln(births)
                                                                       Women age 15 to 34
                                      (1)               (2)                  (3)              (4)                 (5)                  (6)                  (7)
                                     base              fewer               no time          12-mo.              approval            dep var :             dep var:
                                     spec.            welfare               trend             lag                                   ln(frate)           ln(non-mar
                                                        vars                                                                                               ratio)

family cap                           .002               .002                .002              .009       **       .002              .002                 .002
                                    (.005)             (.004)              (.005)            (.004)              (.004)            (.005)               (.006)
ln(max monthly benefits)             .076     ***       .076      ***       .010              .074      ***       .077      **      .076        ***      .033
                                    (.024)             (.024)              (.021)            (.024)              (.024)            (.024)               (.043)
work exemption 1                     .007               .006                .009              .007                .007              .007                -.001
                                    (.004)             (.004)              (.008)            (.004)              (.004)            (.004)               (.008)
work exemption 2                    -.003              -.003               -.003              -.004               -.002            -.003                 .011
                                    (.005)             (.005)              (.007)            (.005)              (.005)            (.005)               (.009)
work exemption 3                     .001              .0001               -.009             .0004                .001              .001                 .038        **
                                    (.006)             (.006)              (.009)            (.006)              (.006)            (.006)               (.016)
time limit                          -.001                 -                 .013     **       -.001               -.001            -.001                -.003
                                    (.004)                                 (.006)            (.003)              (.003)            (.004)               (.006)
TANF-official                       -.001                -                -.014      *       -.0004               -.001            -.001                -.011
                                    (.005)                                (.007)             (.005)              (.005)            (.005)               (.007)
ln(female pop 15 to 34)              .097               .097                1.21     ***      .097                .095             -.903        ***     -.364
                                                       (.129)              (.036)            (.129)              (.130)            (.130)               (.251)
prop1519                            -.613      **      -.613       **      -1.49     ***      -.594      **       -.609     **     -.613        **      -1.07
                                    (.304)             (.304)              (.183)            (.301)              (.304)            (.304)               (.672)
prop2024                             .814     ***       .812      ***      -.453     ***      .846      ***       .820     ***      .814        ***     -.257
                                    (.238)             (.238)              (.135)            (.232)              (.238)            (.238)               (.548)
prop2529                             1.29     ***       1.29      ***      -.921     ***      1.34      ***       1.30     ***      1.29        ***     -.957
                                    (.265)             (.266)              (.204)            (.265)              (.265)            (.265)               (.605)
lagged state unemployment rate      -.135     ***      -.135      ***      -.098     ***      -.135     ***       -.135    ***     -.135        ***     -.024
                                    (.011)             (.011)              (.011)            (.011)              (.011)            (.011)               (.016)
constant                            6.425               6.43      ***      -6.75     ***      6.41      ***       6.45     ***      13.3        ***      3.60
                                    (1.66)             (1.66)              (.484)            (1.66)              (1.66)            (1.66)               (3.11)

state effects                          yes                yes                 yes                  yes             yes                yes                 yes
month effects                          yes                yes                 yes                  yes             yes                yes                 yes
state time trend                       yes                yes                  no                  yes             yes                yes                 yes
R2                                     .99                .99                 .99                  .99             .99                .90                 .96
sample size                           6,120              6,120               6,120               6,120            6,120             6,120                6,120
Sources: Birth data are from Vital Statistics Natality Data, Public-Use Data Files, years 1989 to 1998, compiled by the U.S. National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS);
annual population estimates by state and age group are from the U.S. census bureau (figures are not available by race.)
Notes: Standard errors are White’s robust standard errors adjusted for clustering at the level of state-year.
Significance levels: * 90 percent level, ** 95 percent, *** 99 percent.
The binary famcap, time limit, and TANF variables equal one if the particular policy has been implemented for at least six months.



                                                                                                                                                                             24
                                                                                  Table 3a
                                                                      Dependent variable: ln(births)
                                                                 Higher-order births to women age 20 to 34
                                                             Unmarried                                                                  Married
                                          HS dropout                            HS graduate                         HS dropout                           HS graduate

                                Blacks            Whites               Blacks          Whites              Blacks           Whites              Blacks          Whites
                                 (1)               (2)                  (3)             (4)                 (5)              (6)                 (7)             (8)

famcap                           .057     ***      .063     **          .010          -.012                 .042             .042               .010            -.004
                                (.025)            (.028)               (.019)         (.014)               (.039)           (.027)             (.019)           (.005)
ln(max monthly benefits)         .387              .476     **          -.318   **    -.122                -.157             .210               -.079            .017
                                (.238)            (.216)               (.133)         (.100)               (.273)           (.215)             (.126)           (.039)
work exemption 1                 .039             -.027                 -.058   **     .017                 .036             .010               .011             .007
                                (.029)            (.034)               (.024)         (.016)               (.038)           (.032)             (.021)           (.005)
work exemption 2                 .059              .038                 -.047         -.021                -.037             .025              -.0002           -.025        ***
                                (.043)            (.033)               (.030)         (.019)               (.056)           (.035)             (.027)           (.006)
work exemption 3                 .063              .113    ***          -.042          .082     ***        -.203     ***     .042               -.081     *     -.022        ***
                                (.042)            (.038)               (.033)         (.030)               (.075)           (.039)             (.045)           (.006)
time limit                       -.017             .016                 -.014          .002                 .065      *      .030               -.002            .001
                                (.023)            (.034)               (.019)         (.012)               (.035)           (.033)             (.016)           (.004)
TANF-official                    .065             -.075      *          .048          -.015                -.030            -.044               .003             .006
                                (.046)            (.039)               (.031)         (.014)               (.052)           (.030)             (.027)           (.006)
ln(female pop 20 to 34)          1.76              .915                 1.48    **    -.347                 1.08             .341               .427             .209
                                (.968)            (1.06)               (.643)         (.477)               (1.41)           (.994)             (.722)           (.185)
prop2024                         1.44             -3.56                 2.06    **     .443                 4.50            -6.29               1.10             .294
                                (1.70)            (2.34)               (1.00)         (1.23)               (2.50)           (2.35)             (1.20)           (.394)
prop2529                         2.83              .675                 2.55     *    -.528                 8.88            -2.81               2.31             1.04        **
                                (2.16)            (2.28)               (1.40)         (1.52)               (3.14)           (2.10)             (1.43)           (.490)
lagged state unemp. rate         .045              .023                 -.119    *    -.025                -.132            -.070               -.219    ***    -.067        ***
                                (.079)            (.094)               (.064)         (.043)               (.103)           (.082)             (.068)           (.018)
state effects                     yes               yes                  yes            yes                  yes              yes                yes              yes
month effects                     yes               yes                  yes            yes                  yes              yes                yes              yes
state time trend                  yes               yes                  yes            yes                  yes              yes                yes              yes

constant                          -21.8              -7.99               -15.2     *       10.8               -15.5           2.35                -1.96            4.69
                                 (12.3)             (13.0)              (8.15)            (5.82)              (18.1)         (12.3)              (8.98)           (2.30)
R2                                 .97                .96                 .99              .99                 .93            .97                  .98              .99
Sample size                       4,981             6,116                5,701            6,120               4,812          6,120               5,989             6,120
Sources: Birth data are from Vital Statistics Natality Data, Public-Use Data Files, years 1989 to 1998, compiled by the U.S. National Center for Health Statistics (NCHS);
annual population estimates by state and age group are from the U.S. census bureau (figures are not available by race.)
Notes: Standard errors are White’s robust standard errors adjusted for clustering at the level of state-year.
Significance levels: * 90 percent level, ** 95 percent, *** 99 percent.
The binary famcap, time limit, and TANF variables equal one if the particular policy has been implemented for at least six months.
The proportion of demographic group on welfare (not restricted to mothers), based on weighted means from the 1989 March Current Population Survey:
1) 61.9, n= 267; 2) 36.9, n=820; 3) 22.0, n=1,077; 4) 5.5, n=5,843; 5) 12.9, n=75; 6) 5.3, n=1,129; 7) 2.7, n=556; 8) 1.2, n=8,240.



                                                                                                                                                                                   25
                                                                  Table 3b
                                                      Dependent variable: ln(births)
                                                 Higher-order births to women age 15 to 19
                                                              Unmarried                                               Married
                                            Blacks                   Whites                              Blacks            Whites
                                               (9)                     (10)                               (11)               (12)
famcap                                        .069        ***         -.012                               .017              -.013
                                            (.018)                   (.014)                              (.058)             (.027)
ln(max monthly benefits)                      .291          *         .018                               -.505              -.123
                                            (.160)                   (.106)                              (.326)             (.117)
work exemption 1                             -.036          *         .019                               -.024              -.032
                                            (.020)                   (.015)                              (.049)             (.028)
work exemption 2                             -.018                    .003                               -.043              -.029
                                            (.026)                   (.019)                              (.076)             (.037)
work exemption 3                              .067         **         .052             *                 -.319              -.084           *
                                            (.033)                   (.027)                              (.134)             (.049)
time limit                                   -.008                    .008                                .049               .045           *
                                            (.016)                   (.011)                              (.046)             (.020)
TANF-official                                 .017                    -.013                              -.034               .026
                                            (.027)                   (.017)                              (.061)             (.036)
ln(female pop 15 to 19)                      -.100                    .717            **                 -.182               1.59         ***
                                            (.209)                   (.319)                              (.562)             (.258)
lagged state unemp. rate                     -.104                    -.002                              -.032              -.036
                                            (.063)                   (.057)                              (.135)             (.055)
constant                                      4.97                    -2.60                               6.37              -12.2         ***
                                            (2.56)                   (3.56)                              (6.57)             (2.89)
state effects                                  yes                      yes                                yes                yes
month effects                                  yes                      yes                                yes                yes
state time trend                               yes                      yes                                yes                yes
  R2                                           .99                      .99                                .90                .98
Sample size                                  5,493                   6,120                               4,750              6,107
Sources:Birth data are from Vital Statistics Natality Data, Public-Use Data Files, years 1989 to 1998, compiled by the U.S. National Center for
Health Statistics (NCHS); annual population estimates by state and age group are from the U.S. census bureau (figures are not available by race.)
Notes: Standard errors are White’s robust standard errors adjusted for clustering at the level of state-year.
Significance levels: * 90 percent level, ** 95 percent, *** 99 percent.
The binary famcap, time limit, and TANF variables equal one if the particular policy has been implemented for at least six months.
The proportion of demographic group on welfare (not restricted to mothers), based on weighted means from the 1989 March Current Population
Survey: 9) 8.77, n=642; 10) 1.72, n=4,394; 11) 40.4 , n=6; 12) 5.3, n=203.




                                                                                                                                                    26
                                                                    Table 4
                                                          Dependent variable: ln(births)
                                                              Higher-order births
                                              (1)                         (2)                         (3)                            (4)
                                        Black unmarried             White unmarried             Black unmarried                White unmarried
                                          HS dropouts                HS dropouts                     teens                          teens
famcap – 3 to 6 months before                 .009                          .026                             .010                       -.043
                                             (.029)                       (.028)                           (.022)                      (.017)
famcap – 0 to 2 months before                 .017                         -.025                             .032                       -.005
                                             (.038)                       (.040)                           (.021)                      (.020)
famcap – 1 to 3 months after                  .019                          .036                             .038                       -.013
                                             (.048)                       (.032)                           (.030)                      (.022)
famcap – 4 to 6 months after                  .010                          .031                             .036         *            -.026
                                             (.039)                       (.036)                           (.021)                      (.019)
famcap – 7 to 9 months after                  .010                          .012                             .057        **            -.019
                                             (.050)                       (.046)                           (.029)                      (.022)
famcap – 10 to 12 months after                .039                          .040                             .088       ***             -.032
                                             (.055)                       (.038)                           (.033)                      (.021)
famcap –more than a year after                .093           ***           .100             **               .095       ***             -.016
                                             (.035)                       (.039)                           (.022)                      (.021)
 ln(max monthly benefits)                     .382                          .461            **              .287          *             .017
                                             (.239)                       (.216)                           (.160)                      (.105)
time limit                                    -.017                         .022                            -.005                       .008
                                             (.023)                       (.034)                           (.016)                      (.011)
TANF-official                                 .065                         -.076             *               .016                      -.014
                                             (.046)                       (.039)                           (.026)                      (.016)
work exemption 1                              .041                         -.025                            -.035         *             .019
                                             (.029)                       (.033)                           (.020)                      (.014)
work exemption 2                              .054                          .036                            -.018                       .002
                                             (.043)                       (.032)                           (.026)                      (.019)
work exemption 3                              .063                          .116            ***             .069                        .051             *
                                             (.043)                       (.039)                           (.032)                      (.027)
ln(female pop 15 to 34)                       1.78                          .936                            -.108                       .716            **
                                             (.982)                       (1.06)                           (.208)                      (.319)
prop2024                                      1.52                         -3.45                               -                           -
                                             (1.72)                       (2.34)
prop2529                                      2.97                          .812                               -                           -
                                             (2.17)                       (2.28)
lagged state unemp. rate                      .045                          .020                            -.104         *            -.001
                                             (.079)                       (.094)                           (.063)                      (.057)
state effects                                  yes                           yes                              yes                        yes
month effects                                  yes                           yes                              yes                        yes
state time trend                               yes                           yes                              yes                        yes
constant                                      -22.1                        -8.26                             5.10                       -2.59
                                             (12.5)                       (13.0)                           (2.55)                      (3.56)
R2                                             .97                           .96                              .99                        .99
Sample size                                  4,981                        6,116                            5,493                       6,120
Sources: Birth data are from Vital Statistics Natality Data, Public-Use Data Files, years 1989 to 1998, compiled by the U.S. National Center for Health
Statistics (NCHS); annual population estimates by state and age group are from the U.S. census bureau (figures are not available by race.)
Notes: Standard errors are White’s robust standard errors adjusted for clustering at the level of state-year.
Significance levels: * 90 percent level, ** 95 percent, *** 99 percent.
The binary famcap, time limit, and TANF variables equal one if the particular policy has been implemented for at least six months.


                                                                                                                                                             27
                                                     Appendix Table 1
                                                  State family cap policies

                                                               No             Partial        Increase in        Increase in
                                                            increase         increase         assistance            cash
                                                                in            in cash          for add.          assistance
                                                           assistance       assistance          child             for add.
                         Date               Date               for           for add.        provided as          child to
                      Implemented         Approved         add.child           child           voucher          third party

 Arizona                    11/95             5/95               X
 Arkansas                    7/94             4/94               X
 California                  9/97              8/96              X
 Connecticut                 1/96             12/95                              X
 Delaware                   10/95             5/95               X
 Florida                    10/96              6/96                              X
 Georgia                     1/94             11/93              X
 Idaho                       7/97                -               X
 Illinois                   12/95             9/95               X
 Indiana                     5/95             12/94              X
 Maryland                    3/96             8/95                                                                    X
 Massachusetts              11/95             8/95               X
 Mississippi                10/95              9/95              X
 Nebraska                   11/95             2/95               X
 New Jersey                 10/92             7/92               X
 North Carolina              7/96              2/96              X
 North Dakota                7/97                -               X
 Oklahoma                   10/96                -                                                 X
 South Carolina             10/96              5/96                                                X
 Tennessee                   9/96             7/96               X
 Virginia                    7/95             7/95               X
 Wisconsin                   1/96              6/94              X
 Wyoming                     1/97                -               X
Source: Urban Institute (1998) summary of state TANF policies; Crouse (1999) - note these are the same dates used in the 1999
CEA report; Health and Human Services, Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, Setting the Baseline: A Report on State
Welfare Waivers
Notes: Nineteen of the 23 states requested family cap waivers. Idaho, North Dakota, Oklahoma, and Wyoming implemented
family caps as part of their TANF programs.
                                      Appendix Table 2
                Welfare policy dates: AFDC waivers, TANF, and Time limits

                      AFDC waiver                   TANF implemented         Time limit
                                                                            implemented
               Implemented       Approved                         Actual

Alabama                                            12/96                       12/96
Alaska                                             7/97                        7/97
Arizona           11/95             5/95           11/95                       11/95
Arkansas          7/94              4/94              -                           -
California        12/92             10/92             -            1/98           -
Colorado            -                 -             7/97                        7/97
Connecticut       1/96              8/94            1/98                       1/98
Delaware          10/95             5/95           7/97                        7/97
District of         -                 -             3/97                        3/97
Columbia
Florida           10/96             6/96           2/94                         2/94
Georgia           1/94              11/93          1/97                        1/97
Hawaii             2/97              6/94          2/97                        2/97
Idaho             7/97              8/96           7/97                        7/97
Illinois          11/93             11/93          2/96                        2/96
Indiana            5/95             12/94          5/95                        5/95
Iowa              10/93             8/93           10/93                       10/93
Kansas               -               8/96          10/96                       10/96
Kentucky             -                 -           10/96                       10/96
Louisiana            -              2/96           1/97                        1/97
Maine                -               6/96          11/96                       11/96
Maryland          3/96              8/95           1/97                        1/97
Massachusett      11/95             8/95           12/96                       12/96
s
Michigan          10/92             8/92             --                          --
Minnesota            -                -            7/97                        7/97
Mississippi       10/95             9/95           10/96           7/97        10/96
Missouri           6/95             4/95           7/97                        7/97
Montana           2/96              4/95           2/97                        2/97
Nebraska          10/95             2/95           11/95                       11/95
Nevada               -                -            12/96                       12/96
New                  -              6/96           10/96                       10/96
Hampshire
New Jersey        10/92             7/92           4/97            7/97         4/97
New Mexico          -                 -            7/97                        7/97
New York            -                 -            12/96          11/97        12/96




                                                                                          29
                                       Appendix Table 2 (cont’d)
                      Welfare policy dates: AFDC waivers, TANF, and Time limits

                              AFDC waiver                    TANF implemented                Time limit
                                                                                            implemented
                    Implemented         Approved           Official         Actual
North                   7/96              2/96              1/97                                7/96
Carolina
North                     -                   -             7/97                                7/97
Dakota
Ohio                    7/96                3/96            10/96                              10/97
Oklahoma                  -                   -             10/96                              10/96
Oregon                  2/93                7/92            10/96                               7/96
Pennsylvania              -                   -             3/97                               3/97
Rhode Island              -                   -             5/97                               5/97
South                     -                 5/96            10/96                              10/96
Carolina
South                   6/94                3/94            12/96                              12/96
Dakota
Tennessee               9/96                7/96            10/96                              10/96
Texas                   6/96                3/96            11/96                              6/96
Utah                    1/93                12/92           10/96                              1/97
Vermont                 7/94                4/93             9/96                                --
Virginia                7/95                7/95            2/97                               7/95
Washington              1/96                9/95            1/97                               8/97
West                    2/96                7/95            1/97                               1/97
Virginia
Wisconsin               1/96                6/94            9/96             9/97              10/96
Wyoming                   -                   -             1/97                               1/97

Total                                        34                                                    47
Sources: Crouse (1999) – note these are the same dates used in the 1999 CEA report; Health and Human
Services, Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, Setting the Baseline: A Report on State Welfare
Waivers; Urban Institute (1998) summary of state TANF policies.




                                                                                                             30
                                                Appendix Table 3
                                       Caretaker Work Exemption Policies,
                                Date of Implementation by Age of Youngest Child

                   No           Date              Up to and   Date                Over 6    Date
                exemption       implemented       including   implemented         months    implemented
                                (Waiver or          6 mos.    (Waiver or                    (Waiver or
                                TANF)                         TANF)                         TANF)

Alabama                                                                           1 year     11/96 (T)
Alaska                                                                            1 yaer      7/97 (T)
Arizona                                                                           1 year     10/96 (T)
Arkansas                                            3 mos        7/97 (T)
California                                          6 mos        1/98 (T)
Colorado        county option         (T)
Connecticut                                                                       1 year     10/96 (T)
Delaware                                          13 weeks       3/97 (T)
D.C.                                               1 year       3/97 (T)
Florida                                            3 mos        10/96 (T)
Georgia           no ex.          1/97 (T)
Hawaii                                              6 mos        2/97 (W)
Idaho             no ex.          7/97 (T)
Illinois                                                                          1 year     7/97 (T)
Indiana1                                                                          1 year     10/96 (T)
Iowa              no ex.          1/97 (T)          3 mos       10/93 (W)
Kansas                                                                            1 year     10/96 (T)
Kentucky                                                                          1 year     10/96 (T)
Louisiana                                                                         1 year      1/97 (T)
Maine                                                                             1 year     11/96 (T)
Maryland                                          12 weeks      10/96 (W)         1 year     12/96 (T)
Massachusetts                                      6 mos         9/96 (T)
Michigan          no ex.         10/94 (W)         3 mos         9/96 (T)
Minnesota                                                                         1 year     9/97 (T)
Mississippi                                                                       1 year     9/97 (T)
Missouri                                                                          1 year     12/96 (T)
Montana           no ex.         2/97 (W)
Nebraska                                          12 weeks       3/96 (W)         1 year     12/96 (T)
                                                   3 mos         7/97 (T)
Nevada                                                                            1 year     12/96 (T)
New                                                                               3 years       (T)
Hampshire
New Jersey                                        12 weeks       7/97 (T)         2 years    10/92 (W)
New Mexico                                                                        1 year      7/97 (T)
New York                                                                          1 year     11/97 (T)




                                                                                                          31
                                               Appendix Table 3 (cont’d)
                                           Caretaker Work Exemption Policies,
                                    Age of Youngest Child and Date of Implementation

                        No         Date                 Up to and     Date                    Over 6      Date
                     exemption     implemented          including     implemented             months      implemented
                                   (Waiver or             6 mos.      (Waiver or                          (Waiver or
                                   TANF)                              TANF)                               TANF)

North                                                                                         5 years        7/96 (W)
Carolina                                                                                      1 year         1/97 (W)
North                                                     3 mos          7/97 (T)
Dakota
Ohio                                                                                          1 year         10/96 (T)
Oklahoma                                                                                      1 year         10/96 (T)
Oregon                                                    3 mos          2/93 (W)
Pennsylvania                                                                                  1 year          3/97 (T)
Rhode Island                                                                                  1 year         5/97 (T)
South                                                                                         1 year         10/96 (T)
Carolina
South                                                    12 weeks       12/96 (T)
Dakota
Tennessee                                                16 weeks        9/96 (W)
Texas                                                                                         4 years            ?
Utah                   no ex.         10/96 (T)
Vermont                                                  16 weeks        7/94 (W)             18 mos         9/96 (T)
Virginia                                                                                      18 mos         10/97 (T)
Washington                                                                                    1 year         1/97 (T)
West                                                                                          1 year         1/97 (T)
Virginia
Wisconsin                                                12 weeks        9/97 (T)             1 year         1/96 (W)
Wyoming                                                  3 months        1/97 (T)

Total

Notes: Under TANF, 26 states exempt a mother while the youngest child is under 1 year of age; Vermont and Virginia
allow an exemption up to 18 months; Texas is the only state to have a higher age limit, set at 4 years, but the exemption
may only be used once for each family.
1. Indiana law only allows exemptions for care of a child under 12 weeks if child is conceived while family is on aid.
Sources: Crouse (1999) – note these are the same dates used in the 1999 CEA report; Health and Human Services,
Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, Setting the Baseline: A Report on State Welfare Waivers; Urban
Institute (1998) summary of state TANF policies.




                                                                                                                            32
References

Acs, Gregory. 1994. “The impact of AFDC on young women’s childbearing decisions.” Washington, D.C.:
      Urban Institute.

Acs, Gregory. 1996. “The impact of welfare on young mother’s subsequent childbearing decisions.” Journal of
       Human Resources 31(4): 898-915.

An, Chong Bum, Robert Haveman, and Barbara Wolfe. 1993. “Teen out-of-wedlock births and welfare receipt:
      The role of childhood events and economic circumstance.” Review of Economics and Statistics 75(2):
      195-208.

Argys, Laura M. and Daniel I. Rees. 1996. “The Impact of Welfare Generosity on the Fertility Behavior of
       Recipients,” University of Colorado at Denver, Center for Research on Economic and Social Policy
       working paper 9601.

Becker, Gary. 1981. A Treatise on the Family. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.

Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2002. “How Much Should We Trust Differences-
       in-Differences Estimates?” NBER working paper 7627. Cambridge, MA, March.

Bronars, Stephen G. and Jeff Grogger. 1994. “The Economic Consequences of Unwed Motherhood: Using
       Twin Births as a Natural Experiment.” American Economic Review 84(5): 1141-1156.

Camasso, Michael, Carol Harvey, Radha Jagannathan, and Mark Killingsworth. 1999. “New Jersey’s Family
      Cap and Family Size Decisions: Some Findings from a 5-Year Evaluation.” Rutgers University.

Crouse, Gil 1999. “State Implementation of Major Changes to Welfare Policies, 1992-1998.” Office of Human
       Services Policy, Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation, U.S. Department of Health and
       Human Services. www.aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/Waiver-Policies99/policy_CEA.htm

Council of Economic Advisors. 1999. “Technical Report: Economic Expansion, Welfare Reform, and the
      Decline in Welfare Caseloads: An Update” Executive Office of the President of the United States.

Danziger, Sheldon, Robert Haveman, and Robert Plotnick 1981. “How Income Transfers Affect Work, Savings,
      and The Income Distribution: A Critical Review.” Journal of Economic Literature 19(3): 975-1028.

Duncan, Greg J. and Saul D. Hoffman 1990. “Welfare Benefits, Economic Opportunities and Out-of-Wedlock
      Births Among Black Teenage Girls.” Demography 27: 519-535.

Ellwood, David and Mary Jo Bane. 1985. “The Impact of AFDC on Family Structure and Living
      Arrangements.” In R. Ehrenberg (ed.), Research in Labor Economics 7: 137-207.

Fairlie, Robert W. and Rebecca A. London. 1997. “The Effect of Incremental Benefit Levels on Births to AFDC
         Recipients.” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 16: 575-597.

Gallagher, L. Jerome, Megan Gallagher, Kevin Perese, Susan Schreiber, and Keith Watson. 1998. “One Year
       after Federal Welfare Reform: A Description of State Temporary Assistance for Needy Families


                                                                                                           33
       (TANF) Decisions as of October 1997.” Washington D.C.: Urban Institute, Occasional Paper Number 6.
       http://newfederalism.urban.org/html/occas6.htm.

Green Book. 1998. “Section 7: Aid to Families with Dependent Children and Temporary Assistance for Needy
      families.” Ways and Means Committee, from the U.S. Government Printing Office Online via GPO
      Access. http://frwebgate.access.gpo.gov.

Hoffman, Saul D. and E. Michael Foster. 2000. “AFDC Benefits and Nonmarital Births to Young Women.”
      Journal of Human Resources 35 (2): 376-391.

Horvath-Rose, Anne and H. Elizabeth Peters. 2000. "Welfare Waivers and Nonmarital Childbearing." Joint
      Center for Poverty Research working paper 128. January.

Hoynes, Hillary. 1997. “Does Welfare play any role in female headship decisions?” Journal of Public
      Economics 65(2), 89-117.

Levine, Phillip B. and D.J. Zimmerman. 1999. "An Empirical Analysis of the Welfare Magnet Debate." Journal
       of Population Economics 12(3): 391-409.

Loury, Glenn C. 2000. “Preventing Subsequent Births to Welfare Recipients,” in Douglas J. Besharov and Peter
       Germanis, eds, Preventing Subsequent Births to Welfare Recipients. College Park, Maryland: School of
       Public Affairs.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert Plotnick. 1990. “Effects of State Welfare, Abortion, and Family Planning Policies
      on Premarital Childbearing Among White Adolescents.” Family Planning Perspectives 29 (2): 52-60.

Lundberg, Shelly and Robert Plotnick. 1995. “Adolescent premarital childbearing: Do economic incentives
      matter?” Journal of Labor Economics 13 (2): 177-200.

Moffitt, Robert. 1992. “Incentive Effects of the U.S. Welfare System: A Review.” Journal of Economic
       Literature 30: 1- 61.

Moffitt, Robert. 1994. “Welfare effects on female headship with area effects.” Journal of Human Resources 29
       (2): 621-636.

Moffitt, Robert. 1998. “The Effect of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility,” in Robert Moffitt, ed. Welfare, the
       Family, and Reproductive Behavior. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.

Robins, Philip K. and Paul Fronstin. 1996. “Welfare Benefits and Birth Decisions of Never-Married Women.”
       Population Research and Policy Review 15: 21-43.

Rosenzweig, Mark R. 1999. “Welfare, Marital Prospects, and Non-marital Childbearing.” Journal of Political
      Economy 107 (6): S3-32.

Schettini, Melissa. 2000. “Is There an Effect of Incremental Welfare Benefits on Fertility Behavior? A Look at
       the Family Cap.” MIT Department of Economics, unpublished mimeo, August.

Schoeni, Robert F. and Rebecca M. Blank. 2000. “What has welfare reform accomplished? Impacts on welfare
      participation, employment, income, poverty, and family structure.” NBER working paper 7627.
      Cambridge, MA, March.

                                                                                                                34
“Setting the Baseline: A Report on State Welfare Waivers”. 1997. Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning
       and Evaluations, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
       http://aspe.hhs.gov/hsp/isp/wavier2/title.htm.

Turturro, Carolyn, Brent Benda, and Howard Turney. 1997. Arkansas Welfare Waiver Demonstration Project,
       Final Report (July 1994 through June 1997). University of Arkansas at Little Rock, School of Social
       Work.

Ziliak, James P., David N. Figlio, Elizabeth E. Davis, and Laura S. Connolly. 2000. “Accounting for the
        Decline in AFDC Caseloads.” Journal of Human Resources 35(3): 570-586.




                                                                                                             35
