                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           HOW DO LARGE DEPRECIATIONS AFFECT FIRM PERFORMANCE?


                                            Kristin J. Forbes


                                          Working Paper 9095
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9095


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2002




Thanks to Eduardo Borensztein and participants at the 2nd Annual IMF Research Conference for helpful
comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Kristin J. Forbes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
How Do Large Depreciations Affect Firm Performance?
Kristin J. Forbes
NBER Working Paper No. 9095
August 2002
JEL No. F1, F2, F3


                                               ABSTRACT

        This paper examines how 12 “major depreciations” between 1997 and 2000 affected different
measures of firm performance in a sample of over 13,500 companies from around the world. Results
suggest that in the year after depreciations, firms have significantly higher growth in market capitalization,
but significantly lower growth in net income (when measured in local currency). Firms with a higher
share of foreign sales exposure have significantly better performance after depreciations, according to a
range of indicators. Firms with higher debt ratios tend to have lower net income growth, but there is no
robust relationship between debt exposure and the other performance variables. Larger firms frequently
have worse performance than smaller firms, although the significance and robustness of this result
fluctuates across specifications.




Kristin J. Forbes
MIT - Sloan School
Room E52-455
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
Tel: 617-253-8996
Fax: 617-258-6855
kjforbes@mit.edu
http://web.mit.edu/kjforbes/www
I.      Introduction

In the later half of the 1990’s, a number of countries experienced substantial currency

depreciations. These depreciations include not only the well-known currency crises where

countries abandoned pegged exchange rates, such as in Thailand and Korea in 1997, but also less

well-documented examples where countries with more flexible exchange rates experienced

unusually large depreciations, such as in Mexico and South Africa in 1998. In some cases, these

depreciations were followed by a surge in production and improvement in economic growth,

while in other cases the depreciations were followed by a decline in output and severe recession.

        Why are some depreciations expansionary and others contractionary? This paper partially

addresses this question by focusing on one specific aspect of depreciations – how they affect firm

performance. Depreciations could affect firm performance through a number of channels, such as

raising the cost of imported inputs relative to other factors of production, providing exporters

with a relative cost advantage relative to foreign competitors, or generating higher borrowing

costs and a contraction in lending. Although the impact of depreciations on firm performance is

only one component determining how depreciations affect aggregate economic growth, it can be

an important and significant determinant of why some depreciations are expansionary and others

are contractionary. Moreover, the firm-level impact of depreciations has not been well examined

in previous work and the basic stylized facts have not yet been documented.

        Table 1 shows the diverse impact that 12 recent depreciations have had on firm sales

growth and net income growth.1 There is a remarkable difference in firm performance across

different countries – even during the same crisis periods. For example, during the Asian crisis and

corresponding depreciations in 1997, the median growth rates in sales and net income for South

Korean firms were –42% and –69%, respectively, while the comparable growth rates for

Malaysian firms were –9% and –28%. In 1998, however, the relative performance of firms in

Malaysia and Korea reversed. Firms in Korea quickly recovered from the crisis and appeared to




                                                                                                    1
benefit from the depreciations, with median growth in sales and net income of +35% and +19%,

respectively. The performance of Malaysian firms continued to deteriorate, with median growth

in sales and net income of –25% and –75%. Moreover, the experiences of firms in the Czech

Republic, Greece, and Mexico suggest that firms do not necessarily exhibit negative performance

after depreciations. For example, median sales growth for firms in all three countries was positive

after their depreciations in 1998.



                              <<INSERT TABLE 1 HERE>>



           This paper attempts to better understand these patterns by examining how recent

depreciations affected different measures of firm performance. More specifically, the paper uses a

sample of over 13,500 firms from 42 countries to examine the impact of 12 “major depreciations”

between 1997 and 2000. It evaluates firm performance based on the immediate impact of

depreciations on sales and net income, as well as the expected longer-term impact as measured by

changes in market capitalization and asset value. The paper also analyzes how individual firm

characteristics, such as output type, foreign sales exposure, production structure, debt

outstanding, size, and profitability determine the impact of depreciations on performance.

           Results suggest that in the year after depreciations, firms have significantly higher growth

in market capitalization (when measured in local currency or US dollars), but significantly lower

growth in net income (when measured in local currency). Firms with greater foreign sales

exposure have significantly better performance, according to a range of performance variables.

Firms with higher debt ratios tend to have lower net income growth after depreciations, but there

is no robust relationship between debt levels and the other performance variables. Larger firms

often have worse performance than smaller firms, although the significance and robustness of this



1
    Exact definitions and the data set are discussed in more detail in Section III.


                                                                                                     2
result fluctuates across specifications. There appears to be no consistent relationship between a

firm’s profitability or capital/asset ratio and the impact of depreciations on firm performance.

        The remainder of this paper is divided into five sections. Section II provides a brief

review of related literature. Section III describes the depreciation events and data set. Section IV

presents general results on how depreciations impact firm performance. Section V provides more

detailed evidence on which specific firm characteristics determine how depreciations affect

performance. Section VI concludes.



II.     Literature Review

This paper is related to four diverse branches of literature: the impact of devaluations on exports;

the effect of financial crises on macroeconomic variables; the importance of exchange-rate

exposure to stock returns; and the extent of pass-through from currency movements to goods’

prices. Each of these branches of literature is so extensive that this survey does not make any

attempt to discuss all of the relevant papers. Instead, it simply highlights the key questions and

approaches and refers to recent surveys and articles that are closely related to this paper. After the

literature review, this section closes by discussing one closely related paper, which does not fall

into any of these four categories, in more detail.

        The first branch of related literature examines how devaluations affect export growth. A

standard argument justifying devaluations is that they should reduce the relative cost of exports

on international markets and therefore improve export growth. There are, however, a number of

reasons why devaluations may not have this desired effect, such as if the demand for exports is

relatively inelastic or imported inputs are a large component of production. Ghei and Pritchett

(1999) provide a detailed summary of why devaluations may or may not improve export

performance, as well as why it is difficult to measure these effects. After a review of the




                                                                                                       3
empirical work on this subject, they conclude that exports typically increase after a devaluation,

and that most of this response occurs rapidly (in about one or two years).2

         A closely related branch of literature examines how devaluations affect not only exports,

but also other macroeconomic variables such as output, income, investment, and inflation.

Agénor and Montiel (1996) provide an excellent summary of this literature and develop a

general-equilibrium model showing the various channels by which devaluations can affect the

macroeconomy. They also survey empirical work on this subject and conclude that the evidence

on whether devaluations are contractionary is mixed.3 More recently, several papers extend this

line of research to examine the impact of "crises" (which are generally defined to include

movements in interest rates and/or foreign reserves, as well as exchange rates) on macroeconomic

variables. Gupta, Mishra and Sahay (2000) is one of the most recent papers on this subject. Their

results suggest that about 40% of currency crises between 1970 and 1990 have been

expansionary.

         A third branch of literature takes a firm-level (instead of macroeconomic) approach and

measures how exchange-rate exposure affects stock returns for different types of companies.

Most of these papers estimate reduced-form, market models of how exchange-rate movements

affect stock returns. Dominguez and Tesar (2001) is one of the most recent and thorough

examples of this literature.4 They perform an extensive series of tests and conclude that about

12% to 23% of firms are significantly exposed to exchange-rate movements. These low estimates

of exposure agree with most work on this subject. Forbes (2000) tests for the importance of

different factors in explaining how exchange rate movements affect stock returns in a sample of

over 10,000 companies located around the world during the Asian and Russian crises. Results

2
  Several papers have also examined specific examples of how devaluations affected export growth. For
example, Duttagupta and Spilimbergo (2000), Higgins and Klitgaard (2000), and Barth and Dinmore
(1999) examine the impact of the 1997-98 devaluations on Asian exports.
3
  Edwards (1989) also provides an excellent survey of this literature and detailed evaluation of the historical
evidence on how devaluations impact a variety of macroeconomic variables. Kamin and Klau (1998) find




                                                                                                             4
suggest that trade linkages are important determinants of how these crises affected individual

companies’ stock returns.

          A final literature closely related to this paper examines how exchange-rate movements

affect output prices. This literature includes the work on pricing-to-market and pass-through, and

emphasizes the role of industrial structure and the form of competition.5 In certain situations,

exchange-rate movements may be wholly absorbed in a firm’s price-cost margins and have no

impact on product prices. Dornbusch (1987) develops these ideas in several simple models, and

numerous papers have found evidence of pricing-to-market in specific industries. Goldberg and

Knetter (1997) is an excellent survey of the empirical literature on this subject. They conclude

that the impact of exchange-rate movements on local currency prices of foreign products varies

widely by industry, and that for products shipped to the U.S, the average price response is about

one-half the exchange-rate movement.6

          Despite the range of frameworks and empirical tests used in these four branches of

literature, none of these papers has explicitly addressed the key question explored in this paper:

how do depreciations affect firm performance? The first two branches of literature focus on

macroeconomic relationships and country-level evidence. The last two branches use firm-level

models and data, but only consider how exchange-rate movements affect stock returns or product

prices.

          There is one paper, however, that does not fall into any of the four categories discussed

above and which is closely related to this paper. Forbes (2002) examines how a series of major

devaluations affected commodity firms in the “crisis” country as well as competitors in the rest of


no evidence that devaluations are contractionary in the long run. Calvo and Reinhart (2000) compare the
impact of currency crises on macroeconomic variables for emerging markets versus developed countries.
4
  Jorion (1990) is a classic example of this literature.
5
  More recently, several papers have extended this framework to examine how exchange-rate movements
affect micro-level variables other than prices. For example, Campa and Goldberg (1999) examine the
impact of exchange-rate movements on sectoral investment. Klein, Schuh and Triest (2000) and Goldberg
and Tracy (1999) examine the impact on wages and employment.




                                                                                                          5
the world. The paper focuses on one particular aspect of devaluations – how they affect the

relative cost of labor and capital and therefore influence firm production levels, profitability,

investment decisions, and stock returns. It develops these ideas in a small, open-economy model

and then performs a series of empirical tests using information for about 1,100 firms in 10

commodity industries. The empirical tests support the model’s main prediction that immediately

after devaluations, firms in the crisis country have higher growth rates for output and operating

profits than competitors in other countries. Results also support the prediction that the effect of

devaluations on capital investment and stock returns (and therefore expected long-run output and

profits) is determined by capital/labor ratios and changes in the cost of capital.

        This paper builds on the framework in Forbes (2002) in several ways. First, instead of

focusing solely on commodity firms, it examines the impact of devaluations on a much larger set

of companies from a range of industries. Second, this paper considers a wider range of effects of

devaluations on firm performance. Instead of focusing mainly on how capital-labor ratios

determine the impact of devaluations, it also considers the importance of output characteristics,

foreign sales exposure, debt outstanding, firm size, and profitability. Third, instead of focusing

solely on “devaluation events” (when countries suddenly abandon rigid exchange rate regimes),

this paper also considers “depreciation events” (when countries with more flexible exchange rate

regimes experienced unusually rapid losses in their currency’s value).



III.    Depreciation Events and Data Set

The following analysis defines “depreciation events” as any 4-week period when a country’s US

dollar exchange rate depreciated by 10% or more.7 In order to correspond to the firm-level data

set, the period considered is January 1, 1997 through December 31, 1999. Also, it only includes

6
  One noteworthy study that combines this approach with the work on exchange-rate exposure is Allayannis
and Ihrig (2000). They examine how market structure, including export and import competitiveness, affects
the exchange-rate exposure of a large sample of US firms.




                                                                                                       6
countries with information for at least 50 firms during this period. Table 2 lists the resulting 12

depreciation events in chronological order, as well as the months when the depreciations

occurred. This list of depreciation events includes the well-known currency crises, such as the

series of devaluations in Asia in the later half of 1997 and the Brazilian devaluation in early 1999.

It also includes a series of depreciations that were not standard currency crises, but involved the

adjustment of more flexible exchange rate regimes (such as Mexico and Israel in 1998).8



                           <<INSERT TABLE 2 HERE>>



         The firm-level dataset is compiled from the Worldscope March 2001 CD-ROM published

by Primark. This Worldscope database contains balance sheet, income statement, cash flow, and

general company information for firms from 51 countries, representing about 90% of global

market capitalization (according to their literature).9 The dataset includes historical information

on firms that became inactive due to a merger, bankruptcy, or any other reason. For this analysis,

I include companies that were active for at least 1 year during the period from 1997 through 2000,

and only include countries that have information for at least 50 firms during this period. I also

exclude all financial firms (SIC codes 60-69), since the analysis of how depreciations affect sales,

net income, and assets is not directly relevant. The Worldscope database is augmented with

macroeconomic statistics from the International Monetary Fund’s International Financial

Statistics CD-ROM (from March 2001).

7
  The exchange-rate data is from Datastream. After a depreciation event, the next year is excluded so that
there can be, at most, one depreciation event within any 12-month period.
8
  Some well-known currency crises (such as the devaluations in Russia in 1998 and Ecuador in 1999) are
not included since there is insufficient firm-level data for these countries.
9
  There are several limitations with this data. First, since Worldscope only reports information that is
publicly available, virtually all of the sample consists of publicly traded companies. Most private and
government-owned companies are not included. Second, although Worldscope attempts to correct for
major differences in cross-country accounting standards, significant differences may still exist for certain
variables. The analysis below addresses this problem by using a range of statistics to test each hypothesis
and by examining the impact of country-specific effects on the results. Third, there are a number of extreme




                                                                                                          7
         The resulting firm-level data set includes information for over 13, 500 firms in 42

countries. Table 3 shows the distribution of firms by country, as well as median sales (in US

dollars). Appendix A lists the statistics for each firm used in the following analysis and includes

detailed information on how each variable is defined and/or calculated.



                           <<INSERT TABLE 3 HERE>>



         This dataset includes the 12 countries that experienced depreciation events (as listed in

Table 2), as well as 30 countries that did not experience substantial depreciations between 1997

and 2000. The full sample of firms is necessary to compare the performance of firms in

depreciating countries versus firms in the rest of the world, as well as to control for any global

industry and/or time trends.10 As shown at the bottom of Table 3, firms in depreciating countries

comprise about 20% of the sample and tend to have smaller sales. This partially reflects the fact

that firms in emerging markets (which have a higher incidence of major depreciations) tend to be

smaller than in wealthier countries. This also captures the fact that depreciations in the local

currency/US dollar exchange rate will, by definition, reduce the dollar value of firm statistics.

Finally, this trend could also indicate that after depreciations, firms tend to decrease investment

(thereby reducing potential output), and/or have lower sales. The empirical analysis in the next

section formally tests this hypothesis.



IV.      General Analysis: The Impact of Depreciations on Firm Performance

This section uses the dataset described in Section III to compare firm performance in countries

with depreciation events versus in countries without depreciation events. More specifically, it



and unrealistic outliers that undoubtedly represent reporting errors. The analysis below addresses this
problem by performing an extensive set of sensitivity tests that includes removing outliers.
10
   Kamin (1988) shows the importance of controlling for the performance of a “comparison group” to
adjust for global industry trends when measuring the impact of devaluations.


                                                                                                          8
examines the impact of depreciations on the growth of firm sales, net income, market

capitalization, and asset value. These results provide the basis for the more detailed analysis in

Section V, which examines how different firm characteristics affect how depreciations impact

firm performance.

         The central model for the analysis is:



       Performancei , k ,c,t = α k + β1Depreciationc,t +1 + + β 2 Depreciationc,t
(1)
                               + β 3 Depreciationc,t −1 + β 4 Inflationc,t + β5Periodt + ξi, k ,c,t



where i is each firm, k is each industry, c is each country, and t is each period (denominated in

years). Performance is a measure of firm performance (discussed in more detail below). Any

time-invariant, industry-specific effects on firm performance are captured by αk, which is

calculated based on 2-digit SIC codes.11 Depreciation is a dummy variable equal to 1 if the

country c where firm i is located experienced a depreciation event (as defined on Table 2) in the

given period. More specifically, Depreciationc,t+1 is equal to 1 if country c had a devaluation in

the following year (t+1); Depreciationc,t is equal to 1 if country c had a devaluation in the current

year (t); and Depreciationc,t-1 is equal to 1 if country c had a devaluation in the previous year (t-

1). Inflationc,t measures the rate of inflation in country c in period t. Periodt is a vector of period

dummy variables for 1997 through 2000 (with 1996 as the excluded year) and is included to

control for any annual global shocks to firm performance.

         Firm performance (Performance) is measured by changes in four variables: sales, net

income, market capitalization and assets.12 Although a single measure of “performance” would be

more straightforward to interpret, each of the four measures is useful in order to capture different

11
  The sensitivity analysis tests for the impact of including firm or country effects instead of industry
effects. The base analysis focuses on industry-specific effects, however, since recent empirical analysis has
shown that during this period, sectoral shocks have been large and significant, and even more important
than global and country-specific shocks (Brooks and Del Negro, 2002).



                                                                                                            9
aspects of depreciations. For example, an exporter could respond to the relative cost advantage

provided by a depreciation by keeping local currency prices constant and lowering foreign

currency prices, hoping to generate an increase in sales volume. On the other hand, another firm

could respond by keeping foreign currency prices constant and raising local currency prices, so

that export sales remained fairly constant but net income increased.13 Therefore, the impact of the

depreciation on firm performance could be reflected mainly by an increase in sales or an increase

in income (or some combination of the two), and it is necessary to examine changes in both

measures to fully capture the impact of depreciations on firm performance.

           Moreover, while changes in sales and net income should capture the short-run impact of

depreciations on firm performance, changes in market capitalization and asset value are more

likely to capture the longer-term impact. Changes in market capitalization should reflect changes

in the discounted value of expected future profits, so that an increase in a firm’s market

capitalization after depreciations should reflect expected improvements in the firm’s longer-term

performance. This measure could be particularly important for firms that respond to depreciations

with additional investment (such as planting crops or digging mines) that may not increase sales

or income for several years. One problem with using market capitalization as a measure of long-

term performance, however, is that it assumes markets efficiently reflect new information from

the depreciation. This assumption may not be fully satisfied, especially during crises or in less

liquid emerging markets. Therefore, changes in firm asset value can provide additional

information on the expected longer-term impact of depreciations on firm performance. Firms that

are expected to benefit from depreciations in the long run are more likely to increase assets (such

as purchasing additional machines or even additional plants). Therefore, all four measures of firm

performance are useful in capturing slightly different aspects of how depreciations affect firms in

the short and long run.

12
     The firm performance variables are calculated as changes using the equation: (xt-xt-1)/xt-1.




                                                                                                    10
        Finally, it is useful to compare how depreciations affect both local currency statistics as

well as US dollar statistics, since exchange rate movements could have different effects on

pricing, and therefore various performance measures, for different types of goods. For example, if

a firm produces a non-traded good using only domestic inputs, and holding everything else

constant, a depreciation would have no direct effect on the local currency values of sales, net

income, market capitalization and assets, while the depreciation would cause an immediate

decrease in the US dollar values of the same performance measures. In other words, sales volume

and the local currency value of sales would remain constant, while the US dollar value of sales

would decrease. On the other hand, if a firm produces an export good (such as oil) that is

traditionally priced in US dollars, the same depreciation (again holding everything else constant)

would have no direct effect on the US dollar value of sales (and possibly the other performance

measures) while it would cause an immediate increase in the local currency value of sales (and

possibly the other performance measures). For most goods, depreciations will have an

intermediate effect between these two extreme cases, so it is necessary to consider how

depreciations affect both local currency and US dollar measures of performance.

        Table 4 reports random-effects estimates of equation (1) for the four performance

measures in local currency and US dollars. The top section of the table reports coefficient

estimates, and the lower section reports χ2 test statistics for the joint significance of the period

dummy variables and the industry random effects.



                          <<INSERT TABLE 4 HERE>>



        These estimates suggest several key results. First, in the year before a depreciation event,

there is no significant difference between firms in depreciating countries and non-depreciating


13
  See Clarida (1997) for an empirical analysis of how US firms balanced these two possible responses to
exchange rate movements in the 1980s.


                                                                                                          11
countries for any of the 8 measures of firm performance. Second, when performance is measured

in local currency, firms in depreciating countries tend to have slightly worse performance during

the year of the depreciation than firms in non-depreciating countries, but this difference is usually

not significant. More specifically, the estimated coefficient on Depreciationt is negative when

performance is measured by growth in local currency sales, market capitalization, or assets, but is

only significant at the 10% level for the first variable, and as discussed below, small changes in

model specification often render this coefficient insignificant. Moreover, the magnitude of the

estimated coefficients is fairly small. For example, the –0.10 coefficient in column 1 indicates

that firm sales growth (measured in local currency) during the year of a depreciation was only

10% lower in depreciating countries than in non-depreciating countries.

        Third, and in contrast to the above results, firms in depreciating countries appear to have

substantially worse performance during the year of the depreciation when performance is

measured in US dollars. The coefficient on Depreciationt is negative and highly significant for all

four US dollar measures of performance. This difference with the results when performance is

measured in local currency terms, however, undoubtedly reflects the fact that even if real

performance remained constant, the exchange-rate adjustment would generate negative growth in

US dollar terms. For example, the –0.27 coefficient on Depreciationt in column 5 suggests that

firms in depreciating countries experienced sales growth 27% less than firms in non-depreciating

countries. If the US dollar exchange rate had remained constant, this could reflect a 27% decline

in sales volume. On the other hand, this could also reflect constant sales volume, constant local

currency output prices, and a 27% depreciation in the local currency/US dollar exchange rate.

Moreover, in the 12-month period after the initial depreciation, the average currency movement

for the 12 countries in Table 2 was a 32% depreciation. Although currency movements cannot be

directly mapped into changes in US dollar performance measures, these estimates suggest that the

apparent negative impact of depreciations on US dollar measures could largely reflect nominal

movements and not fundamental changes in real performance.


                                                                                                     12
        A fourth result from Table 4 is that in the year after depreciation events, the impact on

firm performance is mixed. Firms in depreciating countries have significantly lower growth in net

income when measured in local currency. Firms may also have lower growth in net assets when

measured in local currency, although the relevant coefficient is only significant at the 10% level

(and as discussed below this result is not robust to changes in model specification). On the other

hand, firms in depreciating countries have significantly higher growth in market capitalization,

whether measured in local currency or US dollars. If changes in market capitalization are

interpreted as changes in the discounted value of future expected profits, this could suggest that

depreciations improve firms’ expected longer-term profitability. Moreover, the magnitude of the

coefficient estimates suggests that this effect could be economically important. For example,

using the local currency estimates in column 3, in the year after depreciations firm market

capitalization increased by 53% more for firms in depreciating countries than for firms in non-

depreciating countries.

        The final noteworthy result from Table 4 is the significance of the coefficients other than

the depreciation dummies. The magnitude and significance of the inflation coefficients fluctuate

across specifications. On the other hand, the period dummy variables are jointly highly significant

(in 7 of the 8 specifications) and the industry effects are jointly highly significant in each of the 8

specifications. These results suggest that period- and industry-specific shocks are important

determinants of firm performance.

        Next, I estimate a number of variations to the model specified in equation (1) in order to

test for the sensitivity of these results to model specification and outliers. First, I estimate the

model substituting firm effects (αi) for the industry effects (αk). Second, I estimate the model

substituting country effects (αc) instead of the industry effects. Third, I estimate the original

model with industry effects, except use fixed effects instead of random effects to focus on

changes in firm performance within each industry. Fourth, I estimate the model after removing




                                                                                                       13
the 10 outliers for each of the performance measures. Fifth and finally, I remove each country

from the sample and re-estimate the base model.

        Although the coefficient estimates fluctuate in each of these variations, the central results

do not change.14 In each of these sensitivity tests, the only coefficients on the depreciation

variables that are consistently positive and significant are when performance is measured by

growth in market capitalization (measured in either currency) in the year after depreciations. The

only coefficients that are consistently negative and significant are those when performance is

measured by net income growth (in local currency) in the year after depreciations, and those for

each of the four US dollar performance measures in the year of depreciations. The significance of

the other coefficients fluctuates based on model specification and sample selection. (For example,

when performance is measured by asset growth in local currency, the coefficient on

Depreciationt-1 is insignificant at the 10% level in over 1/3 of the tests.)

        To conclude, this analysis has documented several consistent patterns of how

depreciations tend to affect average firm performance. In the year after depreciations, firms in the

depreciating country tend to have significantly higher growth in market capitalization. On the

other hand, firms in depreciating countries tend to have significantly lower growth in net income

(when measured in local currency). Firms in depreciating countries also tend to display worse

performance during the year of the depreciation when performance is measured in US dollars, but

this could largely reflect changes in relative currency values and not significant changes in actual

performance.



V.      The Impact of Depreciations on Performance in Different Types of Firms

The general patterns reported in the last section on how depreciations affect average firm

performance may mask important differences across individual companies. For example,

depreciations may significantly improve the performance of exporters, but negatively impact the




                                                                                                   14
performance of firms using a high share of imported inputs. These different effects could

counteract each other when calculating the average impact of depreciations on firms in general.

Therefore, this section examines which firm characteristics determine the impact of depreciations

on firm performance. More specifically, it considers whether output characteristics, foreign sales

exposure, production structure, debt ratios, size, and/or profitability determine the impact of

depreciations on different types of firms.

            The empirical specification is an extension of the framework used for the more general

tests in Section IV. More specifically, the estimating equation is the same as equation (1), plus the

relevant test variables (i.e. firm characteristics) interacted with dummy variables indicating

whether there was a depreciation in the current year or previous year:



      Performancei , k ,c,t = α k + β1Depreciationc,t +1 + β 2 Depreciationc,t + β 3Depreciationc,t −1
(2)                         + β 4 Inflationc,t + β5Periodt + β 6 Depreciationc,t * Test i ,t −1
                            + β7 Depreciationc,t −1 * Test i,t −1 + ξi , k ,c,t




All variables are defined as in equation (1) except Testi,t-1, which is a vector of characteristics for

firm i from the previous period. Testi,t-1 is lagged in order to avoid capturing any impact of the

depreciation on the relevant firm characteristic. These interactive terms are included to test which

firm characteristics determine how depreciations impact firm performance. For example, if one

variable in Testi is a measure of firm size (such as total assets), then the relevant coefficient

estimates in β6 and β7 would capture any additional impact of depreciations on larger firms.

            There are a number of firm characteristics that could determine how depreciations affect

firm performance and which should therefore be included in Testi. The base analysis focuses on 6

different variables:




14
     Results are not reported since they are so similar to the base results in Table 4.


                                                                                                         15
         1. Output Characteristics: Theoretical models suggest that one important factor

determining the impact of depreciations is whether a firm produces non-traded goods that only

compete with other domestic producers, or traded goods that compete with foreign producers

(either in domestic markets through competition with imports and/or in foreign markets through

competition as exports). Depreciations should reduce the cost of production for goods in the

depreciating country relative to identical goods produced in non-depreciating countries. This

should give a relative cost advantage to firms that produce traded goods, but no relative cost

advantage to non-traded goods. As a result, depreciations should improve the performance of

firms that produce traded goods relative to firms that produce non-traded goods.15

         2. Foreign Exposure: Closely related to the impact of depreciations on traded versus non-

traded goods is whether firms had foreign sales before the depreciation. Firms with export

experience are better positioned to benefit from the relative cost advantage of depreciations.

Granted, firms that do not have foreign sales exposure before depreciations could begin operating

abroad after depreciations, but developing international operations can involve substantial time

lags. Therefore, firms with foreign sales would be expected to exhibit better performance directly

after depreciations than firms without foreign exposure.

         3. Production Structure: As discussed in the section on traded and non-traded goods,

simple models suggest that depreciations can lower the relative cost of production for firms in the

depreciating country relative to firms in non-depreciating countries. This reduction in relative

production costs will be proportional to the share of domestic inputs (such as labor) in production.

If production involves a higher share of imported inputs, then depreciations will have less impact

on relative production costs.16 In most emerging markets a large fraction of capital is imported, so

that capital/labor ratios can be used as rough proxies for the share of imported inputs to domestic


15
   For a model and detailed discussion of these effects, see Agénor and Montiel (1996). Also see Ghei and
Pritchett (1999) for a discussion of factors that could reduce any positive impact of depreciations on traded
goods, especially in developing countries.
16
   See Forbes (2002) for a model and detailed discussion of these effects.


                                                                                                           16
inputs in production. Therefore, firms with lower capital/labor ratios are expected to have

relatively better performance after depreciations than firms with higher capital/labor ratios.

           4. Debt Ratios: One feature of recent large depreciations, and especially currency crises,

is that they are often accompanied by a contraction in lending and/or increase in interest rates. In

some cases, the contraction in lending is a market response to the capital outflows that generated

the currency depreciation. In other cases, the increase in interest rates is a policy response by the

central bank in order to reduce capital outflows and strengthen the currency’s value. Raising

interest rates could also be required as part of an IMF program. At the firm level, depreciations

can reduce collateral values and therefore raise a company’s cost of borrowing.17 In each of these

cases, the contraction in lending and/or higher interest rates after depreciations would

disproportionately affect firms with higher outstanding debt burdens, as well as those more reliant

on borrowing to finance working capital. Moreover, since many companies borrow in foreign

currency, depreciations would have balance-sheet effects and increase the relative burden of

repaying existing foreign-currency debt.18 For all of these reasons, depreciations would be

expected to have a more negative impact on the performance of firms with higher outstanding

debt ratios.

           5. Size: There are a number of channels by which firm size could interact with

depreciations to affect firm performance. First, larger firms are more likely to have access to

financing during lending contractions, which, as discussed above, have frequently occurred

during recent large depreciations. Improved access to financing could occur through informal or

formal networks (such as the Korean chaebol), through government pressure on lending

institutions, and/or through direct bailouts for firms judged “too big to fail”. Second, and possibly

counteracting this effect, although larger firms were more likely to benefit from special networks

or privileges before depreciations, fiscal pressures (or even stricter monitoring as part of an IMF

17
     See Caballero and Krishnamurthy (2000).




                                                                                                    17
program) may make it more difficult to benefit from these traditional networks after

depreciations. Third, larger firms are more likely to have borrowed in foreign currency and

therefore experience negative balance-sheet effects from depreciations. Fourth, and possibly

counteracting this effect, larger firms are more likely to have hedged against currency risk. For all

of these reasons, larger firms could exhibit better or worse performance than smaller firms after

depreciations, but it is difficult to predict which of these effects dominates a priori.

        6. Profitability: The relationship between firm profitability and the impact of

depreciations on firm performance is also difficult to predict a priori. More profitable firms tend

to be operated by more capable managers, who could be better able to adjust production to benefit

from depreciations. Closely related, if depreciations are followed by an output contraction, then

more profitable firms may be better able to withstand the contraction in demand, while less

profitable firms are more likely to go bankrupt. Possibly counteracting this effect, however, more

profitable firms may be operating closer to full capacity and therefore have fewer excess

resources to reallocate and adjust to the depreciation. As a result, it is difficult to predict whether

depreciations will have a positive or negative effect on firms that were more profitable before the

depreciation.

        There are obviously a number of firm characteristics other than the six discussed above

that could determine how depreciations affect firm performance. For example, the extent of

hedging against currency risk or the proportion of debt denominated in foreign currency could be

critical. Unfortunately, the firm-level data for these additional tests is not available. The tests for

this analysis were chosen based on a combination of theoretical motivation, anecdotal evidence,

and data availability.

        To test for the impact of these six firm characteristics on performance after depreciations,

it is necessary to augment the dataset described in Section III. To test for the importance of traded


18
  See Céspedes, Chang and Velasco (2000). Unfortunately, the Worldscope database does not have
sufficient information on foreign-currency borrowing to test this channel directly.


                                                                                                      18
versus non-traded goods, Table 5 lists the different goods produced by firms in the sample by 2-

digit SIC codes and classifies each group as traded or non-traded. This classification is then used

to create a traded dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if the firm’s main output is a traded

good.19 The other variables are more straightforward to calculate based on the Worldscope data.

Foreign exposure is measured by the ratio of foreign sales to total sales. Capital/labor ratios are

measured by the ratio of total assets (in US dollars) to employees. Outstanding debt is measured

by the ratio of total debt to equity. Firm size is measured by total assets, and firm profitability is

measured by the return on assets. Appendix A provides detailed definitions and summary

statistics for each of these variables. The sensitivity analysis at the end of this section shows that

using different definitions has minimal impact on the central results.



                              <<INSERT TABLE 5 HERE>>



            Table 6 reports regression results based on random effects estimates of equation (2) with

the six variables discussed above included in Testi. When Testi is measured by the traded dummy,

the signs on the coefficient estimates fluctuate and are only significant when performance is

measured by net income growth. Moreover, the significant coefficient estimates are negative, the

opposite of the simple model predictions discussed above.20 When Testi is measured by foreign

sales exposure, however, the results are more consistent across performance measures and agree

with the theoretical predictions. The coefficient estimates on these interaction terms are positive

in 14 of the 16 cases, and are often highly significant. Moreover, the magnitude of the coefficient

estimates suggests that this effect is economically important. Holding everything else constant, if

a firm increased its foreign sales (as a ratio to total sales) by 10%, it would be predicted to




19
     Firms are classified based on the SIC code of their primary output.
20
     This counterintuitive result is analyzed in more detail in the sensitivity tests below.


                                                                                                      19
experience growth rates 4% higher in sales, 130% higher in income, and 3% higher in assets (all

measured in local currency) in the year of a major depreciation.



                          <<INSERT TABLE 6 HERE>>



        The coefficient estimates when Testi is measured by capital/labor ratios or debt ratios

provide a less consistent picture. The signs of the coefficient estimates for both sets of results are

fairly evenly split between positive and negative, and the few coefficient estimates that are

significant provide mixed support for the theoretical predictions. For example, in the year after

depreciations, firms with higher capital/labor ratios have significantly lower growth in US dollar

assets (as predicted), but significantly higher growth in local currency sales (the opposite of the

predictions). Firms with higher debt ratios tend to have significantly higher asset growth in the

year of depreciations (the opposite of the predictions), but significantly lower income growth in

the year after depreciations (as predicted). Therefore, this set of results suggests that there is little

strong and consistent relationship between firms’ capital/labor ratios or debt exposure and the

impact of depreciations on firm performance.

        When Testi is measured by firm size, all 8 coefficient estimates are negative for the year

of the depreciation, suggesting that larger firms had worse performance in this period. Only 3 of

these coefficients are significant at the 10% level, however, and some of this negative effect of

firm size is reversed in the year after depreciations. Sales growth measured in local currency,

however, is significantly lower for larger firms in the year after depreciations. For the final set of

coefficient estimates, when Testi is measured by profitability, there is no clear pattern. More

profitable firms have significantly higher growth in local currency sales in the year after

depreciations, but this is the only coefficient of the 16 related to the profitability interaction terms

that is significant at the 5% level. Moreover, the signs of the coefficient estimates are fairly

evenly split between positive and negative. Therefore, although larger firms have slightly worse


                                                                                                       20
performance than smaller firms after depreciations, profitability appears to have little impact on

how depreciations affect performance.

         To analyze the robustness of these central results to changes in variable definition, model

specification, and sample selection, I estimate a number of sensitivity tests. First, I redefine

several different variables: measure foreign exposure using the ratio of foreign assets to total

assets or foreign income to total income (instead of foreign sales to total sales); measure debt

outstanding using total debt to assets or short-term debt to equity (instead of total debt to equity);

measure size using total market capitalization or total income in US dollars (instead of total

assets); or measure profitability using return on equity or return on invested capital (instead of

return on assets). Second, to examine the impact of model specification, I re-estimate the model

substituting firm effects (αi) or country effects (αc) for the industry effects (αk) in equation (2), or

using fixed effects instead of random effects. Then I drop one variable at a time, excluding the

inflation and period dummy variables as well as the interactive terms. Third and finally, I test for

any impact of outliers by removing the 10 extreme values for each of the variables in Testi.

         Coefficient estimates fluctuate throughout this series of sensitivity tests, but the key

findings discussed above are robust. Firms with greater foreign sales exposure tend to have

significantly better performance after depreciations (according to most of the performance

variables measured in either currency).21 Firms with higher debt ratios tend to have lower growth

in net income (in either currency), but there is no consistent relationship between debt exposure

and the other performance variables. Larger firms tend to have worse performance than smaller

firms, although the significance of this result fluctuates across performance measures. There

appears to be no consistent relationship between a firm’s profitability or capital/asset ratio and the

impact of depreciations on firm performance. Finally, firms producing traded goods tend to have


21
  The one exception to this otherwise robust result is when foreign sales exposure is measured as the ratio
of foreign assets to total assets or the ratio of foreign income to total income (instead of using the ratio of
foreign sales to total sales). In both of these cases, data availability is much more limited and the new
foreign exposure variable is not consistently positive and significant.


                                                                                                              21
significantly lower net income growth after depreciations than firms producing non-traded goods,

although this result does not apply for the other performance measures.

        In an attempt to better understand this last result, which does not support the simple

model predictions discussed above, I perform two additional tests. I decompose traded goods into

commodities and differentiated goods in order to see if trends in either group are driving the

coefficient estimates.22 Negative shocks to commodity prices that are not captured by the industry

effects could be important, especially since commodities are a major export for many of the

depreciating countries. The right side of Table 5 lists the resulting classifications by two-digit SIC

code. Then I re-estimate equation (2), replacing the traded dummy variable with dummy variables

for commodities and differentiated goods (with non-traded goods continuing to be the excluded

variable).

        Results are reported at the top of Table 7. The table only reports coefficient estimates for

the depreciation variables and commodity and differentiated good interaction terms, since the

coefficient estimates for the remaining variables in Testi are virtually identical to those reported

in Table 6. The results suggest that the negative impact of depreciations on income growth for

traded-goods firms occurs in differentiated-goods firms instead of commodity firms. Therefore,

the robust finding of a negative impact of depreciations on income growth for traded-goods firms

does not appear to be caused by movements in commodity prices.



                         <<INSERT TABLE 7 HERE>>



        There are three possible explanations (at least) for why depreciations appear to have a

significant negative impact on income growth for firms producing differentiated goods relative to

firms producing other output. First, since many countries in the sample produce similar products




                                                                                                   22
and experienced depreciations around the same time, this may have eroded the relative cost

advantage traditionally provided to traded goods by depreciations. Duttagupta and Spilimbergo

(2000) provide evidence that these “competitive depreciations” were important factors explaining

why the depreciations during the Asian crisis only had a minimal impact on export revenues in

many Asian countries. Second, the demand for differentiated traded goods tends to be more

income elastic than the demand for non-traded goods and commodities. As a result, if

depreciations cause a contraction in income (which occurred in many countries in the sample),

this could generate a greater reduction in demand for differentiated goods relative to other

products.

         A final possible explanation is that the positive effect of depreciations on traded goods

predicted by the models is captured in the significant positive coefficients on the foreign exposure

variables. More specifically, the models predict two main channels by which the relative cost

advantage provided to traded goods improves their performance relative to non-traded goods.

First, depreciations lower production costs relative to those of competing imports in the domestic

market. This effect could be minimal, however, if exporters in other countries respond by

lowering prices, and this “pricing-to-market” is more likely to occur in differentiated goods.

Second, depreciations should lower production costs relative to those of competitors in

international markets, leading to an increase in export revenues. Previous empirical work has

shown that the second effect tends to be more important than the first, but this second effect could

already be captured in the regressions by the coefficients on the foreign exposure variables.23

         To test for this effect, I re-estimate the base specification in equation (2), but exclude the

foreign exposure variables. Coefficient estimates for the relevant variables are reported at the

22
   Commodities are defined as goods that are fairly homogenous across countries, so that prices are set in
global markets. Differentiated goods, on the other hand, are defined as goods that are more heterogeneous
across producers, so that firms have greater power in setting prices.
23
   For example, Kamin (1988) finds that most of the impact of devaluations on the trade balance occurs
through the expansion of exports rather than the contraction of imports. Ghei and Pritchet (1999) survey the




                                                                                                         23
bottom of Table 7. The coefficient on Tradedt becomes insignificant when performance is

measured by net income growth (in either currency), although the coefficient on Tradedt+1

becomes negative and significant at the 10% level when performance is measured as net income

growth in local currency. Moreover, the coefficients on Tradedt and Tradedt+1 become negative

and borderline significant for other performance measures. Therefore, these results suggest that

some of the estimated impact of depreciations on traded goods compared to non-traded goods

may be captured by the foreign exposure variables in the base specification. When the foreign

exposure variables are removed, however, traded goods still do not exhibit superior performance

to non-traded goods, as predicted by the models, so other factors (such as “competitive

devaluations” or income elasticities of demand) may also be important.



VI.     Conclusions

This paper documents several stylized facts of how recent depreciations affected different

measures of firm performance. It uses a sample of over 13,500 firms from 42 countries to

examine the impact of 12 “major depreciations” between 1997 and 2000. It evaluates firm

performance based on the immediate impact of depreciations on sales and net income, as well as

the expected longer-term impact as measured by changes in market capitalization and asset value.

        The first part of the analysis focused on how depreciations affect firms on average. It

finds that in the year after depreciations, firms have significantly higher growth in market

capitalization, suggesting that depreciations increase the present value of firms’ expected future

profits. On the other hand, firms have significantly lower growth in net income (measured in local

currency), suggesting that even if firms benefit from depreciations in the long run, the immediate

impact on performance may be negative. Firms also tend to display worse performance after




empirical literature and do not find strong evidence of a response of imports to exchange-rate movements
in developing countries.


                                                                                                           24
depreciations when performance is measured in US dollars, but this could largely reflect changes

in relative currency values and not significant changes in real performance.

        The second part of the analysis attempted to identify which firm characteristics

determined the impact of depreciations on individual firm performance. The strongest and most

robust result is that firms with greater foreign sales exposure have significantly better

performance after depreciations (according to most of the performance variables, whether

measured in local currency or US dollars). Firms with higher debt ratios tend to have lower

growth in net income, and larger firms often have worse performance than smaller firms,

although the significance of these results fluctuates across performance measures and model

specification. There is no consistent relationship between a firm’s profitability or capital/asset

ratio and the impact of depreciations on performance. Finally, firms producing traded goods tend

to have significantly lower income growth than firms producing non-traded goods, but this result

is sensitive to the inclusion of the foreign exposure variables and does not apply for the other

performance measures.

        Although there are a number of factors other than firm characteristics that determine how

depreciations affect a country’s macroeconomy, these empirical patterns provide some suggestive

evidence of why depreciations can have such varied effects in different countries. The one group

of firms that consistently has superior performance after depreciations, whether measured by

improvements in sales, net income, market capitalization or asset value, was firms with greater

foreign sales exposure. Therefore, relatively open economies with substantial export experience

are more likely to benefit from depreciations, while relatively closed economies with limited

export capacity are more likely to experience an economic contraction.

        The empirical results, however, did not find evidence of a robust relationship between

several other firm characteristics, such as capital/labor ratios, and the impact of depreciations on

firm performance. Some of these estimated relationships may be insignificant because it is not

only the firm characteristic that determines the impact of depreciations, but rather the interaction


                                                                                                     25
between the firm characteristic and macroeconomic variables (such as inflation, interest rates,

government spending, or changes in the composition of aggregate income). For example, a model

developed in Forbes (2002) suggests that for commodity firms, it is not just capital/labor ratios

that determine how depreciations affect sales growth, but the interaction between capital/labor

ratios and changes in the cost of capital.

        Therefore, one promising area for future research is to combine the firm-level evidence

on the impact of depreciations in this paper with the more traditional macro-level research in

previous work. This could involve aggregating the firm-level effects documented in this paper in

order to assess their overall impact at the country level. This could also involve evaluating

whether a country’s firm and industry characteristics or its macroeconomic characteristics are

relatively more important determinants of how depreciations affect aggregate growth. Finally,

this research could also investigate how firm-level factors interact with macroeconomic variables

to determine why some depreciations are expansionary and others are contractionary.




                                                                                                    26
                     APPENDIX A: Variable Definitions, Sources and Summary Statistics


Variable         Definition and source                                                                 Mean          St. Dev.
Assets (Total)   The sum of total current assets, long-term receivables, investment in unconsolidated 3.88            25.98
                 subsidiaries, other investments, net property, plant and equipment, and other assets.
                 Reported in billions of US dollars. Source: Worldscope.
Capital / Labor The ratio of total assets (expressed in millions of US dollars and defined above) to          1.14    9.57
Ratio           total employees. Source: calculated based on Worldscope information.
Foreign Assets The ratio of assets abroad to total assets (defined above). Source: Worldscope.                0.24    0.22
Foreign          The ratio of income generated abroad to total net income (defined below). Source:            0.28    0.33
Income           Worldscope.
Foreign Sales    The ratio of sales abroad to net sales (defined below). Source: Worldscope.                  0.34    0.28
Inflation        Annual percent change in consumer prices for the same annual period as the                   3.11    6.82
                 corresponding firm data. Source: International Financial Statistics, line 64..XZF.
Market           Product of shares outstanding and market price at fiscal year end. Includes all types        1.67    10.85
Capitalization   of shares. Reported in billions of US dollars. Source: Worldscope.
Net Income       Income after all operating and non-operating income, expenses, reserves, income              0.05    0.38
                 taxes, minority interest, and extraordinary items. Represents income before
                 preferred dividends. Reported in billions of US dollars. Source: Worldscope.
Return on        (Net income before preferred dividends + ((interest expense on debt - interest               0.03    0.30
Assets           capitalized) * (1 - Tax Rate))) / Last year's total assets. Source: Worldscope.
Return on        (Net income before preferred dividends - preferred dividend requirements) / Last             0.03    0.66
Equity           year's common equity. Source: Worldscope.
Return on        (Net income before preferred dividends + ((Interest expense on debt - interest               0.06    0.39
Invested         capitalized) * (1 - Tax Rate))) / (Last year's total capital + last year's short-term debt
Capital          & current portion of long-term debt). Source: Worldscope.
Sales (Net)      Gross sales and other operating revenue less discounts, returns and allowances.              1.27    5.55
                 Reported in billions of US dollars. Source: Worldscope.
Short-Term       Ratio of local currency value of short-term debt to equity. Short-term debt is any           0.96    3.56
Debt to Equity   debt payable within 1 year (including current portion of long-term debt). Equity is
                 common shareholder's investment in a company, including common stock value,
                 retained earnings, capital surplus, capital stock premium, cumulative gain or loss of
                 foreign currency translations, discretionary reserves, and negative goodwill. Source:
                 calculated based on Worldscope.
Total Debt to    Ratio of local currency value of total debt to total assets. Total debt is the sum of        0.36    0.30
Assets           short-term debt (defined above) plus long-term debt (which is any interest bearing
                 financial obligations, excluding short-term debt and net of premium or discount).
                 Assets defined above. Source: calculated based on Worldscope.
Total Debt to    Ratio of local currency value of total debt to equity. Both terms defined above.             2.04    5.48
Equity           Source: calculated based on Worldscope.




                                                                                                                     27
                                         References



Agénor, Pierre-Richard and Peter Montiel. (1996). Development Macroeconomics. Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press.


Allayannis, George and Jane Ihrig. (2000). "The Effect of Markups on the Exchange Rate
Exposure of Stock Returns." Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International
Finance Discussion Paper Number 661.


Barth, Marvin and Trevor Dinmore. (1999). “Trade Prices and Volumes in East Asia Through the
Crisis.” Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance Discussion
Papers No. 643.


Brooks, Robin J. and Marco Del Negro. (2002). “Firm-level Evidence on Global Integration.”
International Monetary Fund mimeo.


Caballero, Ricardo and Krishnamurthy, Arvind. (2000). "Emerging Market Crises: An Asset
Market Perspective." MIT mimeo.


Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart. (2000). "Fixing for Your Life." University of Maryland
mimeo.


Campa, Jose and Linda Goldberg. (1999). “Investment, Pass-through and Exchange Rates: A
Cross-Country Comparison.” International Economic Review 40(2): 287-314.


Céspedes, Luis, Roberto Chang and Andrés Velasco. (2000). "Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate
Policy." NBER Working Paper # 7840.


Clarida, Richard. (1997). "The Real Exchange Rate and US Manufacturing Profits: A
Theoretical Framework with Some Empirical Support." International Journal of Finance and
Economics 2(3): 177-88.




                                                                                              28
Dominguez, Kathryn and Linda Tesar. (2001). "Exchange Rate Exposure." NBER Working Paper
#8453.


Dornbusch, Rudiger. (1987). "Exchange Rates and Prices." American Economic Review 77(1):
93-106.


Duttagupta, Rupa and Antonio Spilimbergo. (2000). "What Happened to Asian Exports During
the Crisis?" International Monetary Fund mimeo.


Edwards, Sebastian. (1989). Real Exchange Rates, Devaluation, and Adjustment. Cambridge,
MA: The MIT Press.


Forbes, Kristin. (2002). “Cheap Labor Meets Costly Capital: The Impact of Devaluations on
Commodity Firms.” NBER Working Paper #9053.


Forbes, Kristin. (2000). “The Asian Flu and Russian Virus: Firm-Level Evidence on How Crises
are Transmitted Internationally.” NBER Working Paper # 7807.


Ghei, Nita and Lant Pritchett. (1999). “The Three Pessimisms: Real Exchange Rates and Trade
Flows in Developing Countries.” In Lawrence Hinkle and Peter Montiel, eds. Exchange Rate
Misalignment: Concepts and Measurement for Developing Countries. New York: Oxford
University Press, pgs. 467-96.


Goldberg, Linda and Joseph Tracy. (1999). "Exchange Rates and Local Labor Markets." NBER
Working Paper #6985.


Goldberg, Pinelope and Michael Knetter. (1997). "Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have
WE Learned?" Journal of Economic Literature. XXXV (3): 1243-72.


Gupta, Poonam, Deepak Mishra and Ratna Sahay. (2000). "Output Response During Currency
Crises." International Monetary Fund mimeo.


Higgins, Matthew and Thomas Klitgaard. (2000). "Asia's Trade Performance After the Currency
Crisis." Federal Reserve Bank Economic Policy Review. 6(3): 37-49.



                                                                                              29
Jorion, Philippe. (1990). “The Exchange-rate Exposure of U.S. Multinationals.” Journal of
Business. 63: 331-45.


Kamin, Steven. (1988). “Devaluation, External Balance and Macroeconomic Performance: A
Look at the Numbers.” Study in International Finance no. 62. Princeton University.


Kamin, Steven and Marc Klau. (1998). “Some Multi-Country Evidence on the Effects of Real
Exchange Rates on Output.” International Finance Discussion Papers, Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System, Number 611.


Klein, Michael, Scott Schuh, and Robert Triest. (2000). "Job Creation, Job Destruction, and the
Real Exchange Rate." NBER Working Paper #7466.




                                                                                              30
                                   Table 1
                  Firm Performance after Recent Depreciations
                             Median Growth in Year of                 Median Growth in Year After
                                  Depreciation1                              Depreciation1
                               Sales      Net Income                     Sales       Net Income

Brazil (1999)                   -17.6              -56.1                       −                 −
Czech Republic (1998)            18.3               14.5                    -16.5             -18.6
Greece (1998)                    20.1               18.3                      6.1              28.5
Indonesia (1997)                -35.0              -94.2                    -19.5             -33.4
Israel (1998)                    -2.5              -13.9                     11.8              32.8
Malaysia (1997)                  -9.1              -28.4                    -24.9             -74.9
Mexico (1998)                     6.2              -36.6                     18.5              23.9
Pakistan (1998)                  -6.8              -13.3                     -3.1              -5.8
Philippines (1997)              -19.7              -34.6                     -1.1             -32.7
South Africa (1998)              -9.1              -15.0                      9.8               3.4
South Korea (1997)              -42.1              -69.0                     34.7              19.3
Thailand (1997)                 -43.3             -124.2                     28.0             -91.4

Average                         -11.7              -37.7                     4.0              -13.5

Notes: Sales and net income measured in US dollars. Statistics are median values for all firms in the
given country in the given year. Data set is discussed in detail in Section III.

(1) Depreciations defined as a 10% or greater increase in a country’s US dollar exchange rate in any 4-
week period. See Table 2 for additional information and exact dates.




                                                                                                          31
                                               Table 2
                                          Depreciation Events

                                                        Depreciation Month
                        Thailand                               07/97
                        Philippines                           07/97
                        Indonesia                          08/97, 01/99
                        Malaysia                              09/97

                        South Korea                               11/97
                        Czech Republic                            02/98
                        Greece                                    03/98
                        South Africa                              06/98

                        Mexico                                    08/98
                        Pakistan                                  08/98
                        Israel                                    10/98
                        Brazil                                    01/99
Note: “Depreciation event” defined as a 10% or greater increase in a countries exchange rate versus the US dollar in
any 4-week period between 1/1/97 and 12/30/99. After a depreciation event, the next year is excluded so that there can
be, at most, one depreciation event within any 12-month period. Countries with information for less than 50 firms (such
as Russia) are excluded. The exchange-rate data is from Datastream.




                                                                                                                    32
                               Table 3: Firm Sample Information
                      Region         Country             # Firms                  Median Sales1
                      Countries with Depreciation Events
                                     Brazil                303                         167.5
                                     Czech Republic         58                         160.5
                                     Greece                179                          49.7
                                     Indonesia             127                         73.7
                                     Israel                 44                         215.6
                                     Malaysia              332                          60.0
                                     Mexico                127                         286.8
                                     Pakistan               82                         28.0
                                     Philippines            70                         60.3
                                     South Africa          460                          49.9
                                     South Korea           570                         131.9
                                     Thailand              202                          58.6

                      Countries without Depreciation Events
                      Americas       Argentina               51                        258.4
                                     Canada                 613                        158.1
                                     Chile                   77                        159.7
                                     US2                    411                       4,700.2
                      Asia              Australia                    285               191.4
                                        China                        110                88.3
                                        Hong Kong                    302               145.9
                                        India                        323                81.6
                                        Japan                       3,160              286.9
                                        New Zealand                   55               157.2
                                        Singapore                    204               105.2
                                        Taiwan                       218               225.6
                      Europe            Austria                       94              151.14
                                        Belgium                      125               153.8
                                        Denmark                      169               117.9
                                        Finland                      138              144.4
                                        France                       783                80.6
                                        Germany                      820               122.0
                                        Hungary                       39               89.2
                                        Ireland                       71               113.0
                                        Italy                        191               259.3
                                        Netherlands                  226               292.2
                                        Norway                       181               84.7
                                        Poland                        53               87.5
                                        Portugal                      81               68.6
                                        Spain                        142               271.6
                                        Sweden                       285               117.3
                                        Switzerland                  182               283.2
                                        Turkey                        71               118.6
                                        UK                          1,640               87.6
                      Countries with Depreciations                 2,554               86.6
                      Countries without Depreciations              11,100              182.2
                      Total Sample                                 13,654              157.9
Notes:   (1) Total sales measured in millions of US dollars in 2000 (or the closest year available).
         (2) The Worldscope 2001 CD-ROM only includes information for S&P500 countries for the US.




                                                                                                       33
                                                               Table 4
                                  Regression Results: Impact of Depreciations on Firm Performance
                                         Growth in Local Currency Values                                                    Growth in US Dollar Values
                               Sales        Net Income Market Cap.                    Assets                 Sales          Net Income    Market Cap.                Assets
                                (1)             (2)           (3)                      (4)                    (5)               (6)            (7)                    (8)

 Depreciationt+1              -0.028              -0.367            -0.032            -0.164                 0.041              -0.342             0.021              -0.081
                              (0.086)            (0.308)           (0.116)           (0.085)                (0.079)            (0.297)            (0.096)            (0.072)

 Depreciationt                -0.101*             0.018             -0.069            -0.029                -0.269**          -1.019**           -0.196**           -0.214**
                              (0.055)            (0.209)           (0.078)           (0.054)                 (0.049)           (0.186)            (0.059)            (0.045)

 Depreciationt-1              -0.012            -0.637**           0.525**           -0.091*                 0.032              0.127            0.640**              -0.034
                              (0.055)            (0.211)           (0.077)           (0.054)                (0.050)            (0.186)           (0.059)             (0.045)

 Inflationt                  0.006**              0.021             -0.010           0.004*                  -0.001             0.003            0.005**              -0.002
                             (0.002)             (0.016)           (0.006)           (0.002)                (0.002)            (0.006)           (0.002)             (0.001)

 χ2 test statistics for significance of:
 Period Dummies1              13.8**             11.4**           245.9**            12.0**                 12.0**              1.3              453.1**            82.1**
                  2
 Industry Effects           2,481.9**            19.2**          2,644.1**         28,878.1**              2,546.3**           21.3**           3,224.2**         34,489.4**

 # observations               27,325             30,567            21,185             27,255                 33,247            33,924             30,151             33,207

Notes: Regression includes random industry effects based on 2-digit SIC industries. Data described in Table 3 and Appendix A. Standard errors in parentheses. * is significant at
the 10% level and ** is significant at the 5% level.
(1) χ2 (5) test statistic for an F-test of the joint significance of the period dummy variables.
(2) χ2 (1) test statistic for the Breusch and Pagan Lagrangian multiplier test for the joint significance of the industry random effects.




                                                                                                                                                                                    34
                    Table 5: Output Characteristics by SIC Codes

 SIC                                                                   Non-                Differentiated
Code      Industry                                           Traded   traded   Commodity       Good
01, 02    Agricultural products – crops & livestock            Y         N        Y              N
  07      Agricultural services                                N         Y        ---            ---
  08      Forestry                                             Y         N        Y              N
  09      Fishing, hunting & trapping                          Y         N        Y              N
10, 14    Mining, excluding fuel                               Y         N        Y              N
  12      Coal mining                                          Y         N        Y              N
  13      Oil & gas extraction                                 Y         N        Y              N
15-17     Building & trade contractors, construction           N         Y        ---            ---
  20      Food & kindred products                              Y         N        N              Y
  21      Tobacco products                                     Y         N        N              Y
22, 23    Apparel & textile mill products                      Y         N        N              Y
24, 25    Furniture, fixtures & other wood products            Y         N        N              Y
  26      Paper & allied products                              Y         N        N              Y
  27      Printing & publishing (papers, magazines)            N         Y        ---            ---
  28      Chemicals & allied products                          Y         N        Y              N
  29      Petroleum & coal products                            Y         N        Y              N
  30      Rubber & miscellaneous plastic products              Y         N        N              Y
  31      Leather & leather products                           Y         N        N              Y
  32      Stone, clay & glass products                         Y         N        N              Y
  33      Primary metal industries                             Y         N        Y              N
  34      Fabricated metal products                            Y         N        N              Y
  35      Industrial machinery & equipment                     Y         N        N              Y
  36      Electronics & other electric equipment               Y         N        N              Y
  37      Transportation equipment                             Y         N        N              Y
  38      Instruments & related products                       Y         N        N              Y
  39      Miscellaneous manufacturing industries               Y         N        N              Y
             (musical instruments, toys, etc)
40-45     Transportation (rail, trucking, shipping)            N        Y         ---           ---
  46      Pipelines, except natural gas                        N        Y         ---           ---
  47      Transportation services                              N        Y         ---           ---
  48      Communications (telephone, radio, tv)                N        Y         ---           ---
  49      Electric, gas & sanitation services                  N        Y         ---           ---
50, 51    Wholesale trade                                      Y        N         N             Y
  52      Building material & garden supplies                  Y        N         N             Y
53, 54    Stores for food & general merchandise                N        Y         ---           ---
  55      Automotive dealers & service                         N        Y         ---           ---
56, 57,   Apparel, accessory, furniture, furnishing &          N        Y         ---           ---
  59         misc. retail stores
  58      Eating & drinking places                             N       Y          ---           ---
60-69     Financial institutions-excluded from sample          ---     ---        ---           ---
  70      Hotels & other lodging places                        N       Y          ---           ---
  72      Personal services (laundry, beauty, funeral)         N       Y          ---           ---
  73      Business services (advertising, mail, data)          N       Y          ---           ---
75, 76    Auto repair, parking & misc. services                N       Y          ---           ---
78, 79    Movies, amusement & recreation services              N       Y          ---           ---
80-83     Health, education & social services                  N       Y          ---           ---
  84      Museums, botanic & zoological gardens                N       Y          ---           ---
  86      Membership organizations                             N       Y          ---           ---
87, 89    Other services, nes.                                 N       Y          ---           ---
92, 96    Public administration for justice, public order,     N       Y          ---           ---
             safety & economic programs
  99      Nonclassifiable establishments                       ---     ---        ---           ---




                                                                                                      35
              Table 6: Regression Results: Firm Characteristics and the Impact of Depreciations

                           Growth in Local Currency Values                              Growth in US Dollar Values
                                   Net      Market                                           Net      Market
                        Sales    Income      Cap.       Assets                    Sales    Income      Cap.        Assets

Depreciationt+1         0.127        -0.339        -0.160        -0.056           0.053        -0.829       -0.228           -0.117
                       (0.114)       (3.347)      (0.418)       (0.084)          (0.092)       (2.941)      (0.291)          (0.076)

Depreciationt          -0.037       10.131*       -1.041        -0.094           -0.331**       7.986       -1.126**     -0.387**
                       (0.201)      (5.854)       (0.832)       (0.148)          (0.162)       (5.249)      (0.510)      (0.135)

Depreciationt-1         0.197         -0.213       -1.347       0.205*            0.151        -0.064       -0.359        0.115
                       (0.156)       (4.786)      (0.865)       (0.115)          (0.126)       (4.006)      (0.395)      (0.106)

Inflationt              0.005         0.087        0.063         0.007            0.006         0.162        0.026*       0.012**
                       (0.006)       (0.242)      (0.063)       (0.004)          (0.005)       (0.150)      (0.015)      (0.004)

Test Variables Interacted with Depreciation Dummies

Tradedt                 0.005      -11.505**       0.276         0.014            0.042       -8.876**      -0.103        0.023
                       (0.136)       (4.258)      (0.571)       (0.100)          (0.109)      (3.777)       (0.346)      (0.093)

Tradedt-1              -0.121        -3.497        -0.081       -0.044            -0.140       -2.508       -0.132           -0.054
                       (0.144)       (4.156)       (0.533)      (0.106)          (0.116)       (3.696)      (0.365)          (0.099)

Foreign                 0.425**     12.976**       1.211         0.322**          0.435**       7.648        1.604**      0.411**
Exposuret              (0.198)      (6.336)       (0.871)       (0.146)          (0.160)       (5.110)      (0.506)      (0.134)

Foreign                -0.562        14.155        0.445         0.098           -0.122         8.161        0.621        0.417*
Exposuret-1            (0.346)      (10.382)      (1.488)       (0.255)          (0.279)       (8.895)      (0.877)      (0.234)

K/Lt                   -0.012        -8.082        2.052**      -0.123           -0.128        -3.721        0.303       -0.187*
                       (0.147)       (4.969)      (0.786)       (0.108)          (0.118)       (3.819)      (0.371)      (0.099)

K/Lt-1                  1.551**      -2.552        3.149         0.008            0.272         8.441       -0.370       -0.841**
                       (0.521)      (22.579)      (3.736)       (0.383)          (0.420)      (13.352)      (1.318)      (0.350)

Debtt                   0.108        -1.152        0.857         0.192**          0.102         0.724        0.547*       0.188**
                       (0.110)       (3.532)      (0.545)       (0.081)          (0.089)       (2.981)      (0.280)      (0.074)

Debtt-1                 0.008        -6.546**      -0.025       -0.083           -0.106       -5.789**      -0.375       -0.171**
                       (0.108)       (3.238)       (0.442)      (0.079)          (0.087)      (2.762)       (0.272)      (0.072)

Sizet                  -0.012        -0.014        -0.250       -0.039*          -0.021        -0.392       -0.146**     -0.051**
                       (0.027)       (0.868)       (0.242)      (0.020)          (0.022)       (0.732)      (0.069)      (0.018)

Sizet-1                -0.066**       0.418        -0.399       -0.003            0.010         0.228        0.094        0.051**
                       (0.031)       (1.313)       (0.372)      (0.023)          (0.025)       (0.805)      (0.079)      (0.021)

Profitabilityt          1.233       -34.231        -0.557        0.955*           0.690       -27.222       -0.054        0.509
                       (0.784)      (22.847)       (3.443)      (0.577)          (0.632)      (20.587)      (1.998)      (0.530)

Profitabilityt-1        0.619**      -6.443        6.792        -0.206            0.293        -5.069       -1.057       -0.385*
                       (0.310)       (8.797)      (5.758)       (0.228)          (0.250)       (7.946)      (0.784)      (0.209)
         Notes: Estimates obtained based on equation (2) with random industry effects. Period dummies included in analysis
         (but not reported). Standard errors in parentheses. * is significant at the 10% level and ** at the 5% level.




                                                                                                                              36
                                            Table 7
     Sensitivity Tests: Explaining the Performance of Traded versus Non-Traded Goods

                    Growth in Local Currency Values               Growth in US Dollar Values
                             Net     Market                              Net     Market
                  Sales    Income     Cap.       Assets       Sales    Income      Cap.   Assets
Estimates when traded goods are decomposed into commodities and differentiated goods1
Depreciationt+1   0.119     0.043    -0.155      -0.065       0.048     -0.666    -0.238  -0.139*
                 (0.115)   (3.328)   (0.425)     (0.083)     (0.093) (2.947)      (0.295) (0.072)

Depreciationt        -0.071      11.120*      -1.073        -0.108        -0.344** 9.002*         -1.172** -0.400**
                     (0.205)     (5.871)      (0.854)       (0.148)        (0.166) (5.325)        (0.521) (0.133)

Depreciationt-1       0.198       0.773       -1.392       0.225**         0.158       0.222       -0.366       0.119
                     (0.158)     (4.784)      (0.909)      (0.114)        (0.127)     (4.013)      (0.401)     (0.106)

Commodityt           -0.106       -7.550      -0.276        -0.019         0.005      -5.726       -0.272       0.058
                     (0.176)      (5.170)     (1.336)       (0.127)       (0.142)     (4.628)      (0.446)     (0.118)

Commodityt-1         -0.116       3.738       -0.635        0.197          -0.053      1.502       -0.221       0.270*
                     (0.221)     (6.691)      (1.068)      (0.160)         (0.178)    (5.618)      (0.561)     (0.148)

Differentiated        0.051     -13.427** 0.369             0.023          0.055 -10.474**         -0.027       0.008
Goodt                (0.144)     (4.483)  (0.621)          (0.104)        (0.116) (3.992)          (0.370)     (0.098)

Differentiated       -0.123       -4.490      -0.062        -0.075         -0.151     -2.946       -0.123      -0.086
Goodt-1              (0.146)      (4.178)     (0.544)       (0.106)        (0.118)    (3.727)      (0.372)     (0.101)

Estimates when the foreign exposure variables are excluded 2
Depreciationt+1   0.050      0.142     0.446       0.064                   -0.072     -0.476        0.157      -0.031
                 (0.050)    (0.929)   (0.356)     (0.047)                  (0.048)    (0.931)      (0.216)     (0.046)

Depreciationt         0.035       0.399        0.853*       0.116**       -0.357** -0.938          -0.242     -0.279**
                     (0.057)     (1.250)      (0.509)      (0.053)         (0.055) (1.064)         (0.246)     (0.052)

Depreciationt-1       0.054       0.044        1.914**      0.223**       -0.115** -0.195           0.966** 0.038
                     (0.054)     (1.151)      (0.465)      (0.050)         (0.052) (1.003)         (0.232) (0.049)

Tradedt              -0.013       0.224        0.342        0.005         -0.071*     -0.271        0.054      -0.079*
                     (0.043)     (0.911)      (0.394)      (0.040)        (0.041)     (0.799)      (0.187)     (0.049)

Tradedt-1            -0.053      -1.580*      -0.775*       -0.043         0.017      -0.495       -0.279       0.029
                     (0.045)     (0.933)      (0.403)       (0.042)       (0.043)     (0.839)      (0.193)     (0.041)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Estimates include random industry effects. * is significant at the 10% level and
** at the 5% level.
(1) Regression identical to that reported in Table 6, except the Traded dummy variables are replaced with the
     Commodity and Differentiated Good dummy variables.
(2) Regression identical to that reported in Table 6, except the Foreign Sales interaction variables are excluded.




                                                                                                                      37
