NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

DOES IT PAY TO WORK?

Jagadeesh Gokhale
Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Alexi Sluchynsky

Working Paper 9096
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9096

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002

Laurence Kotlikoff thanks The Smith Richardson Foundation, Boston University, Economic Security
Planning, Inc., the Employment Policies Institute, and the National Institute of Aging for research support.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Jagadeesh Gokhale, Laurence J. Kotlikoff and Alexi Sluchynsky. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Does It Pay to Work?
Jagadeesh Gokhale, Laurence J. Kotlikoff and Alexi Sluchynsky
NBER Working Paper No. 9096
August 2002
JEL No. H2
ABSTRACT
Does it pay to work? Given the number and complexity of federal and state tax and transfer systems, this
is a tough question to answer. The problem is greatly compounded by the fact that what one earns in one year
alters not just current taxes and transfer payments in that year, but in future years as well. Thus, understanding
the net effective tax on work and the changes in this taxation associated with policy reforms requires an
intertemporal model capable of carefully determining tax and transfer payments at each stage of the life cycle.
This study uses ESPlanner, a financial planning software program, to study the net work tax levied on workers
with different earnings capacities. ESPlanner smooths households’ living standards subject to their capacities to
borrow. In so doing, it makes highly detailed, year-by-year federal and state income tax and Social Security benefit
calculations. To produce a comprehensive net work tax measure, we added to ESPlanner all other major transfer
programs.
We focus on lifetime average and marginal net work-tax rates, which are measured by comparing the
present values of lifetime spending from working through retirement both in the presence and in the absence of
all tax-transfer programs. We form these tax rates for young stylized married workers. We report seven findings.
First, our fiscal system is highly progressive. Households earning the minimum wage receive 18 cents in benefits
net of taxes for every dollar they earn. In contrast, households with million dollar salaries pay 54 cents in taxes
net of benefits per dollar earned. Second, progressivity is primarily restricted to the bottom end of the income
distribution. Average net work tax rates of middle class households are relatively high compared with those of the
rich. Third, while the poor face negative average taxes, they face significant positive marginal net taxes on
working. Indeed, a minimum wage household that chooses to work is forced to surrender 34 cents of every dollar
earned in net taxes. Those with earnings that exceed 1.5 times the minimum wage face marginal net taxes on fulltime work above 50 percent. Fourth, low-wage workers face confiscatory tax rates on switching from part-time
to full-time work. Fifth, the same is true of secondary earning spouses in low-wage households. Sixth, the
marginal net tax on working is particularly high for young households with low incomes. Seventh, average and
marginal net work tax rates are relatively insensitive to the assumed rate of real wage growth and the discount rate.
And eighth, major tax reforms, such as switching from income to consumption taxation, can have a significant
affect on the fiscal system’s overall progressivity.

Jagadeesh Gokhale
The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland

Alexi Sluchynsky
Pension Policy Adviser to the
Kosovo Ministry of Economy and Finance

Laurence J. Kotlikoff
Department of Economics
Boston University
270 Bay State Road
Boston, MA 02215
and NBER
kotlikof@bu.edu

I. Introduction
Does it pay to work? Given the number and complexity of federal and state tax and transfer
systems, this is a tough question to answer. The problem is greatly compounded by the fact that
what one earns in one year alters not just current taxes and transfer payments in that year, but in
future years as well. There are five dynamic linkages here. First, earning more in the present
typically alters current saving and, therefore, future levels of capital income and capital income
taxes. Second, changing future levels of income and assets changes the eligibility for and levels
received of income- and asset-tested transfer benefits. Third, earning more in the present generally
alters not just current, but also future levels of consumption, and, therefore, future consumption
taxes. Fourth, the most important transfer program, Social Security, explicitly links future transfer
payments to current earnings. Fifth, the income taxation of Social Security benefits means that
income taxes in a year Social Security benefits are received depend on past Social Security-covered
earnings because the benefits are, themselves, determined by past covered earnings.
Thus, understanding the effective net tax on work and the changes in work taxes associated
with policy reforms requires an intertemporal model capable of carefully determining tax and
transfer payments at each stage of the life cycle based, in part, on economic choices in prior periods.
This study uses ESPlanner, a financial planning software program developed by Economic Security
Planning, Inc., to study the net-work tax levied on workers with different earnings capacities.
ESPlanner smooths households’ living standards subject to their capacities to borrow. In so
doing, it makes highly detailed, year-by-year federal and state income tax and Social Security
benefit calculations. To produce a comprehensive work tax measure, we added to ESPlanner all
other major transfer programs, including Food Stamps, Transitional Aid to Families with Dependent

3

Children (TAFDC), Medicaid, Medicare, Housing Assistance, Supplemental Security Income (SSI),
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program for Women, Infants, and Children (WIC), and the Low
Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP).
Our goal is calculating average and marginal net-work taxes facing stylized young couples
with different levels of earnings. We begin by calculating average lifetime net tax rates defined as
the ratio of lifetime net taxes to lifetime earnings. We then present average and marginal net tax
rates on working fulltime and halftime throughout one’s lifetime and the marginal net tax from
switching from halftime to fulltime work. Finally, we measure marginal net tax rates on working at
particular ages.
Our measured present values of spending in both the presence and absence of fiscal policy
are actuarial calculations. They adjust for the probability that one or both spouses may die prior to
reaching her or his maximum age of life. This actuarial valuation is very important because
surviving widows and widowers can face very different taxes and transfers from those they face
when married. These survivor-specific fiscal policies are also included in the analysis.
We find eight things. First, our fiscal system is highly progressive. Couples working full
time and earning the minimum wage receive 32 cents in benefits net of taxes for every dollar they
earn. In contrast, households with million dollar salaries pay 51 cents in taxes net of benefits per
dollar earned. Second, net subsidies are provided only at the very bottom end of the income
distribution. Average net-work tax rates of couples earning 1.5 times the minimum wage (32,100
per year) are a positive 14 percent. For working couples earning 5 times the minimum wage
($107,100), the net tax rate is 38 percent. Third, while the poor face negative average taxes, they,
like the middle class and the rich, face positive marginal net taxes on working that exceed 50

4

percent. Moreover, certain low- and moderate-income households face substantially higher marginal
net work tax rates than those faced by the rich. Fourth, low-wage workers face confiscatory tax rates
on switching from part-time to fulltime work. Fifth, the same is true of secondary earning spouses in
low-wage households. Sixth, the marginal net tax on working is particularly high for young
households with low incomes. Seventh, average and marginal net-work tax rates are relatively
insensitive to the assumed rate of real wage growth and the discount rate. And eighth, major tax
reforms, such as switching from income to consumption taxation, can have a significant effect on the
fiscal system’s overall progressivity.
The paper proceeds with a brief mention of related prior studies. It next describes the
complexity of the tax-transfer system and, by implication, the need to sweat those details to measure
net tax rates accurately. It then describes our methodology, ESPlanner and its use in this study, the
characteristics of our stylized households, our approach to modeling the fiscal system, and our
findings. The final section summarizes and concludes.

II. Prior Studies
Many studies of lifetime fiscal burdens and their distribution have examined one fiscal policy
at a time. Boskin, et. al. (1987), Caldwell, et. al. (1999), Gokhale and Kotlikoff (1999), and Myers
and Schobel (1993) are all examples of studies of Social Security’s lifetime net tax treatment.
Poterba (1989) considers the lifetime incidence and distribution of excise taxes. And Fullerton and
Rogers (1995) study the lifetime incidence of consumption taxes. None of these studies consider the
tax on work per se.
Fullerton and Rogers (1993) represents the first serious attempt to quantify the lifetime

5

burden of the entire U.S. tax system, but, again, not the tax on work. They construct an elaborate
life-cycle general equilibrium model and use it to study the incidence of particular U.S. tax systems.
Their impressive framework allows them to consider the full incidence of the tax system.
Fullerton’s and Roger’s approach and subsequent related work by Altig et al. (2001) provide
significant insight into the burden and distribution of gross tax liabilities. Fullerton and Rogers find
that the personal federal income tax is highly progressive, with the lowest income groups paying 5
percent of their lifetime incomes and the highest income groups paying 19 percent.
Although these studies tell us a lot about gross tax liabilities, they are relatively silent about
overall net tax liabilities as well as the net tax on work. Moreover, they are highly stylized and do
not consider many of the details of the tax-transfer system that affect its impact. For example, they
don’t consider tax credits, such as the earned income tax credit and the child tax credit. Nor do they
consider the phase-out of itemized deductions, the taxation of social security benefits, or the
progressivity of state income taxation.
Hubbard, et. al. (1995) provide a partial equilibrium analysis of the impact of the fiscal
system on saving decisions in a setting with earnings and health expenditure uncertainty. Their
focus is on the system’s transfer programs, particularly its saving disincentives for the poor.
Although their model would permit an analysis of the fiscal system’s overall progressivity, they
don’t use it for that purpose. Nor is it necessarily ideal for such an analysis because it is also highly
stylized.
Unlike the studies of Fullerton and Rogers (1993) and Altig et al. (2001), the analysis here is
partial equilibrium in nature; i.e., it doesn’t take into account feedback effects of fiscal policy on the
pretax level of wages or the pretax return to capital. And unlike Hubbard et al. (1995), our model

6

doesn’t consider behavioral reactions to fiscal work and saving disincentives. Instead, we
investigate the work disincentives of our tax-transfer program without studying the reaction of
households or the macro economy to those disincentives. In this respect, our study is close to
Pechman’s (1985) work, although his focus was comparing annual gross taxes to annual income, as
opposed to comparing lifetime net taxes to lifetime income.

III. The Complexity of Our Tax-Transfer System
It’s difficult to exaggerate the complexity of the taxes and transfer programs facing American
workers. Mastering just the federal income tax represents a major challenge because it comprises so
many special provisions. The list includes the inflation-indexation of tax brackets, the partial, but
graduated taxation of Social Security benefits above two non inflation-indexed thresholds, the
treatment of retirement account contributions and withdrawals, the phase-out of itemized deductions,
the earned income tax credit, the child-tax credit, the alternative minimum tax, and the recently
legislated credit to low-income households for contributing to retirement accounts.
If the federal income tax weren’t hard enough to follow, almost all states have income taxes
with their own special provisions. For example, Massachusetts has a special exemption for the
elderly, a child deduction, a rental deduction, and a deduction for employee-paid payroll taxes.
Compared to these taxes, the FICA payroll tax may seem straightforward. But workers who want to
calculate their lifetime net-work taxes must understand its ceiling, how that ceiling changes through
time, the degrees to which employer and employee payroll contributions are and are not subject to
federal and state income taxation, and the degree to which their employer’s retirement account
contributions and other fringe benefit payments are and are not subject to payroll taxation.
Figuring out these three tax systems and their interdependencies provides a good
7

apprenticeship for approaching our benefit programs. The most complex of these is surely Social
Security, which requires a handbook of over 500 pages to clarify its provisions. Those brave enough
to wade through this tomb will learn about eligibility requirements, primary insurance amounts,
partial wage indexation of earnings histories, inflation indexation of benefit levels, benefit
reductions for early retirement, recomputation of benefits, the delayed retirement credit, family
benefit maximums, the recently modified earnings test, retirement benefits, survivor benefits, mother
and father benefits, children benefits, spousal benefits, and divorcee benefits. Unfortunately, reading
the Handbook in its entirety raises almost as many questions as it answers – questions that can only
be resolved via detailed interrogatories with actuaries at the Social Security Administration.
Although their intricacies pale in comparison with those of Social Security, understanding
the details of our other benefit programs can also gray one’s hair, particularly those dealing with the
relationship of one program’s benefits to those of another. Take Medicare and Medicaid.
Medicare’s co-payments are covered by Medicaid under certain conditions. But if covered, these
co-payments reduce the income deduction for Food Stamps and, thus, the ultimate amount of Food
Stamps received. And Medicaid benefits are, themselves, income tested, where income includes
Social Security and SSI (Supplemental Security Income) benefits.

IV. Defining Net-Work Tax Rates
A simple two-period framework motivates the formula we use to calculate net tax rates on
working. Let cy stand for consumption when young, co for consumption when old, r for the pre-tax
rate of return earned on saving, ey for earnings from working full time when young, e0 earnings from
working full time when old, and T(ey, eo, cy, co, r) for the present value, discounted at rate r, of

8

lifetime net tax payments. We write lifetime net tax payments as a function of earnings when young
and old, consumption when young and old, and the pre-tax rate of return, since taxes paid and
transfer payments received when young and old depend on all of these variables.1
The household’s lifetime budget constraint is
(1)

C = E − T (c y , c o , e y , e o , r ) ,

where C stands for the present value of consumption and E for the present value of earnings when
the household works fulltime and earns ey when young and eo when old.2 The average work tax rate,
−

τ , is defined as.
τ=

(3)

T (c y , c o , e y , eo , r )
E

.

To understand our calculation of marginal net-work tax rates, let C* refer to the present value
of consumption when earnings are zero (when the household doesn’t work), and let c*y and c*o
denote consumption when young and old in that setting. Hence,
(2)

C * = −T (c *y , co* ,0,0, r )

Note that C* can be positive when earnings are zero if the household receives transfers (T* is
negative). The marginal net-work tax rate, τ, is given by
(3)

τ=

(E + C * ) − C
E + C*

To understand this tax rate, note that E+C* represent the increase in lifetime spending that would
occur if, in going to work, the household could keep it’s basic benefits, measured by C* (the present
1 For example, consumption taxes, including sales taxes and excise taxes, depend on consumption when young and old
(cy and co); payroll taxes when young and old depend on earnings when young and old (ey and eo); and income taxes
depend on total labor plus asset income when young and old (ey and eo + r(ey – cy)).

9

value of consumption if the household doesn’t work), and also keep its entire increase in lifetime
earnings, given by E (the present value of fulltime earnings). The difference between this amount
and C -- what the household actually gets to consume as a result of working – is the numerator of
this tax rate. It represents the absolute amount the household loses (or gains, if τ is negative) from
working. This net loss divided by the total potential gain is the net tax rate from the household
working full time over its lifetime.
Note that E not only equal the present value of earnings; it also equals the present value of
consumption that the household would enjoy in the absence of any fiscal policy (the case that T(ey,
eo, cy, co, r)=0 regardless of its arguments). Call that present value C**. Hence, the work tax rates
can be expressed solely in terms of present values of consumption; i.e.,
(4)

τ=

(5)

τ=

T (c y , c o , e y , eo , r )
C **

, and

(C ** + C * ) − C
.
C ** + C *

These formulae are, with several important caveats, the ones we use to measure average and
marginal net tax rates from fulltime work as well as from halftime work. The first caveat is that we
replace the present values of consumption with their corresponding present values of total spending.
Spending includes not just expenditures on consumption goods and services, including housing
services, but also spending on life insurance premiums and special expenditures, like weddings and
college tuition paid on behalf of children. Second, since some of spending goes to pay excise, sales,
and other taxes on consumption, in measuring the present value of spending in the presence of fiscal
policy, we reduce spending by θ percent, where θ is the consumption tax rate. In what follows,

10

“spending” is used to refer to spending net of consumption taxes.
A third important difference in our actual and the model’s net tax rates is that our measure of
the present value of spending adds in the present value of all transfer payments other than Social
Security benefits (which are already included in ESPlanner). Effectively, then we treat all nonSocial Security transfers (Food Stamps, WIC, TAFDC, Housing Assistance, SSI, WIC, and
LIHEAP, Medicare, and Medicaid) as non-fungible and simply add their present value to the present
value of spending calculated by ESPlanner. Our procedure here assumes that these benefits are
spent in the year they are received. This makes sense for most of these transfers, since they are
provided in kind, rather than in cash. However, our treatment of TAFDC and SSI, which are
provided in cash, as non-fungible is made for computational convenience. Specifically, treating
these two benefits as fungible dramatically increases computation time because of the complexity of
their income and asset tests.

V. Actuarial Valuation

There is a final and very important difference in our actual net-work tax formula. In forming
the present values of lifetime spending (and consumption, which we need in order to net out
consumption taxes), we take into account the fact that neither spouse may live to her or his
maximum age of life (age 95). As a widow or widower, each spouse will pay different amounts of
taxes and receive different amounts of benefits than would be the case was she still married. Our
precise net-work tax formulas are based on the actuarial present values of lifetime spending, where
we a) multiply the spending levels in all future years when both spouses are alive by the probability

2 I.e., C = cy +co/(1+r) and E = ey+eo/(1+r)

11

of their both living through those years and b) multiply the spending levels when each spouse is a
widow or widower by the probability of that survivorship state occurring. Since the amount a
widow or widower spends in a particular year can differ depending on when her or his spouse passed
away, we form survivorship probabilities conditional on the age of death of the spouse and calculate
spending separately for each spouse conditional on the death age of her/his partner.

VI. ESPlanner

ESPlanner uses dynamic programming techniques to smooth a household’s living standard
over its life cycle to the extent possible without allowing the household to go into debt. In making
its calculations, ESPlanner takes into account the non-fungible nature of housing, bequest plans,
economies of shared living, the presence of children under age 19, and the desire of households to
make “off-the-top” expenditures on college tuition, weddings, and other special expenses. In
addition, ESPlanner simultaneously calculates the amounts of life insurance needed at each age by
each spouse to guarantee that potential survivors suffer no decline in their living standards compared
with what would otherwise be the case.
ESPlanner’s calculates time-paths of consumption expenditure, taxable saving, and term life
insurance holdings in constant (2001) dollars. Consumption in this context is everything the
household gets to spend after paying for its “off-the-top” expenditures – its housing expenses,
special expenditures, life insurance premiums, special bequests, taxes, and net contributions to taxfavored accounts. Given the household’s demographic information, preferences, and borrowing
constraints, ESPlanner calculates the highest sustainable and smoothest possible living standard over
time, leaving the household with zero terminal assets apart from the equity in homes that the user

12

has chosen to not sell. The amount of recommended consumption expenditures needed to achieve a
given living standard varies from year to year in response to changes in the household’s
composition. It also rises when the household moves from a situation of being liquidity constrained
to one of being unconstrained. Finally, recommended household consumption will change over time
if users intentionally specify that they want their living standard to change. ESPlanner’s algorithm
is complicated. But it’s easy to check ESPlanner’s reports to see that, given the inputs, preferences,
and borrowing constraints, the program is recommending the highest and smoothest possible living
standard that the household can sustain over time.
Since the taxes paid by households depend on their total incomes, which include asset
income, how much a household pays in taxes each year depends on how much it has consumed and
saved in the past. But how much the household can consume and, therefore, how much it will save
depends, in part, on how much it has to pay in taxes. Thus taxes depend on income and assets,
which depend on taxes. This simultaneity means that the time-paths over the household’s life cycle
of consumption, saving, and tax payments must be jointly determined. ESPlanner achieves this
simultaneous and consistent solution not only with respect to consumption and saving decisions, but
also with respect to the purchase of life insurance.3
Because taxes and Social Security benefits make a critical difference to how much a
household should consume, save, and insure, casual calculations of these variables is a prescription
for seriously misleading financial recommendations.4 As mentioned, ESPlanner has highly detailed
federal income tax, state income tax, Social Security’s payroll tax, and Social Security benefit
3 The program not only calculates the appropriate levels of life insurance at each age for each spouse when both are
alive. Bit also determines how much life insurance each surviving spouse needs to purchase.
4 See Gokhale, Jagadeesh, Laurence J. Kotlikoff, and Mark Warshawsky, “Comparing the Economic and Conventional
Approaches to Financial Planning,” in Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Essays on Saving, Bequests, Altruism, and Life-Cycle

13

calculators. The federal and state income-tax calculators determine whether the household should
itemize its deductions, computes deductions and exemptions, deducts from taxable income
contributions to tax-deferred retirement accounts, includes in taxable income withdrawals from such
accounts as well as the taxable component of Social Security benefits, and calculates total tax
liabilities after all applicable refundable and non refundable tax credits.
These calculations are made separately for each year that the couple is alive as well as for
each year a survivor may be alive. Moreover, ESPlanner’s survivor tax and benefit calculations for
surviving wives (husbands) are made separately for each possible date of death of the husband
(wife). I.e., ESPlanner considers separately each date the husband (wife) might die and calculates
the taxes and benefits a surviving wife (husband) would receive each year thereafter.

VII. Our Stylized Couples

Our stylized household features a husband and wife, both of whom are initially age 18 and
live at most to age 95. The couple has two children, one at age 25 and one at age 27. Both spouses
earn the same income and work through age 64. Their initial annual earnings, which grow by 1
percent in real terms each year, are multiples of the minimum wage times 40 hours per week times
52 weeks. Both children attend college between ages 19 and 22. Couples with annual earnings
below $105,000 pay one third of their total initial real annual earnings in college tuition/room and
board for each child for each year of education. For couples earning $105,000 or more, college
support payments are capped at $35,000 (one third of $105,000).
The couple initially rents a house for 25 percent of its total initial annual earnings. But at age

Planning, Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, NBER volume, 2001, 489-560.

14

25, the couple purchases a house for three times initial earnings. This purchase is financed with a 20
percent down payment and an 80 percent mortgage carried at an 8 percent nominal interest. The
couple earns a 4 percent real pre-tax return on assets. Funeral expenses for each spouse are 10
percent of each spouse’s initial annual earnings, up to a maximum of $10,000. There are no
bequests apart from the value of home equity when the last spouse dies, since the couple never sells
its home.

VIII. Modeling the Fiscal System

As indicated in the Appendix, our analysis incorporates all major tax-transfer programs at
both the federal and state levels. To account for overall labor productivity growth, which we assume
underlies the growth in real wages of our stylized couples, we index annual real benefit amounts as
well as real benefit brackets in the benefit formulae to an index of the real wage. We assume this
index grows at the same rate as the real wages of our stylized couples. The one exception here is the
thresholds at which Social Security benefits become taxable under the federal income tax. The
federal government has eliminated inflation-indexation of these thresholds in what appears to be an
intentional policy of increasing, over time, the share of benefits subject to taxation.
From an economics perspective, employer-paid payroll taxes are no less of a burden on
workers than those paid directly by employees. To incorporate these taxes, we gross up each
spouse’s labor earnings by the amount of the employer-paid payroll taxes and raise ESPlanner’s rate
of payroll taxation from 7.15 percent to 15.3 percent – the combined OASDHI payroll tax rate.5 For
purposes of calculating federal income taxes, however, we do not gross up labor earnings, since
5 To be more precise, we gross up each spouse’s labor income by a) 1.45 percent, which is the HI employer payroll tax

15

employer contributions are an exclusion from the federal income tax base. While making these
adjustments makes no change in ESPlanner’s recommended consumption or total spending in the
presence of the tax-transfer system, these values are higher when we turn off all taxes and transfers.
In terms of equation (4), C** (the present value of spending in the absence of all taxes and
transfers), and, therefore, our calculated lifetime net-work tax rate, is larger because of this
adjustment for employer-paid payroll taxes.
Like employer-paid payroll taxes, federal and state corporate income taxes represent a hidden
tax, whose burden (incidence) falls on workers. We treat these taxes in a parallel fashion to
employer-paid payroll taxes. Specifically, we a) increase our assumed nominal rate of return by the
amount of these taxes and b) adjust ESPlanner’s calculation of income taxes to include these
“corporate” taxes on capital income. By making these two adjustments, ESPlanner’s recommended
consumption and, therefore, present value of spending in the presence of the tax-transfer system
remains unchanged, but it is higher when we turn off all taxes and transfers. Again, C**, and,
therefore, our calculated lifetime net-work tax rate, is larger because of this adjustment for
employer-paid payroll taxes. In making this adjustment for corporate income taxes, we are assuming
that the elimination of corporate income taxes would fully redound to the benefit of workers in the
form of a higher rate of return earned on their savings.6
The Appendix details our calculation of taxes and the benefits from transfer programs. In the
case of the various benefit programs, we take into account income and asset tests. We also take into
account the joint determination of benefits arising from the fact that the level of benefits available
rate, plus b) 5.7 percent of labor earnings up to the OASDI taxable earnings ceiling, where 5.7 percent is the OASDI
employer payroll tax rate.
6 An alternative incidence assumption, which would be appropriate for a small open economy and which we don’t pursue
here, is to assume that the incidence of corporate income taxes falls on workers in the form of lower wages, rather than

16

from one program may depend on the level of benefits received from another.

IX. Findings

Table 1 presents average net-work tax rates from fulltime work. This tax rate divides the
household’s total net taxes associated with working full time through retirement by the present value
of spending the household would enjoy in the absence of taxes or transfers. Consider first
households earning the minimum wage. Their average net tax rate is negative 32.2 percent meaning
their lifetime spending is 32.2 percent higher from working than it would be in the absence of any
fiscal policy. The table’s second row indicates that households earning 1.5 times the minimum
wage, or $32,100 at the beginning of their careers, face a 14.5 percent average net-work tax. For
household earning twice the minimum wage, with an initial annual income of $42,800, the average
net tax rate is 22.6 percent. For households earning from three to forty times the minimum wage,
average work tax rates gradually rise from 29.9 percent to 51.2 percent.
These findings lead to the following three conclusions. First, subsidization of work begins
and ends with minimum wage households. Second, most households pay somewhere between one
fifth and one half of their lifetime economic resources to federal and state government in the form of
net taxes. And third, the fiscal system is highly progressive at the bottom end of the earnings
distribution and moderately progressive at the top end of the distribution.
Tables 2 and 3 clarify the source of these findings. Table 2 shows the present values of the
various taxes and transfers for different multiples of the minimum wage. Table 3 scales Table 2’s
values by the present value of spending in the absence of taxes and transfers. The tables contain

lower after-tax rates of return.

17

seven features worth mentioning. First, the present value of federal income taxes rise from a
negative 2.9 percent of spending to a positive 4.3 percent as we move from a 1 minimum wage to a
1.5 minimum wage household. Hence, notwithstanding the earned income tax credit, the child tax
credit, and other progressive features of the federal income tax code, federal income taxes are
positive, on net, for households with very low, if not the lowest, levels of income. Second, personal
federal and Massachusetts’ state income taxes are highly progressive, while payroll taxes are highly
regressive. Third, consumption taxes are somewhat regressive. Fourth, corporate income taxes,
while progressive, are relatively insignificant. Fifth, Medicaid and the other welfare benefits are
targeted exclusively to the poor. Sixth, the other transfer programs -- Social Security and Medicare
– provide their benefits on a highly progressive basis. And seventh, one cannot assess the overall
degree of the fiscal system’s progressivity by considering any one tax or transfer program in
isolation.

Marginal Net Fulltime Work Tax Rates
Table 4 switches attention from average to marginal net fulltime work tax rates. As
discussed above, the marginal net fulltime work tax considers the net increase in spending that a
household experiences in switching from no work to working full time. The first thing to note is that
all households face marginal net fulltime work tax rates in excess of 50 percent! The second thing to
note is that the marginal net tax rates of low-income households earning 1.5 to 2 times the minimum
wage are particularly high, namely 69.9 percent and 64.1 percent, respectively. The third thing to
note is that for high and very high earning households marginal net tax rates range from 53 to 55
percent.
Perhaps the most striking feature of this table is that the minimum wage household faces a
18

50.8 percent net marginal tax on working full time even though its average tax rate is negative 32.2
percent. The reason for this large difference in average and marginal net tax rates is that households
who don’t work receive very substantial transfers. Many of these benefits are either lost entirely or
substantially reduced when the household goes to work full time. In addition, the household must
pay federal income, state income, and FICA taxes on its earnings. Offsetting these factors is the
increase in Social Security benefits associated with working and the availability of the earned
income tax credit.
Like households earning one times the minimum wage, households earning 1.5 times the
minimum wage lose benefits when they go to work. But they also lose essentially all of their earned
income tax credits. In addition, their higher earnings limits the degree to progressivity of the Social
Security benefit schedule. The loss of benefits is, of course, experienced by higher earning couples
when they go to work. But the higher the level of earnings, the smaller is this loss as a share of the
increase in spending associated with working. This is the reason marginal net tax rates are lower
for households earning more than 1.5 times the minimum wage.
Before considering our other findings, we restate the lesson of Table 4 because of its major
importance. In going to work, all American households hand half or more of every dollar they earn
to state and federal governments in taxes paid net of benefits received.

Halftime Work Tax Rates
Tables 5 through 8 repeat the above analysis for halftime rather than fulltime work. Table 5
shows a very substantial average subsidy of 141.9 percent given to minimum wage households who
work halftime. The average subsidy drops to 71.8 percent for households earning 1.5 times the

19

minimum wage and to 32.2 percent for households earning twice the minimum wage. Higher wage
households face positive average halftime net tax rates. At three times the minimum wage the net
tax rate is 14.5 percent. The rate rises gradually to 49.4 percent for the 40-times minimum wage
household.
Tables 6 and 7 decompose these average net tax rates of Table 5 into their different tax and
transfer components. They show that the federal income tax generates a substantial average net
subsidy for halftime workers earning at or very close to the minimum wage. Medicaid is the most
important transfer provided to poor halftime workers. Indeed, for minimum wage households,
Medicaid provides 94 cents for every dollar of spending the household would do in the absence of
any fiscal policies.
Table 8 presents marginal net taxes on switching from zero work to working halftime. As in
Table 4, all marginal tax rates are positive, starting with the minimum wage household, which faces
a 23.9 percent net tax rate. Once the household’s wage is two or more times the minimum, the
marginal tax exceeds 50 percent. Again, the explanation for the positive sign of marginal net tax
rates for the poor is that even halftime work leads to substantial increases in federal income taxes
and major reductions in benefits from transfer programs.
Table 9 considers a different marginal net-work tax rate, namely that imposed on switching
from halftime to fulltime work. This tax rate is defined as 1 – (a-b)/b, where a stands for the present
value of spending with taxes and transfers if the household works fulltime and b stands for the
present value of spending with taxes and transfers if the household works halftime. If doubling
work, doubled spending, a-b would equal b, and this tax rate would equal zero. I.e., there would be
no special net tax imposed on switching from halftime to fulltime work.

20

For very low-wage workers as a group, this tax rate is, however, far from zero. The loss in
benefits and the rise in effective taxes from switching from half- to fulltime work are so large as to
eliminate almost any economic gain from the switch. Indeed, households earning 1.5 times the
minimum wage who switch from half- to fulltime work end up handing away 100.7 cents for every
dollar earned! While less than 100 percent, the net tax rate on moving from halftime to full time
work is still quite large for middle-income households, but it drops substantially with earnings for
very high earners. The reason for the drop is intuitively clear: High earners pay federal and state
income taxes at the highest rate brackets even when working halftime, but low and middle-income
households become subject to higher marginal income tax rates upon switching from half- to
fulltime work.

Net-Work Tax Rates on Second Earners
Table 9’s net tax rates not only indicate the rate of net taxation of both spouses’ earnings
if both switch from halftime to fulltime work. They also indicate the net tax rate imposed on a
non-working spouse who decides to work full time and earns the same amount as his/her partner.
From this perspective, the U.S. fiscal system is very strongly encouraging one spouse in lowwage married households to stay out of the labor force. Because of child rearing, cultural norms,
and gender differences in pay, the spouse being forced out of the work force by our fiscal system
will typically be the wife.

21

Age-Specific Net-Work Tax Rates
Tables 10 through 14 present net tax rates on working at a particular age given that the
household works at all other ages. The experiment here compares a) the increase in lifetime
spending from working versus not working at a particular age under the current fiscal system with b)
the increase in lifetime spending from working rather than not working at that age in the absence of
all taxes and transfers. The value [1–(a/b)]×100 equals the tax bite imposed on working at the age
under consideration. At 9.7 percent, the net tax rate on working at age 25 is fairly low for minimum
wage workers. However, for workers earning just a little more--about 1.5 times minimum wage-working at age 25 comes with a hefty tax rate of 59.6 percent. Table 15 shows the changes in
different components of taxes and transfers for the experiment of Table 10. It shows that at age 25,
those earning 1.5 times minimum wage lose much more Medicaid benefits by working compared to
those earning at the minimum wage. In addition, working at age 25 induces an increase in federal
income taxes for those earning 1.5 times the minimum wage whereas those earning at the minimum
wage receive a subsidy for working by way of the earned income credit. Table 10 shows that the net
tax rate for working at age 25 is about 45 percent for those earning between three- to forty-times the
minimum wage. That is, the tax on working at age 25 is roughly proportional over most of the
earnings distribution.
A similar pattern of net tax rates by income arises for working at age 35 except that the
net tax rate falls quite sharply at higher income levels. The reason is that borrowing constraints
are less binding on high earners prior to age 35 because children’s college expenses are capped
for high earning households. This implies that high earners enjoy greater flexibility in adjusting

22

assets prior to age 35. Prior asset accumulation is much greater when not working at age 35 for
high earners compared to low earners. But, high prior asset accumulation implies higher capital
income taxes. Therefore, by choosing to work rather than not at age 35, high earning households
save a lot more on capital income taxes than do middle or low income households--as is evident
from Table 16.
Table 12 shows the impact of not working at age 45. Net marginal tax rates are in the teens
at low-income levels and stay relatively flat until 10-times-minimum-wage level of earnings. The tax
rates rise sharply for very high earners. By age 45, households have paid off children’s college
expenses and are beginning to save for retirement. Again, low- and middle-income households
accumulate more assets by age 45 when not working at age 45 compared to working at that age.
Hence, as before, they save on capital income taxes prior to age 45 by working at age 45. This
translates into saving on capital income taxes on a lifetime basis for low earners.
As can be seen from Table 17, the story is somewhat different for high-income individuals.
Although these households also accumulate more assets by age 45 when not working compared to
working at that age—thereby saving on capital income prior to age 45—this saving is more than
offset by higher capital income tax payments in later years. The cap on college expenditures for
high earners implies that their borrowing constraint becomes nonbinding much earlier when they
work at age 45 compared to when they do not work. This induces two effects: First, the amount of
capital income taxes saved prior to age 45 is not much higher for high earners compared to low
earners. Second, because saving for retirement begins earlier when working at age 45 (because the
borrowing constraint become non-binding earlier), asset accumulation is much larger prior to
retirement and high earners pay much more in capital income taxes after age 45. Hence, high

23

earners pay more in capital income taxes on a lifetime basis when working relative to not working at
age 45. This explains the relatively steep increase in the net marginal tax rate on working at age 45
at high earning levels.
Table 13 shows that tax rates are, again, low at low earning levels but rise sharply beginning
at just 3 times minimum wage, quickly reaching the mid-40s in percentage terms. As is clear from
Table 18, deciding to work rather than not at age 55 extends and somewhat magnifies the previously
described effect on asset accumulation. Now, even low earners end up paying more in capital
income taxes on a lifetime basis when they decide to work at age 55.
Table 14 shows the results for the decision to work at age 65. The marginal tax rate on
working is roughly 20 percent for households earning between up to twice the minimum wage and
rises sharply for households earning 3 or more times the minimum wage. Here, the life-cycle stage
of binding borrowing constraints is long past, and the decision to work versus not work at age 65
impacts asset accumulation in prior years as before—working at age 65 implies lower asset
accumulation and, therefore a tax-saving with respect to capital income taxes. The steep increase in
the marginal tax rate on working at age 65 for those earning 3 and 4 times the minimum wage seems
to arise due to sharp increases in federal and state income taxes.
The results of this section point to the important role of prior asset accumulation adjustments,
which consumption-smoothing households would undertake when planning to take time off from
work in future years. The particular manner in which these adjustments occur and interact with
households’ borrowing constraints can sizably influence, on a lifetime basis, marginal tax rates from
working in particular years. It should be noted that ESPlanner does not take into account the
possibility of adjusting prior year’s labor supplies when planning to work/quit work in the future. In

24

general, the decision to work or not in any future year potentially involves dynamic interactions with
asset accumulation, labor supplies, and borrowing constraints in other years and, hence, can affect
marginal work-tax rates in ways that are difficult to model comprehensively.

Sensitivity of Net Fulltime Work Tax Rates to Assumed Discount and Growth Rates
Tables 20 and 21 show how average and marginal net fulltime work tax rates are affected by
assuming higher and lower discount rates and growth rates than those used in the base-case
calculations. As in the base case, we assume that the household’s pre-tax and transfer return to
saving is the same as the discount rate and that transfer bracket levels and basic benefits are indexed
to the growth rate of real wages.
With the exception of the average and marginal net tax rates for low-wage households, the
results are very robust to the alternative discount and growth assumptions. For example, the average
and marginal net fulltime work tax rates for a household earning five times the minimum wage are
37.6 percent and 54.2 percent, respectively. Using a 3 (7) percent, rather than a 5 percent discount
rate, lowers (raises) the average net tax rate to 34.7 (38.5) percent. And it lowers (raises) the
marginal net tax rate to 51.3 (55.8) percent. Assuming a zero (2 percent) rather than a 1 percent
growth rate of real wages lowers (raises) the average net tax rate of this household to 37.0 (38.1)
percent. It lowers (raises) the marginal net tax rate to 53.8 (54.8) percent.
For minimum wage households, the -32.2 percent base-case average net tax rises to -47.4
percent when a 3 percent discount rate is used. With a 7 percent discount rate, the net tax rises to
-29.2 percent. Lowering the wage growth rate to zero rate raises the net tax rate just slightly to -30.7
percent, whereas raising wage growth to 2 percent lowers the net tax rate to -39.0 percent. In the

25

case of marginal net tax rates, lowering (raising) the discount rate faced by the minimum wage
household to 3 (7) percent reduces (raises) the marginal net tax rate from 50.8 percent to 36.0 (57.4)
percent. And lowering (raising) the growth rate to 0 (2) percent, raises (lowers) the marginal net tax
rate to 53.4 (44.2).
The effects of the discount rate changes on the average net-work tax rates of low-wage
households are not surprising given that a larger share of lifetime spending of low-wage households
consists of non fungible welfare payments, much of which arrive late in life. The negative
correlation at the low end of the wage distribution between average the net-work tax rate and the
growth rate reflects the fact that benefit growth, which we assume is pegged to the growth rate,
continues after retirement. Hence, higher growth raises lifetime benefits relative to lifetime earnings
or spending. At the upper end of the earnings distribution, higher growth rates spell higher net tax
rates. The explanation for this correlation is that the federal income tax is not indexed to wages, so
higher real wage growth leads to real bracket creep.

The Impact of Policy Changes on Net Fulltime Work Tax Rates
Our final tables, Tables 22 and 23, consider how average and marginal fulltime net-work tax
rates would change in response to the following four policies: 1) a 5 percentage point cut in the
payroll tax rate, 2) the elimination of the Social Security earnings ceiling, 3) raising the Social
Security payroll tax rate by 5 percentage points, 4) replacing federal personal and corporate income
taxes with a 25 percent consumption tax levied on final sales, and 5) Cutting Social Security benefits
immediately and permanently by 25 percent.

26

Cutting the Payroll Tax Rate by 5 Percentage Points
Cutting the OASDI payroll tax rate is a key feature of current policy proposals for privatizing
Social Security. A 5-percentage point cut in the rate appears to be at the outer limit of what might
ultimately be adopted. A comparison of the base-case results presented in column three of Table 22
with the results for this policy experiment shown in column four indicate that a payroll tax of this
magnitude would be highly progressive. Because of the ceiling on Social Security taxable earnings,
the policy makes little difference to the net tax rates facing the rich, but it does lower the average net
tax rates of middle- and low-income households. Take, for example, households earning three times
the minimum wage, with initial (age 22) income of $64,300. Their average net tax rate is 29.9
percent in the base case and 26.3 percent under the policy reform. And their marginal net tax rate
falls from 57.6 percent to 54.6 percent.

Eliminating Social Security’s Earnings Ceiling
This is another progressive policy. It makes no difference to the average or marginal net
taxes of low-wage households, but it raises those of the rich. However the increase in tax rates,
especially marginal tax rates, for high-income households is surprisingly small. For example,
households earning 15 times the minimum wage or more face average and marginal net tax rates that
are higher by only between 2 to 3 percentage points.
There are two reasons for the smaller-than-expected increases in high-income-households’
tax rates. First, although higher lifetime payroll taxes directly imply smaller lifetime resources and,
therefore, lower sustainable consumption levels, the indirect effects on other taxes dampen the
reduction in these households’ present value of spending. Lower anticipated consumption induces

27

them to save less through retirement, reducing their lifetime federal and state income taxes and
corporate tax payments. Second, eliminating the taxable earnings ceiling means that wage histories
used in calculating Social Security benefits now include full wages rather than earnings-ceilinglimited wages. This implies higher Social Security benefits and further dampens the reduction in
their present value of spending. These indirect effects prevent the present value of spending from
falling by the full increase in lifetime payroll taxes. Hence, average and marginal tax rates facing
high-income households do not rise by as much as one might expect.

Raising Payroll Taxes
While some policymakers wish to cut payroll taxes in the context of privatizing Social
Security, others favor securing the system’s future by raising payroll tax rates. However, Tables 22
and 23 indicate that doing so in the context of a fixed ceiling on Social Security taxable earnings
would be highly regressive. The tables consider a 5-percentage point increase in the tax rate. While
the policy has a small impact on top earning households, those earning at or just above the minimum
wage would bear much higher net tax rates. For a household earning 3 times the minimum wage
household, the average net tax rate rises from 29.9 percent to 33.4 percent and their marginal net tax
rate rising from 57.6 percent to 60.4 percent.

Switching from Federal Income to Consumption Taxes
The next policy we consider is replacing federal personal and corporate income taxes with a
25 percent retail consumption tax. A 25 percent tax rate appears to be in the neighborhood of what
would be needed to maintain revenue neutrality. In considering the regressivity of these results it is

28

important to bear in mind that we are focusing here on households with no initial wealth. Were we
to assume that the rich had significant inheritances, the consumption tax would look much more
progressive because it taxes consumption spending no matter how financed.
Given that caveat, it’s clear that consumption taxation would raise average tax burdens on
the poor and middle class and dramatically lower them for the rich. Households earning twice the
minimum wage would find their average net tax rate rising by 4.1 percentage points. In contrast,
those earning 10 times the minimum wage would experience an 11.8-percentage point cut in their
average tax rate. Minimum wage workers would see their marginal net work tax rates rise from 50.8
percent to 64.1 percent, whereas those earning 10 times the minimum wage would find that their
marginal net tax rate on working had declined from 53.9 percent to 42.1 percent.

An Immediate and Permanent Cut In Social Security Benefits by 25 Percent
Under current tax and benefit rules, one estimate places the U.S. Social Security System’s
present value actuarial imbalance at more than $8 trillion.7 One way to redress this imbalance is via
a benefit cut. According to Social Security’s actuaries, the required magnitude of an immediate and
permanent Social Security benefit cut would be 25 percent. Our fifth policy explores the
implications of this policy on average and marginal net tax rates. Although a 25 percent benefit cut
sounds like a large cut on its own, it makes a relatively minor dent in the lifetime spending of the
young and middle-aged because it becomes effective several decades in the future. In addition, for
relatively low income households---those earning up to 3 times the minimum wage—reduced Social
Security benefits trigger higher Medicaid benefits. As a result, such households experience very

7 Gokhale and Kotlikoff (2002).

29

small increases in their average and marginal net tax rates. Households with earnings between 6 and
8 times minimum wage would bear the largest increases in average and marginal net tax rates from
this policy. But even for these households, the average and marginal tax-rate changes—about 1
percentage point for both—is much smaller than those arising from some of the other policies
considered in Tables 22 and 23.

X. Summary and Conclusion

The U.S. fiscal system is not your father’s Oldsmobile. Thanks to the growth of a variety of
interrelated social welfare program, it’s vastly more complicated than it was in the middle of the last
century. Understanding how this complexity impacts households requires an intertemporal
framework because what one pays in taxes or receives in benefits in one year may depend more on
what happens in other years than in the year in question.
In using ESPlanner, a life-cycle consumption smoothing model, to understand lifetime
average and marginal net tax burdens, we have included in fine detail every major tax and transfer
program affecting American households. What emerges is a picture of a fiscal system that is highly
progressive with respect to the average burdens facing very low-wage households. However, the
system’s generosity toward the poor extends only to those who are very poor. Low-income and
lower middle-income households face significant net tax burdens primarily because the earnings and
asset tests of our welfare programs limit their availability to all but the poorest members of society.
Another key feature of our fiscal system is it’s roughly 50 percent average net tax rates imposed on
the earnings of upper-income and high-income households.
While very poor Americans receive subsidies, on net and on average, they nonetheless face

30

very high marginal net taxes on working. Minimum wage workers lose 51 cents on every dollar
they earn in net taxes when they decide to work full time. Low wage-workers face even higher
marginal net work tax rates, indeed, as high as 70 percent.

At the top end of the earnings

distribution marginal net tax rates are roughly 53 percent.
Another key finding is that low-wage workers face confiscatory taxes in deciding to switch
from working halftime to full time. So do non-working low wage spouses whose partners work full
time. Except for the net tax rates of the poor, average and marginal net tax rates are fairly robust to
different discount rate and growth rate assumptions. In contrast, making different assumptions about
future fiscal policy can greatly alter both average and marginal net tax rates at all wage levels. In
particular, we find that raising payroll taxes or switching to consumption taxation would be highly
regressive, while cutting payroll taxes would be quite progressive.8 Finally, we find that working
when young can be much more costly from a tax perspective than working when old, especially for
workers at the lower end of the wage distribution.
Our work on effective average and marginal net taxes remains at an early stage. We plan to
replace our stylized households with actual households surveyed in the Panel Study of Income
Dynamics. We also plan in that more realistic study to incorporate the tax benefits of participating
in tax-favored retirement saving plans. As shown in Kotlikoff and Gokhale (2003), including such
benefits will show the U.S. tax system to be somewhat less progressive than indicated here.

8 This statement and our study ignore the wealth-tax aspect of consumption taxation.

31

References

Altig, David, Alan Auerbach, Kent Smetters, and Jan Walliser, “Simulating Fundamental Tax
Reform in the U.S.”, forthcoming The American Economic Review, 2001.
Boskin, Michael J., Laurence J. Kotlikoff, Douglas J. Puffert, and John B. Shoven, “Social Security:
A Financial Appraisal Across and Within Generations,” National Tax Journal, vol. 40, no.1, March
1987, 19-34.
Bradford, David F., ed., Distributional Analysis of Tax Policy, Washington, D.C.: AEI Press, 1995.
Browning, Edgar K., “Tax Incidence Analysis for Policy Makers,” in Distributional Analysis of Tax
Policy, David Bradford, ed., Washington, D.C.: The AEI Press, 1995.
Caldwell, Steven B., Melissa Favreault, Alla Gantman, Jagadeesh Gokhale, Thomas Johnson, and
Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “Social Security’s Treatment of Postwar Americans,” in Tax Policy and the
Economy, James Poterba, ed., 13, 1999, 109-48.
Fullerton, Don and Diane Lim Rogers, “Distribution Effects on a Lifetime Basis,” in Bradford,
David F., ed., Distributional Analysis of Tax Policy, Washington, D.C.: AEI Press, 1995, 262-94.
Fullerton, Don and Diane Lim Rogers, Who Bears the Lifetime Tax Burden?, Washington, D.C.:
The Brookings Institution, 1993.
Gokhale, Jagadeesh and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “Social Security’s Treatment of Postwar Americans:
How Bad Can It Get?” in Martin Feldstein and Jeffrey Liebman ed. The Distributional Aspects of
Social Security and Social Security Reform, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2002, 207-62.
Gokhale, Jagadeesh and Laurence J. Kotlikoff, “Who Gets Paid to Save,” forthcoming in James
Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003.
Hubbard, Glenn R., Jonathan Skinner, and Stephen P. Zeldes, “Precautionary Saving and Social
Insurance,” Journal of Political Economy, 103, 2, April 1995, 360-99.
Hurd, Michael D. and John B. Shoven, “The Distributional Impact of Social Security,” in Pensions,
Labor, and Individual Choice, David Wise, ed., Chicago, Ill.: University of Chicago Press, 1985.
Myers, Robert J. and Bruce D. Schobel, “An Updated Money’s-Worth Analysis of Social Security’s
Retirement Benefits,” Transactions, Society of Actuaries, no. 44, 1993, 247-75.
Pechman, Joseph, “Who Paid the Taxes, 1966-1985,” Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution,
1985.
___________, “The Future of the Income Tax,” American Economic Review, March 1990, pp. 1-20.
32

Poterba, James, “Lifetime Incidence and the Distributional Burden of Excise Taxes,” American
Economic Review, May 1989, 325-330.

33

Appendix
Modeling Taxes and Transfers

This appendix is divided into three sections. Section I discusses our calculation of federal income,
payroll, and state income taxes. Section II discusses our calculation of Social Security benefits.
And Section III discusses out calculation of non-Social Security benefits.
I. The Calculation of Taxes
The Federal Income Tax

Esplanner’s calculations of federal income taxes in each future year assumes that the household ‘s
filing status is “married and filing jointly” for married households and “single” for single
households. “Single” is assumed when spouses of married households are by themselves—as is the
case when one spouse outlives the other at the end of the planning horizon or when calculating the
financial plan for one of the spouses as a part of a surviving household. All federal income tax
calculations are based on the new 2001 tax law, which we assume is not phased out at the end of the
decade, but, rather is maintained after 2010 with its 2010 provisions.
All tax calculations are made based on nominal income levels by converting real pre-tax income
amounts to their nominal counterparts based on the assumed rate of inflation. Thus, if the user
inputs a 3 percent inflation rate, all nominal amounts in the user’s federal income tax calculation
(such as nominal bracket amounts and nominal exemption amounts) are multiplied by 1.03 percent
for purposes of calculating 2002 taxes, by 1.03 times 1.03 for purposes of calculating 2003 taxes,
and so on. The federal income tax schedule is applied to the program’s calculation of federal taxable
income. Federal taxable income equals federal Adjusted Gross Income (AGI) less personal
exemptions and less the standard deduction of the sum of itemized deductions, whichever is larger.
The AGI for each year includes projected incomes in current dollars from several sources. These are:
labor income (wages and salaries), self-employment income, asset income projected by the program
based on user inputs of initial non-tax-favored net worth and rates of return, and on the optimal
spending plan computed by the program. AGI also includes taxable asset income, taxable social
security benefits, taxable special receipts, taxable distributions from defined benefit pension plans
and taxable withdrawals from tax-favored saving plans. Each of these items is based upon the user’s
inputs and preferences. Non-taxable special receipts and withdrawals from Roth IRA accounts are
not included in AGI. Deductible contributions to retirement accounts are subtracted from income in
calculating each year’s AGI. Employer contributions to retirement accounts are not included in
AGI. However, withdrawals from these accounts are included.
The Indexation of the Tax Schedule
Tax-rate brackets and infra-marginal tax amounts (all of the dollar amounts listed in the tax
schedules) are adjusted for inflation in each year over the household’s lifetime. This is done to
ensure that the schedule keeps pace with the growth of income in current dollars. The indexation is

34

done using the user-specified rate of inflation. The thresholds for taxing Social Security benefits are
not indexed for inflation in accordance with current policy.
Standard Deductions and Exemptions
Standard deductions and exemptions are also indexed for inflation for each future year based on the
user-specified future rate of inflation. The number of personal exemptions allowed equals 2 plus the
number of children for “married and filing jointly” and 1 plus the number of children for the “single”
filing statuses.

The personal exemption amount that can be deducted from AGI in calculating taxable income is
phased out if AGI is above certain dollar limits depending upon the filing status. ESPlanner takes
into account the phase-out of personal exemptions based on these dollar limits indexed for inflation.
The year-by-year phase-in of changes in the phase-out provisions enacted in the 2001 tax reform are
included in ESPlanner’s tax calculating code.
The Decision to Itemize
ESPlanner takes the maximum of the standard deduction or sum of itemized deductions, where the
latter includes mortgage interest payments, property taxes, state and local income tax payments, and
tax-deductible special deductible expenditures that the user specifies, such as charitable
contributions. Note that state and local income tax payments are deductible only if they are being
withheld from pay or the user makes estimated tax payments during the tax year. ESPlanner assumes
withholding or pre-payment.
The Phase-Out of Itemized Deductions
As modified in the 2001 tax reform, federal income tax rules phase out itemized deductions for highincome taxpayers (both, married filing jointly and single payers). The reduction does not apply to
certain components of the itemized deductions claimed—such as medical care expenses, investment
interest, and casualty and theft losses. Because ESPlanner does not distinguish between these and
other sources of itemized deductions, the phase-out rules are applied to all itemized deductions.
The Child-Tax Credit
The child-tax credit depends on the number of qualifying children in the household. The tax credit
is phased out if AGI is over a threshold, the value of which depends on marital status. The phase-out
rate is $50 for each $1000 of income in excess of the applicable threshold. The amount of the childtax credit equals the smaller of a) the computed amount or b) the federal income tax liability net of
the earned income tax credit. If the earned income tax credit exceeds the federal income tax
liability, the child-tax credit is applied against payroll taxes.
The Earned Income Tax Credit
The program’s calculation of the earned income tax credit (EITC) adheres to the EITC worksheet in
federal Form 1040. ESPlanner first checks for eligibility to receive the EITC based on a) investment
income, b) taxable earned income, c) non-taxable earned income (e.g., employer 401(k)
contributions), d) earned income thresholds for households with no qualifying children, and earned
income thresholds for households with at least one qualifying child. Next, the EITC is computed

35

based on the EITC schedule for taxable and nontaxable income and the household’s level of adjusted
gross income (AGI).
The Taxation of Social Security Benefits
Social Security benefits are included in the federal income-tax base in the following manner. If the
sum of AGI and 50 percent of Social Security benefits falls short of a lower threshold, which is
marital-status specific, then none of the benefits are taxable. If the sum exceeds the applicable dollar
threshold, but the excess is less than a martial-status specific sum, the smaller of one-half of the
excess or 50 percent of the benefit is taxable and is included in the federal income tax base. In
addition, if the aforementioned excess is greater than the second dollar threshold, 85 percent of this
excess or 85 percent of the benefit, whichever is smaller, is also added to the federal income tax
base.
The Low Income Tax Credit for Retirement Account Contributions
This non-refundable tax credit was introduced in the 2001 tax law. The credit reimburses X percent
of the individual’s first $2,000 in contributions to retirement accounts. The value of X for
households with very low incomes is 50 percent, but quickly phases out to zero at higher income
levels.
Payroll Taxes

For purposes of this study, ESPlanner’s payroll tax calculator is modified to incorporate employerpaid payroll taxes. In each year, the payroll tax for a married household is the sum of the two
spouses’ payroll taxes. Each spouse’s tax equals the employee plus employer 12.4 percent OASDI
tax rate applied to labor earnings up to the taxable maximum level plus the employee plus employer
2.9 percent HI tax rate applied to all labor earnings.
Massachusetts State Income Taxes

Massachusetts taxes labor and interest and dividend income at a 5.95% rate.9 The tax base includes
earnings from wages and salaries, self-employment income, pension income, and distributions from
tax-favored saving accounts, and other taxable receipts such as alimony. Federally taxable Social
Security benefits are not included. A rental deduction, available to both single and joint filers, is
allowed up to 50 percent of rent paid on one’s principal residence or $2,500, whichever is smaller.
A single $1,200 deduction is allowed for dependent children under the age of 12. Capital gains are
taxed at a lower rate, but this feature of the Massachusetts tax code is not explicitly modeled.

9 We ignore scheduled future reductions in Massachusetts income tax rates from 5.95 percent to 5.0 percent. Given
the current fiscal crisis in Massachusetts, this tax cut is likely to be repealed.

36

II. The Calculation of Social Security Benefits
Social Security Retirement Benefits
Eligibility
Before ESPlanner provides household heads and spouses Social Security retirement benefits, it
checks that they are fully insured. Individuals must be fully insured to receive retirement benefits
based on their earnings records. Becoming fully insured requires sufficient contributions at a job
(including self-employment) covered by Social Security. For those born after 1929, acquiring 40
credits prior to retirement suffices for fully insured status. Earnings between 1937 and 1951 are
aggregated and divided by $400, and the result (rounded down to an integer number) are the pre1952 credits which are added to the credits earned after 1950 in determining insured status. After
1951, workers earn one credit for each quarter of the year they work in Social Security-covered
employment and earn above a specified minimum amount. The year of first eligibility for retirement
benefits is the year in which the individual becomes age 62. The individual is entitled to retirement
benefits after an application for benefits is submitted, but never before age 62.
Determination of Primary Insurance Amount (PIA)
The PIA is the basis for all benefit payments made on a worker’s earnings record. There are several
steps in computing the PIA. Base years are computed as the years after 1950 up to the first month of
entitlement to retirement benefits begins. For survivor benefits, base years include the year of the
worker's death.
Elapsed Years
Elapsed years are computed as those years after 1950 (or after attainment of age 21, whichever
occurs later) up to (but not including) the year of first eligibility. The maximum number of elapsed
years for an earnings record is 40 (it could be shorter, for purposes of calculating survivor benefits if
the person dies prior to age 62).
Computation Years
Computation years are calculated as the number of elapsed years less five or 2, whichever is the
greater. Earnings in base years (up to the maximum taxable limit in each year, and through age 60
or two years prior to death, whichever occurs earlier) are wage-indexed according to economy-wide
average wages. Of these, the highest earnings in years equaling the number of computation years are
added together and the sum is divided by the number of months in computation years to yield
Average Indexed Monthly Earnings (AIME).
Bend Points
The AIME is converted into a PIA using a formula with bend points. The bend point formula is
specified as 90 percent of the first X dollars of AIME plus 32 percent of the next Y dollars of AIME
plus 15 percent of the AIME in excess of Y dollars. The dollar amounts X and Y are also wage
indexed and are different for different eligibility years. The dollar amounts pertaining to the year of
attaining age 60 (or, for survivor benefits, the second year before death, whichever is earlier) are
applied in computing the PIA.

37

Benefits
A person who begins to collect benefits at his or her "normal retirement age" (currently age 65)
receives the PIA as the monthly retirement benefit. In subsequent years, the monthly benefit is
adjusted according to the Consumer Price Index (CPI) to maintain its purchasing power.
Increases in Normal Retirement Ages
After 2003 normal retirement ages are scheduled to increase by 2 months for every year that a
person’s 65th birthday occurs later than the year 2003. This progressive increase in the normal
retirement age for those born later ceases between the years 2008 through 2020; those attaining age
65 in these years have a normal retirement age of 66. The postponement in retirement ages resumes
after 2020 such that those born after 2025 have a normal retirement age of 67. All cohorts attaining
age 65 after that year have a normal retirement age of 67.
Reductions for Age
A person who begins to collect retirement benefits earlier than the normal retirement age receives a
reduction for age. The reduction factor is 5/9 of 1 percent for each month of entitlement prior to the
normal retirement age. The reduced benefit payment (except for the inflation adjustment) continues
even after the person reaches or surpasses the normal retirement age. If the number of months of
reduction exceeds 36 months (for example, in case of entitlement at age 62 when the normal
retirement age is 67), then the reduction factor is 5/12 of 1 percent for every additional month of
early entitlement.
Delayed Retirement Credits
Those who begin to collect benefits after their normal retirement age (up to age 70) receive delayed
retirement credits. The amount of the delayed retirement credit for each month of delayed
entitlement depends on the year in which a person attains normal retirement age. For example, those
attaining age 65 in 1997 receive an additional 5 percent in monthly benefits for each year of delay in
entitlement. However, those attaining age 65 in the year 2008 will receive an additional 8 percent in
benefits for each year of delayed entitlement.
Earnings Test
If a person continues to work and earn after the month of entitlement and the person is under age 65,
benefits are reduced because of an earnings test. Beneficiaries lose $1 for each $2 earned above an
earnings limit. The earnings limits are scheduled to grow with average wages in subsequent years.
All benefits payable on a worker’s earnings record, including the worker’s own retirement benefits
and spousal and child dependent benefits, are proportionally reduced by the testing of the worker’s
earnings.
Recomputation of Benefits
Earnings in any year after entitlement to benefits are automatically taken into account in a
recomputation of the PIA for determining the subsequent year's benefit amount. However, these
earnings are not indexed before they are included in the AIME calculation. If such earnings are
higher than some prior year's earnings (indexed earnings through age 60 or unindexed earnings after

38

age 60), they result in an increase in the PIA and benefit payable. If they are lower than all previous
year's earnings, they will not lower the PIA or benefits since only the highest earnings in base years
are included in the calculations.
Spousal and Child Dependent Benefits
Eligibility
Wives and husbands of insured workers (including divorced spouses) are entitled to spousal benefits
if the couple was married for at least 10 years at the time of application for spousal benefits, the
spouse is over age 62 or has in care a child under age 16 entitled to benefits under the insured
worker's record, and the insured worker is collecting retirement benefits. Children of insured
workers under age 16 are entitled to child dependent benefits if the child is unmarried and the
worker is collecting retirement benefits.
Benefits
Spousal and child benefits equal 50 percent of the insured worker's PIA (each). Child dependent
benefits may be lower only if the family maximum applies. Spousal benefits may be lower due to the
family maximum, a reduction for age, the application of the earnings test, or the spouse’s receipt of
retirement benefits based or her or his own earnings record.
Family Maximum
All benefits paid under a worker's record (except retirement benefits or divorced spousal benefits)
are reduced proportionately to bring them within the family maximum benefit level. The maximum
benefits payable on a worker's earnings record is determined by applying a bend point formula to the
PIA similar to that applied to the AIME in calculating the PIA. For example, the family maximum
equals 150 percent of the first $X of PIA plus 272 percent of the next $Y of the PIA plus 134 percent
of the next $Z of the PIA plus 175 percent of the PIA greater than $X+$Y+$Z. The values X, Y, and
Z are adjusted for each year of the calculation according to the growth in economy-wide average
wages. In case the spousal benefit is eliminated for any reason, the benefits payable on the insured
worker's record are subjected to the family maximum test again, treating the spouse as though
he/she were not eligible for spousal benefits. This may result in higher benefits for children who may
be eligible for dependent benefits under the worker's record.
Reduction of Spousal Benefits for Age
Spouses eligible for the spousal benefit may elect to receive (may become entitled for) their benefits
before normal retirement age. In this case the spousal benefit is reduced by 25/36 of 1 percent for
each month of entitlement prior to normal retirement age. If the number of months of reduction
exceeds 36 months (for example, in case of entitlement at age 62 when the normal retirement age is
67), then the reduction factor is 5/12 of 1 percent for every additional month of early entitlement.
Earnings Testing of Spousal Benefits
If a spouse is earning above the amount allowed by the earnings test, the spousal benefits he or she is
eligible to receive will be earnings tested according to the pre- and post-normal retirement schedule

39

described above.
Redefinition of Spousal Benefits
If a spouse is already collecting retirement benefits, the spousal benefit is redefined as the greater of
the excess of the spousal benefit over the spouse's own retirement benefit or zero.
Survivor Benefits (Widow(er), Father/Mother, and Children)
Eligibility
The surviving spouse of a deceased worker is eligible for widow(er) benefits if the widow(er) is at
least age 60, is entitled (has applied for widow[er] benefits), the worker died fully insured, and the
widow(er) was married to the deceased worker for at least 9 months. The widow(er) of a deceased
worker is eligible for father/mother benefits if the widow(er) is entitled to benefits (has applied), the
worker died fully insured, the widower has in care a child of the worker. A surviving child is eligible
for child survivor benefits on the deceased worker's record if the child is under age 18 and is entitled
(an application has been filed) and the worker was fully insured.
Survivor Benefits
Monthly benefits equal 100 percent of the worker's PIA for a widow(er); they equal 75 percent of the
PIA for father/mother and child survivor benefits. Widow(er) and child survivor benefits may be
lower only if the family maximum applies. Widow(er)s may become entitled to (elect to receive)
survivor benefits earlier than normal retirement age, but not earlier than age 60. In this case the
reduction is 19/40 of 1 percent for each month of entitlement prior to normal retirement age. After
the widow(er) is 62, he or she is may become entitled to (elect to receive) retirement benefits based
on her own past covered earnings record. In this case the widow(er) benefits are redefined as the
excess over own retirement benefit or zero, whichever is greater. Finally, widow(er) survivor and
own retirement benefits are also subject to the earnings test. If the deceased worker was already
collecting a reduced retirement insurance benefit, the widow(er)'s benefit cannot be greater than the
reduced widow(er) benefit or the greater of 82.5 percent of the worker's PIA or the worker's own
retirement benefit. If the deceased worker was already collecting a retirement insurance benefit
greater than the PIA because of delayed retirement, the widow(er) or is granted the full dollar
amount of the delayed retirement credit over and above the (reduced) widow(er) benefit.
Father/mother benefits are not similarly augmented by delayed retirement credits that the deceased
worker may have been receiving.
Father/Mother Benefits
These benefits may be reduced if the family maximum applies or if the father or mother is entitled to
the own retirement benefit. In this case the father/mother benefit is redefined as the excess over the
father or mother’s own retirement benefit or zero, whichever is greater. Father /mother benefits are
also subject to the earnings test. On the other hand, they are not reduced for age. For those eligible to
receive both widow(er) and father/mother benefits, the program calculates both and takes the larger
benefit.

40

Calculation of a Deceased Worker's PIA
The calculation of survivor benefits in the case of a widow(er) benefits uses the larger of two
alternative calculation’s of the deceased worker's PIA. These are the "wage indexing" method and
the "re-indexing" method. Moreover, the year up to which the worker's wages are indexed may be
different depending upon whether the deceased worker would have become age 62 before or after
the widow(er) attains age 60.
The Wage-Indexing Method
The last year for indexing earnings is the earlier of a) the year the worker dies minus 2 years or b)
the year worker would have attained age 60. Bend point formula dollar amounts are taken from the
earlier of the year the worker dies or the year the worker would have attained age 62. The PIA thus
calculated is inflated by the CPI up to the year the widow(er) turns age 60 (if later) to obtain the PIA
value on which widower benefits would be based. Where applicable, these benefits are then adjusted
for the family maximum, reduction for age, delayed retirement credits, and the earnings test.
The Re-indexing Method
The worker's original earnings are indexed up to the earlier of the year the widow(er) attains age 58
or b) the year the worker attains age 60. The elapsed years are computed as the number of years from
1951 (or the worker's age 22 if later) through the year the widow(er) attains age 60. The computation
years equal elapsed years minus 5 years (computation years cannot be less than 2). Bend point
formula dollar values are applied from the year the widow(er) attains age 60. There is no subsequent
indexing of the PIA for inflation.
The Sequencing of Widow(er) Benefit Calculations
Widow(er) benefit reductions proceed in a particular sequence: First the widow(er) plus children's
benefits are subjected to the family maximum. Second, the widow(er) benefit is reduced for early
entitlement (of the widow(er) prior to normal retirement age). Third, the widow(er) benefit is
compared to the widow(er) own retirement benefit if entitled to the latter. Fourth, the widow(er)
benefit is redefined as the excess over own benefit if own benefit is positive. Finally the earning's
test is applied, first to the widow(er)'s own benefit and then to the widow(er) benefit that is in excess
of own benefit. If the widow(er) benefit is eliminated as a result of these tests, the benefits payable
on the insured worker's record are subjected to the family maximum test again, treating the
widow(er) as though he/she were not eligible for the widow(er) benefit. This procedure can
potentially increase children's benefits if the family maximum limit was binding the first time
through.
III. The Calculation of Non-Social Security Benefits

The calculation of non Social Security benefits occurs in two stages. First, fungible (cash) benefits
are calculated within ESPlanner taking into account each fungible benefit programs’ asset and
income tests and eligibility restrictions. Second, the household’s non-fungible benefits in each year
are calculated based on the household’s asset accumulation and income path as determined by
ESPlanner. While non-fungible benefits are not incorporated in ESPlanner’s consumption
41

smoothing optimization, they are included in the calculation of average and marginal net tax rates.
Specifically, in the formulae for those tax rates specified above, the non-fungible benefits in a
particular year are treated as additional spending in that year for purposes of determining the
expected present values of spending when the fiscal system is assumed to be operational.
The first stage calculations involve dynamic programming in which fungible benefit levels are
determined in each year for each possible level of household assets and income in that year. This
first stage also includes the calculation of federal income, state income, and payroll taxes.
The fungible benefits incorporated in ESPlanner’s consumption smoothing are:
-

Social Security Retirement, Spousal, Survivor, Mother, Father, Child, and Divorcee Benefits
Transitional Assistance to Families with Dependent Children (TAFDC)
Supplementary Security Income (SSI)
Housing Assistance Programs
Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP)

The non-fungible benefits calculated in the second stage and treated as additional spending are:
-

Food Stamps (FS)
Special Supplemental Nutrition Program For Women, Infants And Children (WIC)
Medicaid
Medicare

Family Composition and Benefit Eligibility
In computing how much fungible and non-fungible benefits are available to particular households in
a particular year, we take into account how eligibility for particular benefits within each program
depends on the size and composition of the family. For example, in a year when a couple has two
children at home with them, eligibility is defined based on the income standards for a family of four;
but when the children have left the household upon reaching age 19, it’s defined based on the
income standards for a family of two.
Asset Tests
We include asset tests for each type of benefit that stipulates such a test. The following table
indicates asset limits for program eligibility.
Program
TAFDC
SSI
Medicaid
QMB/SLMB
Food Stamps

Asset Test Limits
$2,500 for a family
$2,000 for a single; $3,000 for a couple
no asset test under 65; over 65 same as SSI
$4,000 for a single; $6,000 for a couple
$2,000 for a family with members under 60 / $3,000 for a family with members over 60

42

Pre-paid funeral arrangements, up to a certain limit, are usually treated as non-countable assets. In
implementing our asset tests, we assume that the first $3,000 in assets held by a couple is exempt
from the asset test and treated a funeral arrangement.
We consider two different ways to implement asset tests. The first assumes that if assets at the
beginning of the year exceed a particular program’s eligibility standard the family looses eligibility
for benefits from that program for the entire year. The second calculates, for each program, the
amount of assets in excess of that program’s asset limit and reduces that program’s benefits by the
amount of excess benefits, with the maximum reduction being the entire benefit.
Growth in Benefits Over Time
In our explanation of the benefits calculation below, we omit a description of our adjustment of real
benefit levels in light of growth over time in economy-wide living standards. But we do make such
an adjustment. Specifically, we assume that all benefit amounts, brackets, premiums, and deductions
grow in real terms at the assumed rate of labor productivity. In our base case, this rate is 1 percent.
Adjusting for the Probability of Benefit Receipt
In our analysis we incorporate the probability of benefit receipt in the case of benefits triggered by
illness (e.g., Medicare and Medicaid benefits) or that come from the rationing of program
participation (e.g., Housing Assistance, the Low Income Housing Energy Assistance Program
(LIHEAP), and the Special Supplemental Nutrition Program For Women, Infants And Children
(WIC)). For both types of programs, we first determine the average benefit (net of the asset test) per
recipient in a particular program and then multiply by the probability of actually receiving the
benefit in question.

In forming our measures of average benefits received, we assume that our household members apply
for all benefits for which they may potentially be eligible. For example, when we calculate average
Medicaid benefits received by 70-year old males who meet the Medicaid income-eligibility test, we
assume that all such males apply for those benefits. As another example, in the case of Housing
Assistance, we assume that all income-eligible households apply, but that their chance of receiving
the average housing benefit obtained by actual recipients equals the ratio of the number of recipient
households to the number of applicant households.
Modeling Specific Benefit Programs

Each program has eligibility rules and benefit formulae that deal with special cases. We consider
the rules and benefit formulae that apply to the standard cases. We describe below the eligibility
rules and benefit formulae for each of the transfer programs.
Transitional Aid to Families with Dependent Children -- TAFDC
Transitional Aid to Families with Dependent Children (TAFDC) is a cash assistance program
designed to assist needy families with dependent child or pregnant women. TAFDC is the formal
name in Massachusetts of the program formerly known as AFDC (Aid to Families with Dependent
Children). Most states have adopted the name Temporary Assistance to Needy Families (TANF).

43

The terms “transitional” and “temporary” reflect the new objective of the programs, namely to
provide short-term assistance to needy families and to encourage such families to return to the labor
force. Under the current rules of the TAFDC, eligible household may generally receive assistance
for no more than 24 months within any 5-year period.
There are several steps in defining eligibility for benefits. The calculations needed to determine
eligibility, both non financial and financial, and benefit levels can be complicated even for the
standard cases we consider.
Non-Financial Eligibility requires that the child must be deprived of the care or support of at least
one parent. Deprivation factors include: death, continued absence, physical or mental incapacity,
unemployment or underemployment of (a) parent(s). A dependent child may be under age 19 or, if a
fulltime school student, age 19. We assume that our family units meet these program-specific
requirements.
To
meet
Eligibility Standard (185% Need Standard / Payment
requirements
for Household
Size
of the Need Standard)
Standard
Financial Eligibility
2
876
474
a household must
3
1,045
565
pass two income
4
1,204
651
tests. First, family
unit gross income cannot exceed 185 percent of the Need Standard that applies given family size.
Second, gross income minus certain applicable deductions cannot exceed the Need Standard itself.
Standard monthly deductions include
- a $90 deduction for each employed family member.
- an extra $30 plus one-half of gross income above $120 deduction for the employed TAFDC
benefit recipients or applicants who received benefits in the previous 4 months.
- dependent-care deductions that range between $50 to $200 for a child under two and $44-$175
for a child 2 or over, depending on the hours worked by a recipient.
We applied the $90 deduction per working individual for all 12 months of each year of eligibility
and the maximum deduction levels for childcare for children between ages 1 and 5. However, we
did not implement the extra deduction to avoid complications in our dynamic programming
algorithm.
If the family unit passes both income tests it gets financial assistance defined as the difference
between the maximum payment standard and net income after deductions. In accordance with
standard program restrictions on the length of benefit receipt, we limited the receipt of benefits to no
more than 24 months within any five-year period. Hence, for those of our stylized households who
are eligible for assistance, benefits follow a cyclical pattern: two years on followed by three years
off, provided the asset test criterion is met. Hitting the TAFDC asset test limits, however, would
disqualify household for receiving benefits in one of the years and would result in modification of
TAFDC lifetime benefits pattern in levels and/or in timing. TAFDC regulation in Massachusetts
44

assumes that families receiving benefits may also receive $40 of monthly housing allowance, which
we add on top of the monthly TAFDC benefit.
Sources
1. Aid To Families with Dependent Children (AFDC). Massachusetts Bar Association. Internet:
http://massbar.org/lawhelp/afdc.html
2. Transitional Aid to Families with Dependent Children (TAFDC). Regulations. Department of
Transitional Assistance. Massachusetts. Internet:
http://www.state.ma.us/dta/dtatoday/policy/TAFDC/TAFDCINDEX.HTM
3. Gretchen G. Kirby, et al. Income Support and Social Services for Low-Income People in
Massachusetts. Urban Institute, 1997. Internet:
http://newfederalism.urban.org/html/MAincome1.html
4. Gretchen G. Kirby, et al. Income Support and Social Services for Low-Income People in
Massachusetts. Urban Institute, 1998. Internet:
http://newfederalism.urban.org/html/Highlights/isss_ma.html
5. Key State TANF Policies Affecting Microenterprise. Massachusetts. Center for Law and Social
Policy, 1999. Internet: http://www.clasp.org/pubs/jobseducation/casestud.htm#Mass
Supplementary Security Income (SSI)

Supplementary Security Income is a federal program
that makes monthly payments to people who have
limited income and resources if they are 65 or older or
1
512
641
are disabled. In our study we ignore payments to the
2
769
971
disabled. If individuals meet the program's income
limits, after deductions, they receive monthly benefits. Payments up to the Federal income limits are
received from the federal government, while states provide supplements that are calculated as the
difference between Federal and state income limits. Standard deductions are $20 per month plus the
sum of a) an additional $65 per month if labor income exceeds $65 per month and b) one-half of
wages over $65. In Massachusetts, an SSI-eligible person is automatically enrolled in Medicaid.
Family size

Income limit
(Federal)

Income limit
(Massachussetts)

For every year we first determine age eligibility for each spouse, and then income eligibility for the
household. When both are eligible, their combined benefit equals the difference between the income
limit for a two-person household and the spouses’ combined income after deductions. When only
one spouse is age eligible, the eligible spouse’s benefit is calculated according to the regulations
using either an individual- or couple-income limit depending on the level of the income of the
ineligible spouse. The SSI asset test was implemented as described above.
Sources
1. A Desktop Guide To SSI Eligibility Requirements. Social Security Administration. 2000.
Internet: http://www.ssa.gov/pubs/11001.html;
2. SSI In Massachusetts. Social Security Administration, 2000;

45

3. Code of Federal Regulations. Title 20--Employees' Benefits. CHAPTER III--Social Security
Administration. Part 416--Supplemental Security Income For The Aged, Blind, And
Disabled. Social Security Administration, 1999. Internet:
http://www.ssa.gov/OP_Home/cfr20/416/416-0000.htm
4. 1999 SSI Annual Report. Social Security Administration. Internet:
http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/SSIR/SSI99/ssiTOC.html
Food Stamps
The purpose of the Food Stamp Program is to improve the diet of low-income families by increasing
their food purchasing power. Households must satisfy both state and federal requirements to qualify
for food stamps. There are several steps in determining program eligibility and calculating the value
of the stamp benefits.

First, gross monthly (earned and unearned) income cannot exceed the limits specified in the table
below for households of different sizes. Unearned income includes Social Security and private
pension benefits, SSI benefits, unemployment insurance benefits, and TAFDC payments. In our
study we include SSI and TAFDC payments as part of the income used to calculate the value of food
stamps.
The following monthly deductions apply:
-

$134 per household.
20 percent of gross income.
Dependent day care: under 2 years of age, up to $200 per month; over 2 years of age, up to $175
per month. We apply here the TAFDC program dependent care deduction for every child
between the ages of 1 and 5.
Medical expenses of individuals over 60 years old are deductible beyond the first $35. These
expenses are calculated as the sum of payments for prescription drugs, Medicare premiums,
deductibles, and coinsurance payments.
Excess housing costs, which are defined as housing expenses in excess of half of the household's
income after other deductions. Prior to age 60 there is a maximum level of $300 for deductible
excess housing costs. We included Housing Assistance benefits (see below) as part of gross
monthly income for calculating of Food Stamps benefits.

Net monthly income (monthly income after deductions) cannot exceed the family-size specific limits
given in the table below. The value of the stamps is the maximum monthly allotment less 30 percent
of net income. The 30 percent figure reflects the expectation that recipient households will spend
about 30 percent of their resources on food.

46

Gross Monthly Income Limitation

Household
Size

Under 60 years

1
2
3
4

893
1,199
1,504
1,810

Over 60 years or
disabled
1,133
1,521
1,909
2,297

Monthly Net
Income
Limits

Maximum
monthly
allotment

687

127
234
335
426

922
1,157
1,392

As indicated, calculating the annual value of Food Stamps benefits for Medicare recipients requires
adjusting for Medicare deductibles and co-insurance payments. The co-insurance payments depend
on actual utilization of medical services. Our estimate of Food Stamp benefits is determined by the
weighted average of four possible medical outcomes; the husband and only the husband receives
medical services subject to Medicare co-payments; the wife and only the wife receives medical
services subject to Medicare co-payments; both spouses receive medical services subject to
Medicare co-payments; and neither spouse receives medical services subject to Medicare copayments.
In calculating the Food Stamp benefits for the three cases in which one or both spouses receive
Medicare-covered medical services, we assume that all medical services are occur and are paid for in
a single month that differs for the two spouses.
The weights used in forming the weighted average benefit are determined by the age-specific
probabilities of the husband and wife receiving Medicare benefits in each year.
As explained above, Food Stamp benefits, because they are not fungible, were not included in
ESPlanner’s consumption smoothing which is used to generate each household’s lifetime profile of
tax payments and asset accumulation. However, this asset accumulation profile is used to implement
the Food Stamps asset test. We apply this test by simply reducing benefits from that program by the
value of excess assets in each year.
Sources
1. Food Stamp Program. Regulations. Department of Transitional Assistance.
Massachusetts. Internet:
http://www.state.ma.us/dta/dtatoday/policy/FS/FoodStampINDEX.html
2. Do You Qualify for Food Stamps? Do You Know Someone Who May? “Long Form”
Qualification Test. The Food Stamp Program, 1999. Internet:
http://www.foodusa.org/long2000.html
3. Food Stamps. San Luis Obispo County Department of Social Services, 2000. Internet:
http://www.slodss.org/Food%20Stamps/FSmain.htm
4. 1999 SSI Annual Report. SSA. Internet:
http://www.ssa.gov/OACT/SSIR/SSI99/ssiTOC.html
5. United States Department of Agriculture. Internet: http://www.usda.gov/

47

Special Supplemental Nutrition Program For Women, Infants And Children (WIC)
WIC is a program designed to improve the health of pregnant women, new mothers, and their
infants. WIC targets population groups that have low income and are at risk nutritionally,
specifically:

-

pregnant women through pregnancy and up to 6 weeks after birth or after pregnancy ends
breastfeeding women through their infant's first birthday;
infants through their first birthday.
children up to age 5.

WIC benefits include: supplemental nutrition, nutrition counseling, and screening services. In most
WIC State agencies, WIC participants receive either actual food items or food vouchers to purchase
specific foods to supplement their diets. Different food packages are provided for different
categories of participants.
Although federally funded, WIC is administrated by state agencies and managed by local agencies.
The WIC Program has certain eligibility requirements that are based on income and nutritional risk.
In order to qualify, WIC applicants must show medically verified evidence of health or nutrition
risk. In addition, their family income generally must be below 185 percent of the federal poverty
level (FPL). Certain applicants can be judged income-eligible for WIC based on their participation
in Food Stamps, Medicaid, and AFDC/TANF programs.
WIC does not serve all eligible individuals - participation is limited by the availability of Federal
funding. Usually, program applicants are ranked by need. The program is estimated to serve about
81 percent of women, infant, and child applicants.
The reported 2000 average monthly WIC benefit for actually WIC recipients (be they women,
infants, or children) in Massachusetts is $29. For the nation as a whole, the average monthly WIC
benefit is estimated at $33. In our model for simplicity, when the household is eligible for Food
Stamp benefits, we assume the family also applies for WIC. Pregnant women, infants, and young
children are allocated the average WIC benefit with an 81 percent probability. The annual value of
the $29 multiplied by .81 is $282.
Sources
1. Women, Infants And Children. U. S. Department of Agriculture. 2000. Internet:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/wic/menu/faq/faq.htm
2. WIC Program. Food And Nutrition Service. Program Data. Internet:
http://www.fns.usda.gov/pd/wichome.htm
3. 1998 Green Book. Program Descriptions. Internet:
http://aspe.hhs.gov/98gb/15bother.htm
Food Stamps Deduction for Out-of-Pocket Expenditures on Prescription Drugs
The elderly spend a considerable part of their income on the prescription drugs. Most are covered by

48

one or another form of private or public medical insurance that pays for part or all of prescriptions.
However, about one-third of the Medicare beneficiaries have no insurance-drug coverage from any
source.
The Food Stamp program provides a deduction for the elderly against income based on out-ofpocket health expenses. From the sources listed below, we estimated relative profiles by age of outof-pocket spending on prescription drugs in 1996 for the elderly. We did this separately for those
who were covered by drug insurance and those who were not. We then applied these profiles to the
average estimated 2000 values of out-of-pocket expenditures by different groups of Medicare
beneficiaries to obtain age- and sex-specific average out-of-pocket prescription drug expenditures
for the following two groups: those covered by Medicaid and those having other coverage, including
no coverage. Next we inflated those values to get to 2001 levels. Corresponding monthly amounts
were deducted in determining net income used to calculate food stamp benefits as medical-related
deductions for individuals over 60. Annual values are given in the table below; we extended average
prescription drug expenditures of the group aged 65-70 to the group of 60-64.
Sources
1. “Universal Prescription Drug Benefit Necessary to Ensure Affordable Coverage for All
Medicare Beneficiaries”. HCFA. March 2000. Internet:
http://www.hcfa.gov/childhealth/news/pr2000/pr000306.htm
2. “Out-of-Pocket-Spending on Prescription Drugs by Women and Men Age 65 And Older:
1999 projections”. Prepared by Mary Gilbson and Lisa Foley. AARP. April 2000.
3. “Effects Of Prescription Drug Coverage On Spending And Utilization”. Internet:
http://www.aspe.hhs.gov/health/reports/drugstudy/chap02.htm
4. Testimony of Michael Hash, Deputy Administrator HCFA, on Prescription Drug Coverage
for Medicare Beneficiaries before the House Commerce Committee, Subcommittee on
Health & Environment. September 28, 1999. Internet:
http://www.hcfa.gov/testimony/1999990928.htm
Medicare
Medicare is a federal health insurance program for the aged and disabled (we ignore disability
benefits and focus on the benefits for the aged only). It incorporates two parts: Hospital Insurance
(HI), also known as “Part A”, and Supplementary Medical insurance (SMI), also known as “Part B”.
Hospital Insurance is generally provided automatically to individuals aged 65 and over who are
entitled to Social Security benefits. Part A helps pay for: care in hospitals, skilled nursing facilities,
hospice, and some home health care. Enrolling in SMI is optional; part B helps pay for: doctors,
outpatient hospital care, clinical laboratory tests, durable medical equipment, most supplies, and
some other services not covered by Part A.

Medicare Part A is primarily financed through a mandatory 2.9 percent payroll tax. Part B is
financed in part by participant premium payments of $45.50 per month regardless of benefits
received. In addition, there are specific cost-sharing arrangements. In particular, under Part A in
each benefit period a recipient of benefits pays: $776 for a hospital stay of 1-60 days; an additional
49

$194 per day for days 61-90; an additional $338 per day for days 91-150; and all costs for each day
beyond 150 days.
We assume that at age 65 both husband and wife enroll in both Part A and Part B. It is typical for
individual to enroll in both plans (in 1998, 95% of all the enrollees were enrolled in both Plan A and
Plan B at the same time). We assumed that in each year an individual, if s/he receives benefits, stays
in the hospital less than 60 days and so pays the fixed fee of $776. Under Part B, participants
receiving benefits must first meet an annual $100 deductible and, in most cases, cover 20 percent of
the approved amount after the deductible.
In our calculations, we impute to each age-eligible spouse at a particular age their expected net
Medicare benefits at that age. If a participant is exempt from cost sharing and/or premium
payments, we considered that Medicaid covers those costs, as described in the section below on
Medicare-Medicaid interactions. Any actual out-of-pocket cost sharing and premium payments were
correspondingly deducted from the gross income in calculations of the Food Stamps benefits for
eligible individuals.
Our calculation of average expected Medicare benefits at a given age multiplies the age- and sexspecific probability that participants receive benefits by the average benefit received at that age by
benefit recipients (we applied same probability for the Part A and Part B). According to 1996-1997
data, 76.9 percent of elderly male participants and 84.7 percent of elderly female participants
received Medicare benefits.
As an example, assume that in a particular year, the average amounts of Plan A and Plan B benefits
per recipient at a given age and sex are $3,500 and $2,000. Assume also that the 85 recipients per
100 participants in that age-sex group actually receive benefits in that year. This means that the
average benefit payment per eligible are $2,975 and $1,700, respectively.
With probability 85 percent an eligible individual would receive services on the full amount of
($3,500+$2,000). With the same probability s/he would also pay $776 as a cost sharing under
Part A, plus a fixed $100 deductible and 0.2*($2,000-$100) after-deductible cost sharing under
Part B. S/he would also pay $45.5 per month as a Part B premium payment regardless of whether
s/he received Part B benefits. So, we have:
Expected Part A net benefits:
0.85*[$3,500 - $776] = $2,315.
Expected Part B net benefits:
0.85*[$2,000 - $100 - 0.2*($2,000-$100) ] - [$45.5*12] = $746.
Adding the net benefits from parts A and B yields $3,061, which is only 56 percent of the gross
benefit per recipient or 65 percent of the gross benefit per participant.

50

Reimbursement per Person Enrolled (AGED)
1997 Preliminary Annual Summary
Part A
Part B
Age
Men
Women
Men
Women
65 & over
3062
3024
1674
1565
65, 66
1748
1526
1178
1173
67, 68
1982
1709
1312
1250
69, 70
2301
1987
1451
1376
71, 72
2548
2220
1581
1471
73, 74
2867
2578
1699
1546
65-69
1930
1676
1279
1239
70-74
2638
2328
1607
1488
75-79
3493
3144
1887
1668
80-84
4534
4132
2107
1806
85 & over
5562
5253
2139
1847

Our data on Medicare
benefits for aged in 1997
come from the Health Care
Financial Administration
(HCFA). HCFA provides
average Medicare benefits
under Part A and under Part
B classified by age and sex.
We also found that, in the
aggregate, average benefits
per person enrolled were 26
percent and 5 percent
greater, respectively, under
Plan A and Plan B, in
Massachusetts compared to the national averages, so we incorporated that adjustment for all age
cohorts and both sexes. We converted all 1997 amounts to 2000 dollars using CPI.
Sources
1. Medicare. Health Care Financial Administration. Internet:
http://www.hcfa.gov/medicare/medicare.htm
2. The 2000 Green Book: MEDICARE. Internet: http://aspe.hhs.gov/2000gb/sec2.txt
Medicaid
Medicaid is a joint federal-state program that provides medical care to the poor. In 1996 Medicaid
recipients constituted 14 percent of the US population. Among those aged 0 to 5 and 85 and older,
the coverage rate reached 35 percent. The 1998 Current Population Survey explored health
insurance coverage of low-income, single-family married households with two children. The survey
indicates that over 50 percent of all Medicaid income-eligible infants, children, and adults had no
access to any other form of private or public health insurance. However, not all eligible individuals
apply for Medicaid. Of Medicaid eligibles with no any other type of insurance, only 60 percent of
infants, 40 percent of children, and 20 percent of adults were enrolled in Medicaid in 199810. For
purposes of this study, however, we assume that our households, when eligible, do apply and receive
all Medicaid benefits to which they are entitled.

Medicaid covers most, but not all, medically necessary medical care and services provided to
eligible individuals. Each state establishes its eligibility standards and general rules. The policies are
complex and vary considerably from state to state. In Massachusetts, Medicaid is officially known
10 Besides providing full exclusive coverage for the eligibles, in many cases Medicaid may supplement and/or subsidize
coverage provided by other parties (e.g., employers). In fact, Medicaid benefits that we impute in our study to the eligible
households represent average amounts over the whole array of types of health care financing provided by Medicaid (we
only exclude financing of the Nursing Home stay).

51

as MassHealth. In addition to serving the poor in general, MassHealth incorporates special
programs to assist poor pregnant women and children, the disabled, and immigrants who are in need
of emergency care.
MassHealth provides the following services:
- Inpatient hospital services
- Outpatient services: hospitals, clinics, doctors, dentists (limited dental coverage for adults),
family planning, and home-health care
- Medical services: lab tests, X rays, therapies, pharmacy services, dental services, eyeglasses,
hearing aids, medical equipment and supplies, adult day health, and adult foster care
- Mental health and substance abuse services: inpatient and outpatient
- Living in nursing homes
- Payment of the Medicare premium, coinsurance, and deductibles for certain groups of elderly
Like Medicare, Medicaid operates as a vendor payment program; recipients receive benefits directly
in the form of medical services provided by qualified vendors. Benefits are provided as long as the
individual meets general and financial eligibility criteria. Financial eligibility criteria include income
eligibility requirements, which may be different for different family members, and assets eligibility
requirements. MassHealth Standard Program specifies that the family monthly income before taxes
and deductions cannot exceed:
-

200 percent of the FPL (Federal Poverty Level) for pregnant women and infants
150 percent of the FPL for children under age 19
133 percent of the FPL for parents with children under age 19

Under MassHealth the income limit for an eligible individual (couple) aged 65 and over is 100
percent of FPL. In addition, in Massachusetts if an individual is eligible for SSI, s/he would also be
eligible for Medicaid. The table below presents the respective income limits.

family size
1
2
3
4

Federal Poverty Levels
100%
133%
150%
687
914
1,030
922
1,226
1,383
1,157
1,539
1,735
1,392
1,851
2,088

200%
1,374
1,844
2,314
2,784

Note: Income standards as of April 1, 1999.

Medicaid eligibility may be extended to individuals with incomes greater than the above income
limits if they are deemed “medically needy.” States provide residual financing of such individuals’
medical treatment costs, provided they spend their excess resources (income and assets) down to the
eligibility limits. This is particularly the case for individuals moving into nursing homes with
insufficient resources to fully finance their stays. For simplicity, we do not consider coverage of the
medical needy in this analysis.

52

In each year we determine for each family member of a particular age and sex if s/he meets
appropriate income standards of eligibility and then allocate to that individual the Medicaid age- and
sex-specific benefit projected to prevail in that year. Fortunately, statistics on Medicaid eligibles,
recipients, and total vendor payments are available by sex and age. To adjust for the fact that for
some age groups the data in Massachusetts show a greater number of recipients than eligibles, in
calculating average benefits we divided total expenditures by the maximum of a) the number of
eligibles and b) the number of recipients. When the beneficiary in our stylized case is a child under
19, we ignore gender difference in benefits. Our estimates of the average benefits for the most recent
data, for 1998, are presented in the table below in the column headed Unadjusted Benefits.
We make two adjustments to these benefit amounts. One is Medicaid-financed nursing home stays.
The other is for Medicaid payment of Part B Medicare premium for certain low-income individuals.
From 1995 National Nursing Home Survey we know the age distribution of nursing home residents.
Assuming the same age-distribution for 1997 Massachusetts Medicaid recipients residing in nursing
homes, we obtained counts of Medicaid-financed nursing home residents by age. Comparing these
numbers with the total number of Medicaid participants in particular age groups permits us to
determine the probability that a Medicaid participant of a particular age will reside in a nursing
home. This probability is multiplied by the average Medicaid expenditure per nursing home
resident.
If a person over age 65 is eligible for Medicaid, his/her Medicare cost-sharing will be partially or
fully financed by Medicaid. There are two broad groups of dual-eligibles: those for whom Medicaid
pays only Medicare part B premiums (so-called, SLMB eligibles), and those who get extensive
coverage from Medicaid (see the discussion on Medicaid-Medicare interactions below). Our
calculated average benefit values for aged eligibles reflect Medicaid payments made for both these
groups. However, we impute full Medicaid benefits only to the elderly with incomes less than 100
percent of the federal poverty line; and we treat SLMB eligibles separately. Specifically, for those
over 65, who are eligible for the full coverage, after adjustment for Nursing Home benefits we
further adjusted the average Medicaid benefits by excluding payments for SLMB eligibles, using
data on the fraction (4.6 percent) of those receiving benefits from both Medicare and Medicaid who
are SLMB recipients, the size of the SLMB Medicaid benefit (equal to the annual Part B premium),
and the overall average Medicaid benefit net of Nursing Home financing. Our final calculated
adjusted age- and sex-specific Medicaid benefits for 1988 are presented in the table below. We used
the CPI to measure 1998 benefit levels in 2001 dollars.
To estimate our benefits net of nursing home stay financing we started with the data on the age
distribution of the nursing home residents available from the 1997 Nursing Home Surveys. With
information on age profile and the average duration of stay from the survey as well as with data on
total number of nursing home residents financed by Medicaid from the Health Care Financing
Administration, we estimated the age profile of the Medicaid nursing home recipients in 1997. We
then applied that profile to the most recent 1998 Medicaid data on recipients. Observing that there is
little variation in daily charges in nursing homes for different age groups, we distributed total 1998
Medicaid expenditure for nursing home financing proportionally to the number of recipients in each
53

age group. In this way, we estimated 1998 non-nursing home recipients, expenditures, and average
benefits for different cohorts of men and women nation-wide. After further adjustment for exclusion
of the SLMB recipients (assuming the same fixed proportion of the SLMB recipients in each age
group), we compared the resulting average benefits per recipient to the initial reported benefits we
started with and derived corresponding age- and sex- specific ratios. We then applied those ratios to
the reported 1998 Massachusetts benefits per recipient to estimate the MassHealth benefits net of
nursing homes and SLMB program financing in Massachusetts. Our final calculated adjusted ageand sex-specific Medicaid benefits per recipient in Massachusetts for 1988 are presented in the table
below. Finally we estimated benefits per eligible in Massachusetts by applying 1997 Massachusetts
age-specific probabilities of being eligible and getting benefits. We used the CPI to measure 1998
benefit levels in 2001 dollars.
E s tim a t e d 1 9 9 8 M e d ic a id B e n e fits in M a s s a c h u s e tt s
n e t o f N u r s in g H o m e S t a y a n d t h e S L M B P r o g r a m F in a n c in g
A v e ra g e r e p o rte d

E s tim a te d A d ju s tm e n t

A d ju s te d 1 9 9 8

1 9 9 7 p ro b a b ili tie s

E s tim a te d N e t

b e n e fit p e r re c ip ie n t

R a tio

b e n e fits p e r re c ip i e n t

fo r e lig i b le s

B e n e fi ts P e r E lig ib le

M a le

F e m a le

T O T AL

4 917

5 179

M a le

F e m a le

M a le

F e m a le

U n is e x

M a le

F e m a le

U ND ER 1

3 458

3 276

100%

100%

3 458

3 276

0 ,8 2

2 838

2 689

1 - 5

1 651

1 468

100%

100%

1 651

1 468

0 ,8 8

1 459

1 297

6 - 14

1 782

1 446

100%

100%

1 782

1 446

0 ,9 0

1 596

1 296

15 - 20

2 306

2 541

100%

100%

2 306

2 541

0 ,8 9

2 048

2 257

21 - 44

7 385

3 937

92%

93%

6 824

3 662

0 ,8 6

5 857

3 143

45 - 64

9 823

7 967

94%

97%

9 263

7 758

0 ,8 8

8 157

6 832

65 - 74

9 826

7 739

70%

74%

6 865

5 734

0 ,9 4

6 437

5 377

75 - 84

12 633

12 705

59%

66%

7 501

8 400

1 ,0 0

7 501

8 400

8 5 & O VE R

12 013

15 349

51%

67%

6 170

10 304

1 ,0 0

6 170

10 304

In each year we determine for each family member of a particular age and sex if s/he meets
appropriate income standards for eligibility and then allocate to that individual the Medicaid ageand sex-specific benefit projected to prevail in that year. When the beneficiary in our stylized case
is a child under 19, we ignore gender difference in benefits.
Sources
1. HCFA-2082 Report for Federal Fiscal Year 1998. Internet:
http://www.hcfa.gov/medicaid/msis/2082%2D98.htm
2. Information about MassHealth. The Division of Medical Assistance. Massachusetts.
Internet: http://www.state.ma.us/dma/masshealthinfo/applmemb_IDX.htm
3. MassHealth Member Booklet. Internet:
www.state.ma.us/dma/masshealthinfo/memberbklt.pdf
4. Medicaid. Health Care Financial Administration. Internet:
http://www.hcfa.gov/medicaid/medicaid.htm
54

5. The National Nursing Home Survey: 1997 Summary. National Center for Health Statistics.
Internet: http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/series/sr_13/sr13_147.pdf
Medicaid-Medicare Interactions
1999 Monthly Income Limits
Program Pays
Individual Couple
Medicare's
Premium, deductibles,
$696
$938
QMB
and coinsurance
Monthly Part B
$835
$1,125
SLMB
premium
Source : Medicare office

Medicare beneficiaries with
low incomes and limited
resources may receive help
to pay Medicare premiums
and other cost-sharing
payments from their state
Medicaid programs. The
extent of assistance that
Medicaid offers varies based on the Medicare beneficiary characteristics. Medicare beneficiaries
who are eligible for Medicaid assistance fall into two categories: those who are sufficiently poor and
qualify for full Medicaid benefits, and those who receive partial assistance from Medicaid. In the
second group, the two most important categories are Qualified Medicare Beneficiaries (QMB) and
Specified Low-Income Beneficiaries (SLMB). To qualify one has to meet assets restrictions and
have limited income, as specified in the table. For QMBs, income must be below 100 percent of the
FPL, while for SLMBs it can be below 120 percent of the FPL. The state pays Medicare premiums
as well as deductibles and coinsurance for QMBs. The basic difference between the fully covered
and the QMBs is that states may impose limits on payments to QMBs. For SLMBs, Medicaid pays
only Part B monthly premiums. The asset test limits for QMB and SLMB programs are $4,000 and
$6,000 for an individual and a couple, respectively.
For persons enrolled in both Medicare and Medicaid, the latter is always “payer of last resort”,
which means that any Medicare-covered services are paid for by Medicare before any payments are
made by the Medicaid program. In 1995 there were 6 million dual-eligible beneficiaries nation
wide. They constituted 16 percent of the Medicare enrollees and 17 percent of the Medicaid
population. In 1996, 4.6 percent of the dual-eligibles were SLMBs, 45 percent were QMBs, and 50.4
percent received full Medicaid coverage.
The presence of dual eligibles means that the reported Medicaid payments for individuals over 65
will include Medicare cost-sharing payments as well as other Medicaid-provided services.
Assuming also that any out-of-pocket Medicare co-payments are deducted from the gross income
included in calculation of value of Food Stamp benefits, we had to develop a measure of combined
net payments from Medicare, Medicaid, and Food Stamps.
Those who are not qualify for QMB or SLMB status pay Medicare co-payments and premiums in
the full amounts, and their out-of-pocket health expenditures are included as medical-related
deductions in our model's Food Stamp benefit calculations. The households involved here have
annual incomes ranging between around $13,500 and $18,000, - when they no longer qualify for
Medicare co-payment subsidies, but are still eligible for Food Stamps (given higher Food Stamps
gross income standards for the seniors). Generally, these households receive no Medicaid benefits,
55

fully cost share with Medicare, but receive somewhat higher Food Stamps benefits as a result of
these additional medical cost deductions.
For those who are SLMBs (couples with annual incomes between roughly $11,200 and $13,500),
Medicaid covers only Medicare Part B premiums, which we include as a transfer payment. We do
not impute to them any other Medicaid benefits; SLMBs still cost-share with Medicare, and their
out-of-pocket Medicare cost-sharing payments, which do not involve the Part-B premiums paid on
their behalf, are deductible in the Food Stamps income calculation.
Finally, poor elderly couples (those with annual incomes that are less than roughly $11,200) pay no
Medicare costs whatsoever and have no Medicare related deductions when it comes to determining
income by the Food Stamps program. We did not distinguish between fully covered and QMB
beneficiaries: when income of our household falls below 100% of the FPL, we simply impute
calculated average Medicaid benefits from the table and do not deduct Medicare related premium,
deductibles, and coinsurance from their gross income. When individuals temporarily loose their
eligibility for the full Medicaid coverage based on the asset test and receive reduced benefits, we
assumed that that they remain eligible for the Medicaid subsidy of Medicare co-payments under the
QMB program.
Sources
1. “A Profile Of QMB-Eligible And SLMB-Eligible Medicare Beneficiaries.” Barents Group
LLC: Prepared for Health Care Financial Administration. April 7,1999.
2. List And Definition Of Dual Eligibles. Internet:
http://www.hcfa.gov/medicaid/dualelig/bbadedef.htm
Housing Assistance11
A number of Federal programs address the housing needs of lower income households. There are
different types of housing aid available. The three broad categories are: subsidized rental housing,
public housing, and homeownership opportunities for low income, first-time homebuyers.

Rental assistance programs generally reduce tenants’ rent payments by a fixed percentage -- usually
30 percent or higher, depending on the treatment of heating costs -- of their adjusted income, with
the government paying the remaining portion of the rent. In Massachusetts, there are three types of
rental assistance programs: The “Section 8” program, the Massachusetts Rental Voucher Program
(MRVP), and the Alternative Housing Voucher Program (AHVP). The federal government funds
“Section 8” assistance, and the state funds the MRVP and AHVP programs. While the incomeeligibility limit for the “Section 8” program is 80 percent of the area median income ($50,200 for a
family of 4 in Boston), a participant of the state rental voucher program or the alternative program
can earn no more than 200 percent of the federal poverty level ($34,100 for a household of 4, as of
April 2000). Income limits depend on the size of the household.

11 This section and the next section draw heavily on the housing program descriptions cited as data sources.

56

Public housing apartments are built and subsidized by either the state or federal government. The
rent a public housing tenant pays is based on household income and whether the costs of any utilities
are included: 30 percent of net income for rent if the rent includes any basic utilities and 25 percent
of net income if no utilities are provided. To be eligible to live in public housing a household must
typically earn no more than 80 percent of the area median income. Income limits also vary
depending on the number of persons in the household and the region.
There are a variety of programs available to help low- or moderate- income people purchase a home.
Most programs are limited to first-time homebuyers. The Federal Government assistance comes with
the long-term commitments to reduce mortgage interest, when interest subsidies are provided for
mortgages financed by private lenders. Those programs generally limit combined mortgage
payments, property taxes, and insurance costs to a fixed percentage of income. The current
percentage is 28. As an example, the Soft Second Mortgage Program is a state-funded program that
helps households purchase their first homes. The program requires a minimum 5 percent down
payment. The state will subsidize a second mortgage on behalf of a homeowner who also has a
conventional mortgage. In 1997, 11 percent of all the assisted units were newly purchased first
homes; the rest were rental units.
Housing assistance is not provided to all households that qualify for aid. Each year a limited amount
of Federal funds is allocated to fund new and existing housing assistance commitments. As a result,
in most cases new applicants are put on very long (1 to 2 year) waiting list.
Several studies of housing and welfare reform document that in 1996 approximately one quarter of
the families receiving AFDC/TANF benefits lived in assisted housing. However, this ratio varied
significantly from state to state. Barbara Sard and Jennifer Daskal (1998) analyzing data for
Massachusetts show that estimates of the percentage of AFDC households that also received housing
assistance in 1996 ranged between 32 percent and 43 percent. Daskal (1998) presents estimates of
the percentage of the poor receiving housing assistance classified by various characteristics. At the
aggregate level, she shows that 40 percent of the families with incomes less than 50 percent of the
FPL received some form of rent subsidies. For incomes between 50 percent and 99 percent of the
FPL, between 100 percent and 149 percent of the FPL, and between 149 percent and 200 percent of
the FPL, respective recipient rates were 33 percent, 21 percent, and 12 percent. These rates are used
in our analysis as income-specific probabilities of a household's receiving some form of subsidy.
In our stylized cases, our households rent living accommodations, and if they are income-eligible,
we assume that they apply to the rent assistance program. The just-described income-specific
recipient rates refer to population of AFDC recipients; we extend these rates to the whole population
of the households with qualifying levels of income. In so doing, we disregard factors of age and the
presence of child in a family that may make actual probabilities differ from those used in the study.
Following the regulations, we assume that rent in excess of 30 percent of family income is
subsidized by the authorities. We simply treat this difference (multiplied by the probability of
receiving the benefit) as an additional government transfer payment

57

Housing subsidies become part of the gross monthly income that we use in determining eligibility
for the Food Stamps program.
Sources
1. G. Thomas Kingsley. Federal Housing Assistance and Welfare Reform: Uncharted Territory.
Number A-19 in Series, "New Federalism: Issues and Options for States". 1997. Internet:
http://newfederalism.urban.org/html/anf19.html
2. Barbara Sard. The Importance of Issues at the Intersection of Housing and Welfare Reform
for Legal Services Work. Internet:
http://www.clasp.org/pubs/Other/Updated2000Jan-FebIntersectionHousingWelfare1.htm:
3. Barbara Sard and Jennifer Daskal. Housing and Welfare Reform: Some Background
Information. November 5, 1998. Internet:
http://www.cbpp.org/hous212.htm
4. Jennifer Daskal. In Search of Shelter: The Growing Shortage of Affordable Rental Housing.
Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. 1998. Internet:
http://www.cbpp.org/615hous.pdf
5. The 1998 Green Book. Program Descriptions. Federal Housing Assistance. (AND)
Transitional Assistance to Families with Dependent Children. Internet:
http://aspe.hhs.gov/98gb/15other.htm
Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP)
LIHEAP is a block-grant program of the Federal Government that allocates funds between states to
operate various home energy assistance programs for needy households. The funds may be used for
the purposes of home heating and cooling assistance, energy-crisis intervention, and low-cost
weatherization or other energy-related home repairs.

LIHEAP assists eligible low-income households in meeting the heating or cooling portion of their
residential energy needs. Low-income households are defined as households with incomes that
cannot exceed the greater of 150 percent of the poverty level or 60 percent of state median income
($28,135, $34,755, and $41,375 for 2-, 3-, and 4- person families respectively in Massachusetts in
2001). The states have flexibility of setting their income eligibility at or below this maximum
standard. LIHEAP payments can be made to households where one or more persons are receiving
Supplemental Security Income (SSI), Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC/TANF), or
food stamps. Priority may be granted to those households with the greatest energy cost in relation to
income, taking into consideration the presence of children and elderly.
In Massachusetts in 1995, 140 thousand households received an average of $348 from the single
largest program component -- heating assistance. However, only one fifth of LIHEAP-eligible
households received heating and/or winter crisis assistance in that year.
We treat LIHEAP benefits in our analysis in the same way as housing assistance benefits. With a
probability of 20 percent (the national estimate) we add the CPI-inflated value of the annual benefit
to the income of eligible households.
58

Sources
1. Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program. Block Grant Overview. Internet:
http://www.save-liheap.org/overview/contents.htm
2. Low Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP). US Department of Health and
Human Services. Internet:
http://www.acf.dhhs.gov/programs/liheap/liheap.htm
3. The 1998 Green Book. Program Descriptions. Low-Income Home Energy Assistance
Program (LIHEAP). Internet: http://aspe.hhs.gov/98gb/15other.htm
4. The Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program (LIHEAP). Report for Congress.
5. Congressional Research Service. Updated September 29, 2000. Internet:
http://www.cnie.org/nle/eng-41.html

59

Table 1
Average Net Fulltime Work Tax Rates

Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

Present
Value of
Spending
with Taxes
and
Transfers
Assuming
Fulltime
Work

Present
Value of
Spending
without
Taxes or
Transfers
Assuming
Fulltime
Work

Fulltime
Career
Average
Net-work tax
rate
(percent)

1

21.4

655.1

495.4

-32.2

1.5

32.1

635.2

743.1

14.5

2

42.8

766.8

990.8

22.6

3

64.3

1041.9

1486.2

29.9

4

85.7

1303.6

1981.6

34.2

5

107.1

1547.0

2477.8

37.6

6

128.5

1759.3

2974.0

40.8

7

150.0

1987.7

3470.1

42.7

8

171.4

2215.6

3958.7

44.0

9

192.8

2439.5

4426.4

44.9

10

214.2

2666.4

4894.2

45.5

15

321.4

3741.4

7233.4

48.3

20

428.5

4842.7

9572.6

49.4

30

642.7

7035.6

14251.0

50.6

40

857.0

9229.2

18929.4

51.2

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial and assume a 5 percent real discount
rate. The net tax rate is calculated as 100 times the quantity 1 minus the ratio of a to b, where a is column 3
and b is column 4.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

60

Table 2
Present Values of Taxes and Transfers of Fulltime Workers

(thousands of 2000 dollars)
Initial
Multiple of
Social
Annual
Payroll State Federal Consumption Corporate
Minimum
Security TAFDC
Household taxes Taxes Taxes
Taxes
Taxes
Wage
Benefits
Income
21.4
67.4
12.5
-14.1
30.3
0.8
23.2
1.6
1
32.1
101.1
24.9
32.1
39.4
1.3
28.5
0.0
1.5
42.8
134.8
37.5
67.8
49.3
2.0
33.7
0.0
2
64.3
202.2
63.9
154.4
67.7
3.3
44.2
0.0
3
85.7
269.7
91.0
272.0
83.3
4.6
54.6
0.0
4
107.1
337.1
118.2
400.5
99.0
5.6
59.8
0.0
5
128.5
404.5
145.6
559.9
112.1
6.9
64.7
0.0
6
150.0
471.9
172.7
704.1
126.9
7.9
69.6
0.0
7
171.4
524.7
200.2
851.8
141.5
9.4
73.2
0.0
8
192.8
537.5
228.2 1,015.9
155.7
11.3
73.2
0.0
9
214.2
550.2
256.1 1,175.8
171.6
13.3
73.2
0.0
10
321.4
614.1
395.9 2,035.3
248.3
23.8
73.2
0.0
15
428.5
678.0
537.3 2,854.5
327.0
36.4
73.2
0.0
20
642.7
805.8
820.5 4,497.2
484.2
62.4
73.2
0.0
30
857.0
933.6 1,103.7 6,138.9
641.4
88.4
73.2
0.0
40
Present values are actuarial assuming a 5 percent real discount rate.
Source: Authors’ calculations

61

SSI
2.1
0.9
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Food
Stamps Housing
Medicare Medicaid
and
Benefits
WIC
7.5
2.2
26.0
172.2
0.1
0.0
26.0
21.5
0.1
0.0
26.0
11.8
0.2
0.0
26.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
26.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
26.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
26.0
0.0

Table 3
PV of Taxes and Transfers of Fulltime Workers as Percent of PV of Spending in Absence of Taxes and Transfers
Multiple of
Initial
Social
Payroll State Federal Consumption Corporate
Minimum Household
Security TAFDC
taxes Taxes Taxes
Taxes
Taxes
Wage
Income
Benefits
21.4
13.6
2.5
-2.9
6.1
0.2
4.7
0.3
1
32.1
13.6
3.4
4.3
5.3
0.2
3.8
0.0
1.5
42.8
13.6
3.8
6.8
5.0
0.2
3.4
0.0
2
64.3
13.6
4.3
10.4
4.6
0.2
3.0
0.0
3
85.7
13.6
4.6
13.7
4.2
0.2
2.8
0.0
4
107.1
13.6
4.8
16.2
4.0
0.2
2.4
0.0
5
128.5
13.6
4.9
18.8
3.8
0.2
2.2
0.0
6
150.0
13.6
5.0
20.3
3.7
0.2
2.0
0.0
7
171.4
13.3
5.1
21.5
3.6
0.2
1.9
0.0
8
192.8
12.1
5.2
23.0
3.5
0.3
1.7
0.0
9
214.2
11.2
5.2
24.0
3.5
0.3
1.5
0.0
10
321.4
8.5
5.5
28.1
3.4
0.3
1.0
0.0
15
428.5
7.1
5.6
29.8
3.4
0.4
0.8
0.0
20
642.7
5.7
5.8
31.6
3.4
0.4
0.5
0.0
30
857.0
4.9
5.8
32.4
3.4
0.5
0.4
0.0
40
All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial assuming a 5 percent real discount rate.
Source: Authors’ calculations

62

SSI
0.4
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Food
Stamps Housing
Medicare Medicaid
and
Benefits
WIC
1.5
0.4
5.2
34.8
0.0
0.0
3.5
2.9
0.0
0.0
2.6
1.2
0.0
0.0
1.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.9
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.7
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0

Table 4
Marginal Net Fulltime Work Tax Rates

Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

Present
Value of
Spending
with Taxes
and
Transfers
Assuming No
Work

Present
Value of
Spending
without
Taxes or
Transfers
Assuming
Fulltime
Work

Present
Value of
Spending
with Taxes
and
Transfers
Assuming
Fulltime
Work

Fulltime
Career
Marginal
Net-work tax
rate
(percent)

1

21.4

411.3

495.4

655.1

50.8

1.5

32.1

411.3

743.1

635.2

69.9

2

42.8

411.3

990.8

766.8

64.1

3

64.3

411.3

1486.2

1041.9

57.6

4

85.7

411.3

1981.6

1303.6

55.0

5

107.1

411.3

2477.8

1547.0

54.2

6

128.5

411.3

2974.0

1759.3

54.7

7

150.0

411.3

3470.1

1987.7

54.6

8

171.4

411.3

3958.7

2215.6

54.4

9

192.8

411.3

4426.4

2439.5

54.2

10

214.2

411.3

4894.2

2666.4

53.9

15

321.4

411.3

7233.4

3741.4

54.0

20

428.5

411.3

9572.6

4842.7

53.7

30

642.7

411.3

14251.0

7035.6

53.5

40

857.0

411.3

18929.4

9229.2

53.4

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial and assume a 5 percent real discount
rate. The net tax rate is calculated as 100 times the quantity: 1 minus the ratio of a to b, where a is column 5 minus
column 3 and b is column 4.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

63

Table 5
Average Net Halftime Work Tax Rates

Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

Present
Value of
Spending
With Taxes
and
Transfers

Present
Value of
Spending
With No
Taxes or
Transfers

Halftime
Career
Average Network tax
rate
(percent)

1

10.7

600.2

248.1

-141.9

1.5

16.1

639.5

372.2

-71.8

2

21.4

655.1

495.4

-32.2

3

32.1

635.2

743.1

14.5

4

42.8

766.8

990.8

22.6

5

53.6

899.9

1238.5

27.3

6

64.3

1041.9

1486.2

29.9

7

75.0

1174.0

1733.9

32.3

8

85.7

1303.6

1981.6

34.2

9

96.4

1427.6

2229.7

36.0

10

107.1

1547.0

2477.8

37.6

15

160.7

2100.7

3718.2

43.5

20

214.2

2666.4

4894.2

45.5

30

321.4

3741.4

7233.4

48.3

40

428.5

4842.7

9572.6

49.4

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial assuming a 5 percent real
discount rate. The net tax rate is calculated as 100 times the quantity 1 minus the ratio of a to b, where
a is column 3 and b is column 4.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

64

Table 6
Present Values of Taxes and Transfers of Halftime Workers

(thousands of 2002 dollars)
Multiple of
Initial
Payroll
Minimum Household
taxes
Wage
Income

State
Taxes

Federal Consumption Corporate
Taxes
Taxes
Taxes

10.7
33.7
0.9
-49.2
1
16.1
50.6
6.3
-35.7
1.5
21.4
67.4
12.5
-14.1
2
32.1
101.1
24.9
32.1
3
42.8
134.8
37.5
67.8
4
53.6
168.5
50.4
107.5
5
64.3
202.2
63.9
154.4
6
75.0
236.0
77.5
212.0
7
85.7
269.7
91.0
272.0
8
96.4
303.4
104.7
333.9
9
107.1
337.1
118.2
400.5
10
160.7
505.6
186.4
776.8
15
214.2
550.2
256.1
1175.8
20
321.4
614.1
395.9
2035.3
30
428.5
678.0
537.3
2854.5
40
Present values are actuarial assuming a 5 percent real discount rate.
Source: Authors’ calculations

20.9
27.2
30.3
39.4
49.3
58.9
67.7
75.6
83.3
91.1
99.0
134.1
171.6
248.3
327.0

0.2
0.3
0.8
1.3
2.0
2.6
3.3
3.9
4.6
5.2
5.6
8.5
13.3
23.8
36.4

65

Social
Security
Benefits
14.8
20.6
23.2
28.5
33.7
38.9
44.2
49.4
54.6
57.3
59.8
72.1
73.2
73.2
73.2

TAFDC SSI
52.1
20.2
1.6
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

7.4
2.8
2.1
0.9
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Food Housing
Medicare Medicaid
Stamps Benefits
38.9
20.8
7.5
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

2.5
2.1
2.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

26.0
26.0
26.0
26.0
26.0
26.0
26.0
26.0
26.0
26.0
26.0
26.0
26.0
26.0
26.0

232.8
213.8
172.2
21.5
11.8
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Table 7
PV of Taxes and Transfers of Halftime Workers as Percent of PV of Spending in Absence of Taxes and Transfers
Multiple of
Initial
Payroll
Minimum Household
taxes
Wage
Income

State
Taxes

Federal Consumption Corporate
Taxes
Taxes
Taxes

Social
Security
Benefits

TAFDC

10.7
13.6
0.4
-19.8
8.4
0.1
5.9
21.0
1
16.1
13.6
1.7
-9.6
7.3
0.1
5.5
5.4
1.5
21.4
13.6
2.5
-2.9
6.1
0.2
4.7
0.3
2
32.1
13.6
3.4
4.3
5.3
0.2
3.8
0.0
3
42.8
13.6
3.8
6.8
5.0
0.2
3.4
0.0
4
53.6
13.6
4.1
8.7
4.8
0.2
3.1
0.0
5
64.3
13.6
4.3
10.4
4.6
0.2
3.0
0.0
6
75.0
13.6
4.5
12.2
4.4
0.2
2.8
0.0
7
85.7
13.6
4.6
13.7
4.2
0.2
2.8
0.0
8
96.4
13.6
4.7
15.0
4.1
0.2
2.6
0.0
9
107.1
13.6
4.8
16.2
4.0
0.2
2.4
0.0
10
160.7
13.6
5.0
20.9
3.6
0.2
1.9
0.0
15
214.2
11.2
5.2
24.0
3.5
0.3
1.5
0.0
20
321.4
8.5
5.5
28.1
3.4
0.3
1.0
0.0
30
428.5
7.1
5.6
29.8
3.4
0.4
0.8
0.0
40
All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial assuming a 5 percent real discount rate.
Source: Authors’ calculations

66

SSI
3.0
0.8
0.4
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Food Housing
Medicare Medicaid
Stamps Benefits
15.7
5.6
1.5
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

1.0
0.6
0.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

10.5
7.0
5.2
3.5
2.6
2.1
1.7
1.5
1.3
1.2
1.0
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.3

93.8
57.4
34.8
2.9
1.2
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

Table 8
Marginal Net Halftime Work Tax Rates

1

10.7

411.3

Present
Value of
Spending
with no
Taxes or
Transfers
Assuming
Halftime
Work
248.1

1.5

16.1

411.3

372.2

639.5

38.7

2

21.4

411.3

495.4

655.1

50.8

3

32.1

411.3

743.1

635.2

69.9

4

42.8

411.3

990.8

766.8

64.1

5

53.6

411.3

1238.5

899.9

60.6

6

64.3

411.3

1486.2

1041.9

57.6

7

75.0

411.3

1733.9

1174.0

56.0

8

85.7

411.3

1981.6

1303.6

55.0

9

96.4

411.3

2229.7

1427.6

54.4

10

107.1

411.3

2477.8

1547.0

54.2

15

160.7

411.3

3718.2

2100.7

54.6

20

214.2

411.3

4894.2

2666.4

53.9

30

321.4

411.3

7233.4

3741.4

54.0

40

428.5

411.3

9572.6

4842.7

53.7

Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

Present
Value of
Spending
with Taxes
and
Transfers
Assuming No
Work

Present
Value of
Spending
with Taxes
and
Transfers
Assuming
Halftime
Work
600.2

Halftime
Marginal
Net-work tax
rate
(percent)
23.9

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial and assume a 5 percent real discount
rate. The net tax rate is calculated as 100 times the quantity: 1 minus the ratio of a to b, where a is column 5 minus
column 3 and b is column 4.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

67

Table 9
Net Tax Rate on Switching from Halftime to Fulltime Work

Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income
When
Working
Full Time

Present
Value of
Spending
from
Working
Fulltime with
Net Taxes

Present
Value of
Spending
from
Working
Halftime
with Net
Taxes

Percentage
Increase in
Spending from
Switching from
Part-Time to
Fulltime Work

Net Tax Rate
on Switching
from Part-Time
to Fulltime
Work

1

21.4

655.1

600.2

9.1

90.9

1.5

32.1

635.2

639.5

-0.7

100.7

2

42.8

766.8

655.1

17.1

82.9

3

64.3

1041.9

635.2

64.0

36.0

4

85.7

1303.6

766.8

70.0

30.0

5

107.1

1547.0

899.9

71.9

28.1

6

128.5

1759.3

1041.9

68.9

31.1

7

150.0

1987.7

1174.0

69.3

30.7

8

171.4

2215.6

1303.6

70.0

30.0

9

192.8

2439.5

1427.6

70.9

29.1

10

214.2

2666.4

1547.0

72.4

27.6

15

321.4

3741.4

2100.7

78.1

21.9

20

428.5

4842.7

2666.4

81.6

18.4

30

642.7

7035.6

3741.4

88.0

12.0

40

857.0

9229.2

4842.7

90.6

9.4

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial and assume a 5 percent real discount rate.
The net tax rate on switching from part-time to fulltime work is calculated as 100 minus the ratio of a) column 3
minus column 4 to b) column 4 in Table 8.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

68

Table 10
Net Marginal Tax Rates on Working at Age 25

Present Value of Spending
Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

Taxes and Transfers

No Taxes or Transfers

Earnings
at Age 25

No
Earnings
at Age 25

Earnings
at Age 25

No
Earnings
at Age 25

Net
Marginal
Tax Rate
on
Working
at Age 25
(percent)

1

21.4

657.5

637.4

646.2

624.0

9.7

1.5

32.1

639.2

626.9

644.3

614.0

59.6

2

42.8

769.6

751.0

779.3

740.0

52.8

3

64.3

1045.5

1013.7

1064.4

1003.3

47.9

4

85.7

1308.0

1264.7

1336.6

1254.7

47.1

5

107.1

1552.0

1497.5

1590.1

1487.9

46.7

6

128.5

1764.9

1700.4

1815.9

1691.1

48.4

7

150.0

1993.7

1919.7

2054.0

1910.7

48.3

8

171.4

2222.3

2137.2

2291.8

2128.6

47.9

9

192.8

2446.8

2351.0

2525.7

2342.8

47.6

10

214.2

2674.5

2568.1

2763.0

2560.5

47.4

15

321.4

3754.6

3598.4

3894.1

3594.3

47.9

20

428.5

4861.1

4643.4

5048.2

4652.6

45.0

30

642.7

7064.5

6738.7

7343.9

6759.2

44.3

40

857.0

9268.5

8837.0

9638.7

8866.4

44.1

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial assuming a 5 percent real discount rate.
The net tax rate is calculated as 100 times the quantity 1 minus the ratio of a to b, where a is the difference between
column 3 to column 4 and b is the difference between columns 5 and 6.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

69

Table 11
Net Marginal Tax Rates on Working at Age 35

Present Value of Spending
Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

Taxes and Transfers

No Taxes or Transfers

Earnings
at Age 35

No
Earnings
at Age 35

Earnings
at Age 35

No
Earnings
at Age 35

Net
Marginal
Tax Rate
on
Working
at Age 35
(percent)

1

21.4

657.4

642.8

651.2

634.7

11.5

1.5

32.1

639.1

631.2

644.0

623.7

61.1

2

42.8

769.6

757.2

776.4

750.1

52.9

3

64.3

1045.5

1023.6

1059.5

1017.3

48.2

4

85.7

1307.8

1277.8

1328.4

1272.2

46.7

5

107.1

1551.8

1514.0

1578.1

1508.8

45.5

6

128.5

1764.6

1720.8

1797.5

1715.8

46.2

7

150.0

1993.5

1942.5

2031.2

1938.0

45.2

8

171.4

2222.1

2162.5

2266.7

2158.5

44.9

9

192.8

2446.6

2378.9

2494.7

2375.4

43.2

10

214.2

2674.3

2598.2

2727.2

2595.2

42.3

15

321.4

3754.4

3640.3

3835.1

3639.8

41.6

20

428.5

4860.9

4707.5

4968.6

4709.6

40.8

30

642.7

7064.3

6832.1

7189.0

6839.4

33.6

40

857.0

9268.2

8948.5

9408.7

8969.9

27.1

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial assuming a 5 percent real discount
rate. The net tax rate is calculated as 100 times the quantity 1 minus the ratio of a to b, where a is the difference
between column 3 to column 4 and b is the difference between columns 5 and 6.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

70

Table 12
Net Marginal Tax Rate on Working at Age 45

Present Value of Spending
Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

Taxes and Transfers

No Taxes or Transfers

Earnings
at Age 45

No
Earnings
at Age 45

Earnings
at Age 45

No
Earnings
at Age 45

Net
Marginal
Tax Rate
on
Working
at Age 45
(percent)

1

21.4

657.4

647.6

659.9

648.0

16.7

1.5

32.1

639.1

627.8

642.0

628.4

16.6

2

42.8

769.6

755.1

771.8

755.9

9.5

3

64.3

1045.5

1023.8

1050.4

1024.9

14.8

4

85.7

1307.8

1280.3

1314.1

1281.7

15.3

5

107.1

1551.8

1520.5

1559.4

1522.2

16.1

6

128.5

1764.6

1732.3

1773.5

1734.2

17.8

7

150.0

1993.5

1956.5

2004.6

1958.5

19.7

8

171.4

2222.1

2182.0

2234.9

2184.3

20.7

9

192.8

2446.6

2402.7

2460.5

2405.4

20.3

10

214.2

2674.3

2626.2

2689.1

2629.2

19.6

15

321.4

3754.4

3693.0

3780.6

3697.7

25.9

20

428.5

4860.9

4799.0

4896.8

4805.4

32.2

30

642.7

7064.3

7005.5

7120.3

7013.9

44.7

40

857.0

9268.2

9187.2

9343.3

9199.2

43.8

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial assuming a 5 percent real discount rate.
The net tax rate is calculated as 100 times the quantity 1 minus the ratio of a to b, where a is the difference
between column 3 to column 4 and b is the difference between columns 5 and 6.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

71

Table 13
Net Marginal Tax Rates on Working at Age 55

Present Value of Spending
Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

Taxes and Transfers

No Taxes or Transfers

Earnings
at Age 55

No
Earnings
at Age 55

Earnings
at Age 55

No
Earnings
at Age 55

Net
Marginal
Tax Rate
on
Working
at Age 55
(percent)

1

21.4

657.4

652.6

658.5

652.9

12.7

1.5

32.1

639.1

632.5

640.7

633.0

14.2

2

42.8

769.6

762.2

771.1

762.9

10.4

3

64.3

1045.5

1036.8

1050.5

1037.8

31.7

4

85.7

1307.8

1298.2

1314.7

1299.3

37.9

5

107.1

1551.8

1540.5

1560.8

1541.8

40.3

6

128.5

1764.6

1752.2

1775.9

1753.8

43.4

7

150.0

1993.5

1978.9

2007.5

1980.9

45.2

8

171.4

2222.1

2205.3

2238.4

2207.6

45.5

9

192.8

2446.6

2428.3

2464.2

2431.1

44.6

10

214.2

2674.3

2654.2

2694.6

2657.6

45.6

15

321.4

3754.4

3719.4

3789.5

3725.6

45.2

20

428.5

4860.9

4812.4

4909.4

4822.2

44.3

30

642.7

7064.3

6991.7

7140.2

7009.1

44.6

40

857.0

9268.2

9168.6

9370.5

9194.8

43.3

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial assuming a 5 percent real discount rate.
The net tax rate is calculated as 100 times the quantity 1 minus the ratio of a to b, where a is the difference between
column 3 to column 4 and b is the difference between columns 5 and 6.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

72

Table 14
Net Marginal Tax Rates on Working at Age 65

Present Value of Spending
Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

Taxes and Transfers

No Taxes or Transfers

Earnings
at Age 65

No
Earnings
at Age 65

Earnings
at Age 65

No
Earnings
at Age 65

Net
Marginal
Tax Rate
on
Working
at Age 65
(percent)

1

21.4

657.4

655.1

658.4

655.3

24.5

1.5

32.1

639.1

634.7

640.8

635.2

21.6

2

42.8

769.6

763.8

771.4

764.4

17.7

3

64.3

1045.5

1036.9

1051.2

1038.0

35.2

4

85.7

1307.8

1297.1

1316.6

1298.6

40.7

5

107.1

1551.8

1539.2

1562.6

1541.5

40.5

6

128.5

1764.6

1750.7

1778.7

1753.4

44.9

7

150.0

1993.5

1977.5

2010.8

1980.9

46.5

8

171.4

2222.1

2203.8

2242.2

2207.9

46.7

9

192.8

2446.6

2426.8

2470.2

2431.9

48.3

10

214.2

2674.3

2652.5

2700.8

2658.7

48.2

15

321.4

3754.4

3716.8

3798.4

3729.6

45.3

20

428.5

4860.9

4808.5

4922.1

4828.8

43.8

30

642.7

7064.3

6984.9

7160.5

7020.0

43.6

40

857.0

9268.2

9159.5

9398.2

9210.4

42.1

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial and assume a 5 percent real discount
rate. The net tax rate is calculated as 100 times the quantity 1 minus the ratio of a to b, where a is the difference
between column 3 to column 4 and b is the difference between columns 5 and 6.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

73

Table 15
Increase in Net Taxes and Transfers Paid or Received at Age 25 from Working Fulltime at Age 25
Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

Payroll
taxes

State
Taxes

Federal Consumption Corporate
Taxes
Taxes
Taxes

Social
Security
Benefits

TAFDC

21.4
2895
238
-2267
1350
-434
2
-1
1
32.1
4342
708
182
1751
-561
3
-1
1.5
42.8
5789
1186
1809
2208
-714
4
-1
2
64.3
8684
2178
4578
3154
-1017
5
-1
3
85.7
11579
3233
9397
3955
-1273
7
-1
4
107.1
14474
4289
14300
4748
-1528
4
-1
5
128.5
17368
5359
20437
5454
-1732
5
-1
6
150.0
20263
6419
27027
6136
-1972
5
-1
7
171.4
22466
7476
32481
6916
-2220
-2
-1
8
192.8
23015
8536
39053
7676
-2459
-2
-1
9
214.2
23563
9597
45690
8431
-2697
-2
-1
10
321.4
26307
14917
82497
11962
-3822
-2
-1
15
428.5
29050
20222
117156
15640
-5001
-2
-1
20
642.7
34537
30824
184922
23107
-7388
-2
-1
30
857.0
40024
41424
252246
30605
-9784
-2
-1
40
All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial and assume a 5 percent real discount rate.
Source: Authors’ calculations

74

SSI
0
-1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Food Housing
Stamps Benefits
1090
-263
-263
-263
-263
-263
-263
-263
-263
-263
-263
-263
-1
-1
-1

33
24
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Medicare

Medicaid

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
-12118
-12120
-12119
-12119
-12119
-12119
-12119
-12119
-12119
-12119
-12119
-2731
-2
-2

Table 16
Increase in Net Taxes and Transfers Paid or Received at Age 35 from Working Fulltime at Age 35
Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

Payroll
taxes

State
Taxes

Federal Consumption Corporate
Taxes
Taxes
Taxes

Social
Security
Benefits

TAFDC

21.4
1913
191
-1456
1262
-592
1
-2221
1
32.1
2870
491
245
1621
-745
0
-6
1.5
42.8
3827
778
1094
2058
-952
-2
-6
2
64.3
5740
1380
2627
2973
-1399
-4
-6
3
85.7
7653
2020
5491
3755
-1775
-4
-6
4
107.1
9567
2702
8318
4512
-2002
-8
-6
5
128.5
11480
3434
12699
5093
-2045
-8
-6
6
150.0
13393
4110
16292
5787
-2296
-8
-6
7
171.4
14884
4718
19108
6618
-2789
-13
-6
8
192.8
15246
5300
23143
7409
-3381
-13
-6
9
214.2
15609
5907
26643
8228
-3883
-13
-6
10
321.4
17422
9146
47364
11902
-5634
-13
-6
15
428.5
19236
12379
66514
15717
-7409
-13
-6
20
642.7
22862
18848
104820
23352
-10954
-13
-6
30
857.0
26489
25311
142855
31023
-14517
-13
-6
40
All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial assuming a 5 percent real discount rate.
Source: Authors’ calculations

SSI
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Food Housing
Stamps Benefits
2142
-2
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Medicare

Medicaid

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
-8522
-8531
-8531
-8531
-8531
-8531
-8531
-8531
-8531
-8531
-8531
-8531
-8531
-9

Table 17
Increase in Net Taxes and Transfers Paid or Received at Age 45 from Working Fulltime at Age 45
Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

Payroll
taxes

State
Taxes

Federal Consumption Corporate
Taxes
Taxes
Taxes

Social
Security
Benefits

TAFDC

21.4
1257
5
-226
853
-903
1
0
1
32.1
1886
241
611
1088
-862
1
0
1.5
42.8
2515
430
1154
1380
-996
1
0
2
64.3
3772
737
1857
2074
-1640
2
0
3
85.7
5030
1132
3564
2621
-1984
2
0
4
107.1
6287
1674
6279
2974
-1791
1
0
5
128.5
7545
2451
10094
3067
-740
1
0
6
150.0
8802
2974
11986
3507
-617
2
0
7
171.4
9804
3477
15885
3793
-566
0
0
8
192.8
10043
4011
19045
4152
-401
0
0
9
214.2
10281
4542
21896
4532
-245
0
0
10
321.4
11473
7632
40981
5711
2114
0
0
15
428.5
12664
11815
65249
5491
8468
0
0
20
642.7
15048
20515
115544
4784
22404
0
0
30
857.0
17431
27192
154449
6635
28940
0
0
40
All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial and assume a 5 percent real discount rate.
Source: Authors’ calculations

76

SSI
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Food Housing
Stamps Benefits
1090
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3
-3

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Medicare

Medicaid

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table 18
Increase in Net Taxes and Transfers Paid or Received at Age 55 from Working Fulltime at Age 55
Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income*

Payroll
taxes

State
Taxes

Federal Consumption Corporate
Taxes
Taxes
Taxes

Social
Security
Benefits

TAFDC

21.4
804
99
234
450
-269
0
1
32.1
1206
255
642
600
-225
0
1.5
42.8
1608
482
1443
656
71
0
2
64.3
2411
952
3311
751
648
0
3
85.7
3215
1411
5962
786
1187
0
4
107.1
4019
1837
8139
907
1599
0
5
128.5
4823
2234
10863
997
1909
0
6
150.0
5626
2617
12789
1155
2170
0
7
171.4
6282
2989
14824
1309
2387
0
8
192.8
6434
3371
17689
1421
2637
0
9
214.2
6586
3749
20286
1556
2877
0
10
321.4
7348
5264
29861
2817
2703
0
15
428.5
8110
6910
39913
3913
3010
0
20
642.7
9633
10471
61007
5877
4605
0
30
857.0
11157
13832
80399
8127
5473
0
40
All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial assuming a 5 percent real discount rate.
Source: Authors’ calculations

77

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

SSI
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Food Housing
Stamps Benefits
-8
-7
-7
-7
-7
-7
-7
-7
-7
-7
-7
-7
-7
-7
-7

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Medicare

Medicaid

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

0
-3
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table 19
Increase in Net Taxes and Transfers Paid or Received at Age 65 from Working Fulltime at Age 65
Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income*

Payroll
taxes

State
Taxes

Federal Consumption Corporate
Taxes
Taxes
Taxes

Social
Security
Benefits

TAFDC

21.4
478
116
193
206
59
62
1
32.1
717
152
337
350
-124
93
1.5
42.8
956
204
687
464
-262
124
2
64.3
1433
328
1281
694
-487
186
3
85.7
1911
511
2306
840
-502
249
4
107.1
2389
708
3251
974
-464
146
5
128.5
2867
901
4539
1100
-434
175
6
150.0
3344
1062
5605
1264
-527
204
7
171.4
3742
1220
6510
1443
-630
231
8
192.8
3833
1388
8089
1575
-697
231
9
214.2
3924
1559
9215
1742
-750
231
10
321.4
4376
1999
12074
3135
-2546
231
15
428.5
4829
2536
15271
4370
-3984
231
20
642.7
5735
3850
22733
6661
-5984
231
30
857.0
6640
4975
29086
9164
-8675
231
40
All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial assuming a 5 percent real discount rate.
Source: Authors’calculations

78

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

SSI
-17
-19
-10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Food Housing
Stamps Benefits
-25
-19
-16
-17
-21
-17
-17
-17
-17
-17
-17
-17
-17
-17
-17

0
-5
0
-1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Medicare

Medicaid

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

-288
-13
-12
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Table 20
Sensitivity of Average Net Fulltime Work Tax Rates to Discount and Growth Rates

Base Case

Discount
Rate
Equals 3
Percent

Discount
Rate
Equals 7
Percent

Growth
Rate
Equals
Zero
Percent

Growth Rate
Equals 2
Percent

21.4

-32.2

-47.4

-29.2

-30.7

-39.0

1.5

32.1

14.5

0.0

20.6

20.1

9.4

2

42.8

22.6

13.2

26.5

25.2

18.3

3

64.3

29.9

25.2

31.7

29.8

28.5

4

85.7

34.2

30.4

35.6

34.1

34.4

5

107.1

37.6

34.7

38.5

37.0

38.1

6

128.5

40.8

38.4

41.6

39.7

41.3

7

150.0

42.7

40.8

43.2

42.1

43.4

8

171.4

44.0

42.5

44.3

42.9

45.0

9

192.8

44.9

43.7

44.9

43.8

45.8

10

214.2

45.5

44.7

45.4

44.4

46.4

15

321.4

48.3

48.5

47.6

46.9

49.0

20

428.5

49.4

50.1

48.5

48.6

50.1

30

642.7

50.6

51.8

49.3

49.8

51.3

40

857.0

51.2

52.8

49.8

50.6

51.9

Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

1

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars. Present values are actuarial assuming a 5 percent real discount rate.
Source: Authors’calculations

Table 21
Sensitivity of Marginal Net Fulltime Work Tax Rates to Discount and Growth Rates

Base Case

Discount
Rate
Equals 3
Percent

Discount
Rate
Equals 7
Percent

Growth
Rate
Equals
Zero
Percent

Growth Rate
Equals 2
Percent

21.4

50.8

36.0

57.4

53.4

44.2

1.5

32.1

69.9

55.6

78.3

76.1

64.9

2

42.8

64.1

54.8

69.7

67.3

59.9

3

64.3

57.6

53.0

60.5

57.9

56.2

4

85.7

55.0

51.2

57.3

55.2

55.2

5

107.1

54.2

51.3

55.8

53.8

54.8

6

128.5

54.7

52.3

56.0

53.7

55.1

7

150.0

54.6

52.6

55.6

54.1

55.2

8

171.4

54.4

52.9

55.1

53.5

55.4

9

192.8

54.2

53.1

54.6

53.3

55.1

10

214.2

53.9

53.1

54.1

52.9

54.9

15

321.4

54.0

54.2

53.6

52.6

54.7

20

428.5

53.7

54.4

52.9

52.9

54.4

30

642.7

53.5

54.7

52.4

52.7

54.2

40

857.0

53.4

55.0

52.1

52.8

54.1

Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Household
Income

1

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

80

Table 22
Sensitivity of Average Net Fulltime Work Tax Rates to Policy Changes

Base
Case

Cut Payroll
Tax Rate by 5
Percentage
Points

Eliminate
Social
Security
Earnings
Ceiling

Raise
Payroll Tax
Rates by 5
Percentage
Points

Switch from
Federal
Income to
Consumption
Taxes

Immediate Cut
In Social
Security
Benefits by 25
Percent

21.4

-32.2

-37.4

-32.2

-27.3

-19.0

-31.4

1.5

32.1

14.5

10.5

14.5

18.3

21.1

15.7

2

42.8

22.6

18.9

22.6

26.2

26.7

22.5

3

64.3

29.9

26.3

29.9

33.4

30.5

30.4

4

85.7

34.2

30.7

34.2

37.6

31.6

35.8

5

107.1

37.6

34.1

37.6

40.9

32.7

38.9

6

128.5

40.8

37.5

40.8

44.0

33.5

42.0

7

150.0

42.7

39.4

42.7

45.9

34.1

43.8

8

171.4

44.0

40.9

44.2

47.1

34.3

45.0

9

192.8

44.9

42.1

45.7

47.6

33.9

45.7

10

214.2

45.5

43.0

46.8

47.9

33.7

46.3

15

321.4

48.3

46.6

50.9

49.9

33.3

48.9

20

428.5

49.4

48.2

52.6

50.6

33.1

49.9

30

642.7

50.6

49.8

54.4

51.4

32.9

50.9

40

857.0

51.2

50.6

55.4

51.8

32.8

51.5

Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Annual
Income*

1

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars
Source: Authors’ calculations.

Table 23
Sensitivity of Marginal Net Fulltime Work Tax to Policy Changes

Base
Case

Cut Payroll
Tax Rate by 5
Percentage
Points

Eliminate
Social
Security
Earnings
Ceiling

Raise
Payroll Tax
Rates by 5
Percentage
Points

Switch from
Federal
Income to
Consumption
Taxes

Immediate
Cut In Social
Security
Benefits by
25 Percent

21.4

50.8

47.6

50.8

53.8

64.1

51.6

1.5

32.1

69.9

67.2

69.9

72.4

76.4

71.0

2

42.8

64.1

61.4

64.1

66.8

68.2

64.0

3

64.3

57.6

54.6

57.6

60.4

58.1

58.0

4

85.7

55.0

51.9

55.0

57.9

52.3

56.5

5

107.1

54.2

51.1

54.2

57.1

49.3

55.5

6

128.5

54.7

51.7

54.7

57.6

47.3

55.9

7

150.0

54.6

51.5

54.6

57.5

45.9

55.6

8

171.4

54.4

51.5

54.6

57.2

44.7

55.4

9

192.8

54.2

51.6

54.9

56.7

43.2

55.0

10

214.2

53.9

51.6

55.1

56.2

42.1

54.7

15

321.4

54.0

52.4

56.5

55.5

39.0

54.5

20

428.5

53.7

52.5

56.8

54.9

37.4

54.2

30

642.7

53.5

52.7

57.2

54.3

35.8

53.8

40

857.0

53.4

52.8

57.4

54.0

34.9

53.6

Multiple of
Minimum
Wage

Initial
Annual
Income

1

All amounts are in thousands of 2002 dollars.
Source: Authors’ calculations.

82

