NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN INTERGENERATIONAL MODEL OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE

Robert A. Pollak

Working Paper 9099
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9099

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002

I am grateful to the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation and the John Simon Guggenheim
Memorial Foundation for financial support, to Marla Lieberman for interesting and useful conversations, to
Helen Tauchen for insightful comments, and especially to Shelly Lundberg for suggestions that have shaped
and reshaped this paper. Of course I retain responsibility for the views expressed. Earlier versions of this
paper were presented at Washington University in St. Louis, the University of Washington, Southern Illinois
University in Carbondale, Princeton University, the Population Association of America, Northwestern
University, the University of Chicago, the University of Pennsylvania, the University of Michigan, and Johns
Hopkins University. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Robert A. Pollak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

An Intergenerational Model of Domestic Violence
Robert A. Pollak
NBER Working Paper No. 9099
August 2002
JEL No. D1
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes and analyzes an intergenerational model of domestic violence (IMDV) in
which behavioral strategies or scripts are transmitted from parents to children.
The model rests upon three key assumptions:
* The probability that a husband will be violent depends on whether he grew up in a violent
home.
* The probability that a wife will remain with a violent husband depends on whether she grew
up in a violent home.
* Individuals who grew up in violent homes tend to marry individuals who grew up in violent
homes.
The IMDV calls attention to three features neglected in the domestic violence literature. The first
is the marriage market. If some men are more likely than others to be violent as husbands and some
women are more likely than others to remain in violent marriages, then the probability that such
individuals marry each other is crucial. The second neglected feature is divorce: ongoing domestic
violence requires the conjunction of a husband who is violent and a wife who stays. Third, variables and
policies that reduce the rate of domestic violence in the short run are likely to reduce it even further in the
long run.

Robert A. Pollak
Department of Economics, Campus Box 1208
Washington University in St. Louis
205 Eliot Hall
One Brookings Drive
St. Louis, MO 63130
and NBER
Tel: 314-935-4918
Fax: 314-935-6359
pollak@olin.wustl.edu

An Intergenerational Model of Domestic Violence
I.

Introduction
Domestic violence is a high-profile social problem, and its prevalence and causes have been

extensively discussed in both the social science literature and the popular media. The economic, social,
and psychological effects of domestic (i.e., marital or spousal) violence have also received considerable
attention from researchers.1 One focus of this attention has been the possible effects on children who
witness violence within the family, including effects on their own tendency to perpetrate or experience
domestic violence as adults. The phrase “cycle of violence” is commonplace in the literature on spouse
abuse, but there have been few attempts to model the intergenerational transmission of domestic
violence. This paper presents a simple model in which the prevalence of domestic violence in the long
run depends upon both the intergenerational transmission of propensities for violence within families and
on patterns of marriage and divorce. Its intention is to provide a prototype of more complex models
that might inform discussions of violence prevention and interventions, as well as to highlight potential
problems in estimating the parameters of such models and calculating the prevalence and correlates of
domestic violence.
The “violence begets violence” hypothesis has many variants, ranging from assertions that
abused children are more likely to become abusers themselves to concerns that viewing television
violence will increase aggressive behavior among children. A principal strand in the cycle-of-violence
literature examines the effects of witnessing violence between parents on the probability that children will
experience violence in their own marriages, either as perpetrators or as victims. Considerable evidence
has accumulated that there is a statistical relationship between violence in the parents’ marriage and
violence in the child’s, but the intergenerational transmission mechanism is not clear. The level of marital
violence will depend not only on how tendencies to commit and to tolerate violence are transmitted, but
also on who marries whom, and on which marriages or relationships remain intact long enough to
influence the behavior of children.

1

Although I phrase the discussion of domestic violence in terms of "marriage," the analysis also applies to
cohabitation.

Marriage and divorce patterns are thus crucial elements of the intergenerational transmission
process and of the equilibrium level of domestic violence. The selection of partners and the dissolution
of violent relationships will depend on individual characteristics that may be correlated with past
experiences of violence and with individual propensities for violence. The actual cycle of violence is
therefore a complex phenomenon and designing effective interventions depends upon understanding the
underlying transmission process. To explain the process and to focus attention on important gaps in our
empirical knowledge, I propose a model of the transmission of domestic violence that explicitly
recognizes the roles of marriage formation and dissolution. As in any dynamic model, the distinction
between the short run and the long run is essential, but as in any intergenerational model, the long run
can be very long.
The model's basic framework is one in which husbands may or may not be violent, and in which
the wives of violent husbands may or may not divorce them. The model assumes that men who are
raised in violent homes are more likely to be violent as adults, and that women who witness domestic
violence as children are more likely to remain with an abusive spouse. I initially assume that children are
affected by domestic violence only if their mothers fail to leave an abusive partner, then explore an
alternative specification in which divorce is imperfectly protective. The transmission mechanism of the
model is consistent with, but is not implied by, extensive evidence of a positive correlation between
parental domestic violence and future involvement in an abusive relationship. In section II I discuss the
empirical evidence that informs the intergenerational transmission model. A severe shortage of reliable
evidence concerning the relationships among marriage, divorce, family background, and violence makes
it difficult to assess alternative modeling strategies, but an explicit model helps identify data needs.
Section III provides an informal overview of the model, while section IV develops the simplest
version of the model, a version with no divorce and random mating. Section V adds divorce. The
addition of divorce focuses attention on the marriage market. Because ongoing domestic violence
depends upon the pairing of violent men with women who will stay with them, the prevalence of
domestic violence depends on the marital matching process. Section VI discusses assortative mating.
In a version of a model that allows selective matching on the basis of family background characteristics
associated with violence (i.e., women from violent homes are more likely to marry men from violent

2

homes) I show that the equilibrium level of violence increases with positive assortative mating.2 Section
VII is a brief conclusion.

II.

The Economics of Domestic Violence
Although the literature on domestic violence is vast, the literature within economics on this topic

is scant.3. Several recent papers examine the effects of spousal abuse on economic outcomes such as
women’s employment (Lloyd [1997], Bowlus and Seitz [2002]), or attempt to measure the overall cost
to society of domestic violence (Greaves, Hankivsky, and Kingston-Riechers [1995]). Estimates of this
cost depend upon the prevalence of violent marriages, which has proven very difficult to measure.
Domestic violence is believed to be underreported on surveys. In addition, reported rates are
sensitive both to the definition used and the way questions are posed. In the U.S., the National Crime
Victimization Survey yields estimates of annual rates violence by “intimates” that remained at about 6.5
per thousand for women and 1.2-1.8 per thousand for men during the 1980s, but these rates jumped
sharply in the early 1990s when the survey was revised. Rates reported in the National Crime
Victimization Survey are much lower than those implied by the National Family Violence Surveys of
1975 and 1985, which asked about specific types of violent behavior between husbands and wives and
did not require that the respondent identify this behavior as a “crime.” Rates of “severe” husband-towife violence of about 30 per thousand are implied by the responses to this survey, and reported rates
of severe wife-to-husband violence are even higher.4 A recent Canadian data source, the Violence
Against Women Survey finds that 29 percent of ever-married women and 50 percent of divorced
women have been the victims of spousal abuse.

2

One can make a priori arguments for negative rather than positive assortative mating and, for that matter, for
negative rather than positive patterns of intergenerational transmission (e.g., arguing that those who grow up in
violent homes realize how bad violence is and avoid it in choosing partners and in their own lives). Although some
individuals may react in this way, the empirical evidence (e.g., Kalmuss [1994]) suggests that the intergenerational
correlations are positive. Violence in the previous generation is a risk factor for violence.
3

Yoshikawa and Rosman [2000] survey the domestic violence literature with an emphasis on recent work in
psychology.
4

Blau [1998, pp. 155-158] reports these rates and provides references for the U.S. surveys. She concludes that there
is no evidence of an upward trend in domestic violence in these surveys.

3

Most economists who have attempted to explain domestic violence rather than document its
prevalence and effects have taken a game-theoretic approach. Tauchen, Witte, and Long [1991]
consider a noncooperative game in which violence has both expressive and instrumental components:
violence increases the husband’s utility directly, and may also increase his utility indirectly through
control of his wife’s behavior. Their paper, the most serious sustained attempt to account for domestic
violence within the framework of a bargaining model of marriage, specifies a two-stage game; whether
there is violence in equilibrium depends on the level of resources controlled by each spouse and on
whether the reservation utility constraint is binding (e.g., whether the wife is no better off remaining in the
marriage than she would be if she left). Farmer and Tiefenthaler [1997] present a noncooperative
model of domestic violence that implies that wives’ income and other financial support available from
outside the marriage will decrease the level of violence in intact families.
In a game-theoretic context, violence or the threat of violence can be regarded as an aspect of
the “threat point” in a cooperative bargaining model or as part of a “punishment strategy” in a noncooperative game. This framework points to factors such as the wife’s employment status or potential
earnings, or the attractiveness of her alternatives outside the marriage, as determinants of the incidence
of marital violence. Empirical studies of the wife’s economic dependence and its relationship to
violence, most of which have been based on small non-representative samples, have produced
somewhat mixed results. However, Tauchen, Witte and Long find the expected negative relationship
between violence and women’s income for low- and middle-income families in their sample. Farmer
and Tiefenthaler [1996] analyze the effectiveness of shelters and other services for battered women, and
argue that the use of such services can be a signal of a women's unwillingness to tolerate domestic
violence. Tauchen and Witte [1995] examine the effectiveness of alternative police practices (i.e.,
advising the couple; separating them temporarily; arresting the suspected perpetrator) in response to
domestic violence calls. An interesting paper by Bloch and Rao [2002] finds patterns of wife abuse in a
sample from Southern India that appear to be related to inter-household transfers, and in which transfers
appear to be driven by costs and benefits.
Stevenson and Wolfers [2002] investigate the relationship between divorce law changes and
domestic violence. Using state level data, they find a statistically significant relationship between the
4

adoption of unilateral divorce and a decline in domestic violence. They also find that the adoption of
unilateral divorce is associated with a decline in female suicide rates and in the likelihood that women
will be murdered by their partners.
In this paper I ignore bargaining and rational choice in order to focus on an aspect of the
empirical evidence concerning domestic violence that game-theoretic models have not addressed -- the
intergenerational correlation of domestic violence. Straus [1995] asserts: "The idea that child-abusing
parents were themselves victims of abuse, and that wife-beating husbands come from violent families, is
now widely accepted." (Straus [1995, p. 406]).5 I leave the analysis of child abuse to a future paper; in
this paper I consider only the intergenerational transmission of domestic violence.
III.

An Overview of the Model
I propose and analyze an intergenerational model of domestic violence in which behavioral

strategies or scripts are transmitted from parents to children: boys and girls learn the adult roles of
husbands and wives from their fathers and mothers.6 The substantial literature on epidemiology of family
violence recognizes multiple pathways of transmission, from witnessing violence in the community to
being a victim of family violence. The model assumes a particular transmission
pathway--witnessing domestic violence in the family of origin—though modeling a transmission
mechanism that allows genetic as well as environmental components is clearly desirable.7 Marriages and
divorces depend upon violence and propensities for violence in rather simple ways, but I do not model
the optimizing behavior of individuals.

5

Using the survey data collected by Straus and Gelles, Kalmuss [1994] provides some badly needed quantification.
She reports that both marital violence and parent-child violence in family of origin are related to domestic violence.
“When neither form of aggression occurred in one's childhood family, the probability of (husbandwife) aggression is 1%... When only parent-child hitting occurred, the probability is increased to
3%.... When only parental hitting, the probability doubles to 6%. Finally, when both types of
childhood aggression occurred, the probability of severe (husband-wife) aggression is 12%.” (p.
15)
6
The model is thus broadly consistent with models of "cultural transmission" such as those proposed by CavalliSforza and Feldman [1981] and by Boyd and Richerson [1985], but the emphasis here is on intergenerational
transmission within families and not on intragenerational transmission and peers.
7
Wrangham and Peterson [1996] argue that the human male propensity for domestic violence has deep roots in the
evolutionary history of our species, but their argument has no obvious implications for understanding differences in
behavior across societies, changes in behavior within societies over time, or differences in the behavior of

5

The model rests upon three key assumptions:
1. The probability that a husband will be violent depends on whether he grew up in a violent home.
2. The probability that a wife will remain with a violent husband depends on whether she grew up in a
violent home.
3. Individuals who grew up in violent homes tend to marry individuals who grew up in violent homes;
individuals who grew up in nonviolent homes tend to marry individuals who grew up in nonviolent
homes.
The assumption that marital violence is asymmetric, that the husband is the perpetrator and the wife the
victim, is at odds with survey evidence that wives report as many acts of violence towards their
husbands as by their husbands.8 The usual assumption that men inflict most serious injuries is supported
by the National Crime Victimization Survey, which reports much higher rates of violence towards
women, and by relative rates of homicide by intimates.9
Heterogeneity of both men and women is central to the model: some husbands are violent,
others are not; some wives divorce violent husbands, others do not. Each individual's behavior is
random, but the probabilities are determined by the presence or absence of violence in the individual's
family of origin. The intergenerational model of domestic violence (IMDV) relies on
propensities and probabilities rather than on utility maximization and strategic behavior. It thus follows
the precedent of evolutionary, demographic, and epidemiological models rather than of rational choice
models.10 Avoiding the complications of rational choice, I focus on other complications. A
thoroughgoing rational choice version of the IMDV would require allowing individuals to make choices
regarding marriage, fertility, violence, and divorce. Like the IMDV, however, any satisfactory model of
domestic violence must recognize the role of parents' behavior in shaping and molding their children's
preferences.11

individuals within a society.
8
Straus and Gelles [1986]; Straus [1997].
9
Bachman and Saltzman [1995].
10
Unlike evolutionary games in which fitness is density dependent, I assume that survival probabilities and
reproductive success are independent of the composition of the population and identical for all individuals.
11
On the transmission of preferences, see Pollak [1976], Becker [1992], Pollak and Watkins [1993], and Becker [1996].

6

The basic structure of the IMDV can be described with the use of a time line. We begin in
period t with an initial vector showing the number of men and the number of women of each type in the
population where types are defined in terms of sex and home environment (violent/nonviolent). The
model specifies a sequence of five stages that defines a mapping of the population by type in period t
into the population by type in period t+1:
(1) marriages
(2) births
(3) signals indicating whether the husband will be violent
(4) divorce/nondivorce
(5) violence/nonviolence.
Time Line
marriages

births

signals

divorce

violence

marriages

------------------- ------------------ ------------------- ----------------------- ----------------- -------------Period t

Period t+1

This sequence reflects two simplifying assumptions. First, realized violence affects neither marriage nor
fertility. If signals regarding propensities for violence are broadcast during courtship (e.g., if violence in
the families of origin of potential spouses are observable), we might expect both assortative mating and
systematic differences in marriage and fertility rates between different types of individuals. The timing
assumptions of the model preclude this: realized violence occurs too late to affect marriage or fertility.
Second, I begin with the assumption that divorce occurs, if at all, before violence has occurred (e.g.,
because divorce is triggered by the signal that violence will occur rather than by the occurrence of
violence). This assumption implies that divorce is "fully protective" because divorce prevents children
from witnessing domestic violence. I then examine the consequences of relaxing the assumption that
divorce is fully protective of children.
IV.

The Simplest IMDV: No Divorce and Random Mating

7

I begin with notation to characterize the population distribution in period t:
π Ft = the fraction of women who grew up in violent homes in period t
π Mt = the fraction of men who grew up in violent homes in period t

I assume that propensities for violence depend upon the type of home (violent or nonviolent) in
which the husband grew up:
pv = the probability that a man will be violent if he grew up in a violent home
pv = the probability that a man will be violent if he grew up in a nonviolent home

These probabilities are crucial parameters of the IMDV. Not surprisingly, the equilibrium level of
violence is increasing in both p parameters. I assume pv ≤ pv . Intergenerational transmission of a
propensity toward violence corresponds to the strict inequality (i.e., pv < pv ), but the polar case in
which pv = pv provides a benchmark.

The simplest version of the IMDV assumes that mating is random with respect to the family
background (violent/nonviolent) of men and women, and that marriages cannot be dissolved. I begin by
calculating the fraction of violent homes in period t+1, assuming random mating and no divorce:
(1a)

π t+1 = pvπ Ft π Mt + pv π Ft (1 − π Mt ) + pv (1 − π Ft )π Mt + pv (1 − π Ft )(1 − π Mt )

Since π Ft = π Mt = π t , (1a) reduces to

(1b)

π t+1 = pvπ t + pv (1 − π t )

and we can rewrite (1b) as
(1c)

π t+1 = pv + ( pv − pv )π t .

8

In a steady state, π = π t = π t+1 , so that (1b) implies

(2a)

π = pvπ + pv (1 − π ) .

We can investigate the existence, uniqueness, and comparative statics properties of the long-run
equilibrium by solving (2a) for π as a function of pv and pv

(3)

π = pv [1 − ( pv − pv )] .

Clearly, this simple version of the IMDV has a unique long-run equilibrium. Furthermore, it is
straightforward to show from equation (3) that the equilibrium value of π is an increasing function of pv
and of pv . Equation (2) implies that π is a weighted average of pv and pv and, hence,
pv ≤ π ≤ pv .
As pv increases from 0 to pv , the equilibrium value of π increases from 0 to pv . As pv increases from
pv to 1, the equilibrium value of π increases from pv to 1.
In versions of the IMDV with divorce and assortative mating, I use a different approach to
investigate existence, uniqueness, and comparative statics. In those versions of the IMDV, the
equations analogous to (2a) are nonlinear and I rely on the implicit function theorem rather than explicitly
solving for the equilibrium value of π . With no divorce and random mating, the analogue of the implicit
function approach rearranges (2a) by moving π to the right-hand side, defines a function G(π ) by
(2b) G(π ) = pv π + p v (1 − π ) − π
and observes that the equilibrium level of π is implicitly defined by the equation
(2c) G (π *) = 0 .

Differences between the long-run and short-run effects of a change in the parameters on the
level of violence can be easily seen in this simple model. For example, an increase in the probability that
a man from a violent home will be violent will have a smaller impact on the rate of violence in the next

9

period (differentiate (1b) with respect to pv ), than it will have on the equilibrium level of violence (from
(3)).
The dynamics are also straightforward. Equation (1c) is the familiar nonhomogeneous linear
difference equation12 whose solution is

(4)

π t = ( pv − pv ) t π 0 + pv

[1 − ( pv − pv ) t ]
.
[1 − ( pv − pv )]

As t increases, ( pv − pv ) approaches 0 and π t converges to the equilibrium (3).
t

Three degenerate cases provide benchmarks:
Case 1. If pv = pv , then π = pv = pv . That is, if the probability that a man will be violent is the same
regardless of whether he comes from a violent or a nonviolent home, then the equilibrium is equal to this
common probability.
Case 2. If pv = 1 and pv ≠ 0 , then π = 1 . That is, if all men from violent homes are violent and some
men from nonviolent homes are violent then in equilibrium all men are violent.
Case 3. If pv = 0 and pv ≠ 1 , then π = 0 . That is, if men from nonviolent homes are never violent and
not all men from violent homes are violent, then in equilibrium violence disappears.13
A diagram illustrates the long-run equilibria corresponding to various parameter combinations.
We plot pv on the x-axis and pv on the y-axis; points below the 45° ray correspond to parameter
combinations satisfying the condition that pv < pv . The equilibrium level of violence is constant along
the plotted curves, each of which is a straight line radiating from the point ( pv , pv ) = (1, 0). The level of
violence corresponding to each curve can be inferred from the values of pv and pv corresponding to the

12
13

See Luenberger [1979, pp. 19-22].
If pv = 1 and pv = 0 , then equation (1c) implies a neutral equilibrium in which π t +1

initial value of

π0.
10

= π t = π 0 regardless of the

intersection of the curve with the 45° ray from the origin; along the 45° ray, pv = pv and the equilibrium
value of π is equal to their common value.14
Figure 1 goes about here
V. Divorce
I next add divorce to the simplest model by assuming that women who grew up in nonviolent
homes are less likely to stay with violent husbands than are women from violent homes. Allowing
divorce to depend on family background makes the model much more complex by requiring two
additional parameters and destroying linearity. In certain degenerate cases, however, the model with
divorce becomes as transparent as the model without divorce. I begin by assuming that divorce is “fully
protective” in the sense that children who grow up in single parent families have the same propensities to
violence and to divorce as children who grow up in nonviolent two parent families.
Notation for staying with a violence husband is more convenient that notation for leaving:
sv = the probability that a women will stay married to a violent husband if she grew up in a violent
home, and
sv = the probability that a woman will stay married to a violent husband if she grew up in a nonviolent
home.
I assume sv ≤ s v . An intergenerational transmission of a propensity for women to stay with
violent husbands corresponds to the strict inequality (i.e., sv < s v ), but the polar case in which sv = sv
provides a benchmark.15 With the introduction of divorce, the probability that a man has a propensity
to be violent and the probability that an observed marriage will be violent are no longer equal. Empirical
studies of domestic violence and its effects must recognize that this selectivity implies that observed
violent marriages constitute a population that differs systematically in terms of other characteristics as

14

I am grateful to Helen Tauchen for suggesting this figure.
I do not introduce notation for the probabilities that women from each type of home will stay married to nonviolent
husbands, because these probabilities play no role in the analysis.
15

11

well, and many of these other characteristics will influence the experiences and characteristics of
children.16
We now need to distinguish among four types of marriages, depending on the type of home in
which the husband grew up and the type of home in which the wife grew up. For each type, we have a
probability that the husband will be violent and, for each type, a probability that the wife will stay
married if her husband is violent. Hence, given the fraction of violent homes in period t, we can
calculate the fraction of violent homes in period t+1:
(5a)

π t+1 = s v pvπ Ftπ Mt + sv pv π Ft (1 − π Mt ) + sv pv (1 − π Ft )π Mt + sv pv (1 − π Ft )(1 − π Mt )

Recognizing that π Ft = π Mt = π t , (5a) can be rewritten as

(5b)

π t+1 = s v pv π 2t + sv pv π t (1 − π t ) + s v pv (1 − π t )π t + sv pv (1 − π t ) 2

Moving π t +1 to the right hand side of (5b) and rewriting it in terms of the equilibrium value of π , the
equilibrium condition becomes

(6)

G(π ) = sv pvπ 2 + s v pv π (1 − π ) + sv pvπ (1 − π ) + sv pv (1 − π )2 − π = 0

Equation (5b) implies that π t +1 is a weighted average of the four factors {sv pv , s v pv , s v pv , s v pv }. Under
our assumptions, this implies
sv pv ≤ π t+1 ≤ sv pv .
*
*
The existence of an equilibrium value of π -- that is, a value π , 0 ≤ π ≤ 1, for which

G(π * ) = 0 --follows immediately from the continuity of the function G(⋅) , the intermediate value

theorem, and the observations that
16

Bowlus and Seitz [2002] find that domestic violence plays an important role in the divorce decision: the divorce
rate of women in the Canadian Violence Against Women Survey who were not abused was 15%, while the divorce

12

G(0 ) = sv pv > 0 , and
G(1) = sv pv − 1 < 0 .
Figure 2 illustrates the argument for existence and the argument for uniqueness (below).17
To establish uniqueness, we appeal to the fact that the function G(.) is quadratic. This fact, in
conjunction with G(0) > 0 and G(1) < 0, implies that the function G(.) has exactly one 0 in the interval
∗

[0,1]. This argument also implies that G(.) is downward sloping at the equilibrium, π . (The argument
does not imply that the function G(.) is monotonically decreasing on the interval [0,1]; the conclusion
we require is that G(.) crosses the x-axis exactly once on the interval [0,1] and is downward sloping
when it crosses the axis.)
Figure 2 goes about here
The quadratic formula, which I present in the Appendix, yields an opaque expression for the equilibrium
value of π in terms of the four parameters {pv , pv , sv , sv }.18 The model with divorce becomes
transparent in three special cases.
Case 1. Suppose sv = sv = s , so the probability that a wife will stay married to a violent husband is
independent of whether she grew up in a violent or a nonviolent home. In this case, because pv and pv
are always multiplied by the common value of s and because s appears nowhere else, we can attach the
common “staying probability” to pv and pv ; using the newly defined parameters,

pv∗ = spv
rate for women who reported being severely abused in their first marriage was 75%.
17
This argument ignores the two boundary cases (i.e., sv pv = 0 and sv pv = 1) and assumes that the strict
inequalities hold.
18

Figure 2 shows a quadratic that decreases monotonically on the interval [0,1], but the argument does not depend
on this assumption and is consistent with any quadratic satisfying our end point conditions. It is not difficult to
show that G( π) must be decreasing at π = 0 and at the equilibrium π = π*. It may, however, reach a minimum on the
interval (π*, 1) and be increasing at π = 1.

13

pv∗ = spv ,

the model with common divorce rates becomes formally identical to the reparameterized model without
divorce. Using the earlier argument, we have an expression for the equilibrium level of violence that is
analogous to equation (3):

(7)

π=

pv∗
.
1 − ( pv∗ − pv∗ )

Not surprisingly, divorce prevents the transmission of some violence under our assumptions, and so
reduces the equilibrium level of violence.
Case 2. Suppose pv = pv = p , so that the probability that a man will be violent is independent of
whether he grew up in a violent home. In this case intergenerational transmission takes place only
through the propensity of women to remain with violent husbands. We can attach the common “violence
probability” to sv and sv and, rewrite (5b) using the newly defined parameters,

sv∗ = s v p
∗
. sv = s v p

Solving for the equilibrium level of violence yields
(8)

π=

sv∗
.
1 − ( s ∗v − s∗v )

Case 3. Suppose sv = 0 , so that women who grew up in nonviolent homes will not stay married to
violent husbands. In this case, the equilibrium condition (6) reduces to

π = p∗v π 2 + p∗v (1 − π )π , where pv∗ = s v pv and pv∗ = s v pv .
One solution is clearly π = 0 , the case in which violence disappears. In fact, this is the only admissible
solution unless other parameters also assume boundary values. To see this, notice that if π ≠ 0 , we can
divide through by π and the equilibrium condition becomes
14

1 = pv∗π + p∗v (1 − π ) .
∗
∗
∗
That is, a weighted average of pv and pv must equal unity. If π = 1, this implies pv = 1, and, hence,

sv = pv = 1 (i.e., men who grew up in violent homes are always violent, and women who grew up in
∗
∗
violent homes always stay married to violent husbands). If π ≠ 1 , this is possible only if both pv and pv

equal unity, so that we must have both sv = pv = 1, and pv = 1 (the additional requirement implies that
men who grew up in nonviolent homes are always violent.)
I now relax the assumption that divorce is fully protective for children born into violent families
and assume instead that divorce is only partially protective. This may be the case if some violence
precedes the divorce or if propensities to commit or to tolerate violence are transmitted from parents to
children by some mechanism other than the actual observation of violence. More precisely, I assume
that for a child born into a violent family, divorce is fully protective with probability γ and not at all
protective with probability (1- γ). It is convenient to define a parameter ω to represent the fraction of
children who possess the propensities characteristic of children who grew up in violent homes. Thus ω
includes both children who grew up in violent homes and children who left violent homes but for whom
divorce was not protective. With this convention the equilibrium level of domestic violence, π , will be
less than the equilibrium level of ω ; women who divorce will not themselves be victims of violence, but
with probability (1- γ) their children will carry the same propensities as children who grew up in violent
homes.19 Two comments are in order: (i) Although I have assumed that transmission is based on
learning and imitation, if the transmission process includes genetic components, then divorce will not be
fully protective. (ii) The assumption that divorce is equally protective (or equally unprotective) for boys
and their propensity to perpetrate violence and for girls and their propensity to tolerate violence is only a
convenient simplification.
When divorce is not fully protective, the analogue of equation (5b) is obtained by adding to
each of the four terms an additional term corresponding to the children who left violent homes but who
19

I continue to assume that divorce protects women from experiencing domestic violence, ignoring the possibility
that their ex-husbands will pursue them. Wilson and Daly [1993] present data showing that spousal homicide is more
female-biased in estranged than in co-residing married couples.

15

have the same propensities to perpetrate and tolerate violence as children who grew up in violent
homes. Thus, the analogue of equation (5b) is given by

(9)

ω t+1 = sv** pv ω2t + sv** pvωt (1 − ω t ) + sv** pv (1 − ωt )ωt + sv** pv (1 − ωt ) 2

**
**
where sv and s v are given by

sv** = sv + (1 − γ )(1 − sv )

and

s **
= sv + (1 − γ )(1 − sv ).
v

The formal properties of the model are unaffected by relaxing the assumption that divorce is not fully
protective. If divorce is not at all protective, then the transmission process is equivalent to that in the
model with no divorce. The equilibrium level of violence, however, is not the same in the two models
because women who divorce are not themselves victims of domestic violence. The equilibrium level of
domestic violence can be calculated directly from the equilibrium level ofω :

(10)

VI.

π = sv pvω 2 + sv pv ω (1 − ω ) + sv pv (1 − ω )ω + sv pv (1 − ω ) 2

Assortative Mating
I now relax the assumption that women from violent and nonviolent homes are equally likely to

marry men who grew up in violent homes and investigate the implications of assortative mating. A
positive association between the family backgrounds of husbands and wives, and thus between their
propensities to commit and to tolerate violence, may result from a correlation between violence
propensities and other characteristics that affect matching, such as gender role attitudes, or because of
signals sent and received during courtship. To generalize the analysis from random mating to assortative
mating and obtain strong results requires specific functional form assumptions.20 I consider a particularly
tractable one-parameter specification of assortative mating.

20

A similar situation arises in generalizing the one-sex model of classical stable population theory, which is inherently
a linear model, to a two-sex model, which is inherently nonlinear. Strong results in the generalized model require
specific functional form assumptions; see Pollak [1990].

16

Suppose the marriage market is composed of three distinct submarkets—a “mixed” or
“combined” submarket that contains both individuals who grew up in violent homes and individuals who
grew up in nonviolent homes, and two “pure” submarkets, one composed only of individuals who grew
up in violent homes and the other composed only of individuals who grew up in nonviolent homes. I
limit myself to the special case in which the same fraction, (1 −σ ) , of individuals from violent and from
nonviolent homes enter the combined marriage market. Within the combined submarket, I assume
random mating. We can think of the allocation of individuals to submarkets as a two stage procedure.
First select an individual at random from the population; with probability π t the individual will be from a
violent home and with probability 1− π t from a nonviolent home. Second, assign the randomly selected
individual to the appropriate pure submarket with probability σ and to the combined submarket with
probability (1 −σ ) .

Characterizing marriages by the type of home (violent or nonviolent) in which the husband and
the wife grew up, we distinguish among four types of marriages. In the two pure submarkets, however,
only one of the four types is represented, while in the combined submarket all four types are
represented. To establish the existence and uniqueness of equilibrium in the IMDV with divorce and
assortative mating, we calculate the fraction of violent homes in period t+1:

(11a)

π t+1 = σ s v pvπ t + σ svv pv (1 − π t ) + (1 − σ )sv pvπ 2t + (1 − σ )s v pv π t (1 − π t )
+(1 − σ ) sv pvπ t (1 − π t ) + (1 − σ ) sv pv (1 − π t ) 2

The first two terms represent the contributions of the two pure submarkets; the last four terms, the
contribution of the combined submarket.

17

Two polar cases are transparent. When σ = 0, the two pure submarkets disappear and the
model reduces to the random mating model discussed in section V. When σ = 1, the mixed or
combined submarket disappears and the model reduces to “pure assortative mating” – individuals from
violent homes marry individuals from violent homes, and individuals from nonviolent homes marry
individuals from nonviolent homes. With pure assortative mating, equation (10a) becomes
(11b) π t+1 = sv pvπ t + sv pv (1 − π t )
which is linear in π . The model with pure assortative mating is isomorphic to the model with random
mating and no divorce discussed in section IV. The long-run equilibrium is given by

(12)

π=

rv
1 − ( rv − rv )

where rv = s v pv and rv = sv pv and the dynamics are given by an equation analogous to (4). A diagram
analogous to figure 1 illustrates the long-run equilibria corresponding to various combinations of rv and
rv .

Returning to the general case, we establish the existence of equilibrium as we did in the case of
random mating, by moving π t +1 to the right hand side of (12a), and replacing π t +1 and π t by the
equilibrium value, π . The equilibrium condition becomes

(13)

G(π , σ ) = σ sv pvπ + σ svv pv (1 − π ) + (1 − σ )sv pvπ 2 + (1 − σ )sv pv π (1 − π )
+(1 − σ )s vv pvπ (1 − π ) + (1 − σ ) svv pv (1 − π ) 2 − π = 0

We observe that, as with random mating,
G(0, σ ) = sv pv > 0 and
G(1, σ ) = sv pv − 1 < 0.
18

The existence of an equilibrium value of π follows immediately from the continuity of the function
G(⋅,σ ) and the intermediate value theorem. To establish uniqueness, we observe that with our oneparameter specification of assortative mating the function G(⋅,σ ) is quadratic. Hence, the argument
from the random mating case applies here as well.
The greater the degree of assortative mating (i.e., the greater the value of σ), the greater the
equilibrium level of domestic violence. This comparative statics result follows from the implicit function
theorem. Since G(π , σ ) = 0 , we have

π = g(σ )
and

(14)

∂G (π , σ )
dπ dg(σ )
∂σ
=
=−
∂
G
(π , σ ) .
dσ
dσ
∂π

The uniqueness argument implies that the function G(π , σ ) crosses the x-axis exactly once on the interval
[0,1] and that it is downward sloping at the point π * at which G(π *, σ ) = 0 ; hence

∂G(π *, σ )
< 0.
∂π
Thus, the sign of dπ / dσ is the same as the sign of ∂G(π , σ ) / ∂σ . Differentiating G(π ,σ) with respect
to σ and combining terms we obtain

(15)

∂G(π , σ )
= sv pv − sv pv − sv pv + sv pv π (1 − π )
∂σ
= (s v − sv )( pv − pv )π (1 − π )

The first two factors are positive because of our assumptions about intergenerational transmission (e.g.,
men from violent homes are more likely to be violent than men from nonviolent homes); the third and
fourth factors are positive because π lies between 0 and 1. Hence
19

∂G(π , σ )
>0
∂σ
and so
dπ dg(σ )
=
>0
dσ
dσ

QED.
Thus, assortative mating on aspects of family background that are related to individual
propensities to perpetrate or tolerate violence will increase the equilibrium level of violence.

VII.

Conclusion
The IMDV formalizes the commonplace notion of an intergenerational “cycle of domestic

violence” providing a highly stylized representation of domestic violence and its transmission. It treats
intergenerational transmission as stochastic -- witnessing domestic violence in the family of origin is not
an inexorable precursor of violence, but it does increase the likelihood of violence. The motivation for
violence is purely expressive and not at all instrumental: violence and threats of violence are not
manifestations of power used to enforce allocational or distributional outcomes. The IMDV is thus
consistent with the “culture of violence” analysis emphasized by Straus and Gelles [1995].
The IMDV is less consistent with recent bargaining models of marriage, including those
developed in Lundberg and Pollak [1993, 1994, 1996]. Lundberg and Pollak [1993] develops a
cooperative model with an internal (noncooperative) threat point and suggests that incorporating
domestic violence into this type of bargaining model could shed light on both distribution within marriage
and the incidence of domestic violence. But incorporating domestic violence into a bargaining model of
marriage is difficult for much the same reasons that incorporating strikes into models of union-firm
bargaining is difficult: in the absence of mistakes or private information, neither domestic violence nor
strikes will occur in equilibrium.21

20

Although the IMDV is not a rational choice model, it could easily be modified to allow
maximizing behavior at the key decision points—marriage, fertility, divorce, and violence—while
maintaining the emphasis on intergenerational linkages. Economic factors, policy variables, and social
and cultural factors might influence domestic violence through the probabilities that are the parameters of
the model. For example, economic factors such as earnings and the availability of welfare benefits might
influence domestic violence primarily through their effect on marriage and divorce probabilities.22 The
model may thus cast some light on the effect on domestic violence of welfare reform policies that create
incentives to keep marriages together because such policies are likely to increase the probability that
violent as well as nonviolent marriages remain intact. Policy variables, such as the way police respond
to domestic violence complaints and the way courts treat domestic violence cases, might influence
domestic violence primarily through their direct effect on violence probabilities. The social and cultural
acceptability of violence might also influence violence probabilities and probabilities of divorce in the
event of violence.
The IMDV calls attention to three features neglected in the domestic violence literature. The
first is the marriage market. If some men are more likely than others to be violent as husbands and
some women are more likely than others to remain in violent marriages, then the probability that such
individuals marry each other is crucial. Furthermore, to the extent that these assortative mating results
generalize to more complex specifications, the equilibrium level of domestic violence increases
monotonically with assortative mating on the basis of violence or on characteristics related to violence in
families of origin. The second neglected feature is divorce: ongoing domestic violence requires the
conjunction of a husband who is violent and a wife who stays. Appropriate measures of the prevalence
and correlates of domestic violence depend on whether the population at risk is defined as couples who
entered marriage at a particular date or as married couples at a particular date.23 Hence, recognition of
the importance of the marriage market and divorce is crucial to calculating such measures. Third,
variables and policies that reduce the rate of domestic violence in the short run are likely to reduce it
even further in the long run. Amplification of the impact effect follows from the dynamics of
intergenerational transmission: a permanent change in an economic or policy variable that reduces the
21

Kennan [1986] and Cramton and Tracy [1992] discuss strikes.
It would be more difficult to generalize the model to include an intergenerational transmission mechanism for
earnings, and to allow earnings or earnings prospects to play a role in the marriage market.
23
Similar analytic issues arise in thinking about the correlates of welfare or unemployment; the population entering
22

21

rate of violence in period t reduces it even further in period t+1 and beyond because it reduces the
fraction of individuals who grew up in violent families.

welfare at a particular date looks very different from the population of welfare recipients.

22

References
Bachman, Ronet and Linda E. Saltzman. Violence Against Women: A National Crime
Victimization Survey Report. U.S. Department of Justice, January 1994.
Becker, Gary S., “Habits, Addictions, and Traditions,” Kyklos, Vol. 45, No. 3, (1992), 327-345.
Reprinted as Becker [1996, Ch. 6].
Becker, Gary S. Accounting for Tastes, Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1996.
Blau, Francine D., “Trends in the Well-Being of American Women, 1970-1995,” Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. XXXVI, No. 1, (March 1998), 112-165.
Bloch, Francis and Vijayendra Rao, “Terror as a Bargaining Instrument: A Case-Study of‘ Dowry
Violence in Rural India,” forthcoming, American Economic Review, 2002.
Boyd, R. and Richerson, P. J. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press, 1985.
Bowlus, Audra and Shannon Seitz, “Domestic Employment and Divorce," June 2002.
Cramton, Peter C., and Joseph S. Tracy, "Strikes and Holdouts in Wage Bargaining: Theory and Data,"
American Economic Review, Vol. 82, No. 1 (March 1992), 100-121.
Cavalli-Sforza, L.L. and M.W. Feldman, Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative
Approach, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1981.
Cherlin, Andrew J., Public and Private Families, New York: McGraw Hill, 1996.
Farmer, Amy and Jill Tiefenthaler, “Domestic Violence: The Value of Services as Signals,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 86, No. 2, (May 1996), 274-279.
Farmer, Amy and Jill Tiefenthaler, “An Economic Analysis of Domestic Violence,” Review of Social
Economy, Vol. 55, No. 3, (Fall 1997), 337-358.
Greaves, Lorraine, Olena Hankivsky, and JoAnn Kingston-Riechers. Selected Estimates of the Costs
of Violence Against Women. Centre for Research on Violence Against Women and Children, 1995.
Kalmuss, Debra, “The Intergenerational Transmission of Marital Aggression,” Journal of Marriage
and the Family, Feb. 1994, 11-19.
Kennan, John, "The Economics of Strikes," in Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds.,
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 2. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company, 1986,
1091-1137.
Lloyd, Susan, “The Effects of Domestic Violence on Women's Employment,” Law and Policy, Vol. 9,
No. 2 (April, 1997), 139-167.
23

Luenberger, David, Introduction to Dynamic Systems: Theory, Models, and Applications, New
York: John Wiley & Sons, 1979.
Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, “Separate Spheres Bargaining and the Marriage Market,”
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 101, No. 6, (December 1993), 988-1010.
Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, “Noncooperative Bargaining Models of Marriage,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 84, No. 2, (May 1994), 132-137.
Lundberg, Shelly and Robert A. Pollak, "Bargaining and Distribution in Marriage," Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 10, No. 4, (fall 1996), 139-158.
Pollak, Robert A., “Interdependent Preferences,” American Economic Review Vol. 66, No. 3 (June
1976), 309-320.
Pollak, Robert A., "Two-Sex Demographic Models," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 98, No. 2,
(April, 1990), 399-420.
Pollak, Robert A. and Susan Cotts Watkins, “Cultural and Economic Approaches to Fertility: Proper
Marriage or Mésalliance?” Population and Development Review, Vol. 19, No. 3, (September
1993), 467-496.
Straus, Murray A., “Physical Assaults by Women Partners: A Major Social Problem,” in Mary Roth
Walsh, ed., Women, Men, and Gender: Ongoing Debates. New Haven: Yale University Press,
1997, 210-221.
Straus, Murray A. and Richard J. Gelles, Physical Violence in American Families: Risk Factors and
Adaptations to Violence in 8,145 Families, New Brunswick: Transaction Publishers. 1990.
Straus, Murray A. and Richard J. Gelles, “Societal Change and Change in Family Violence from 1975
to 1985 as Revealed by Two National Surveys,” Journal of Marriage and the Family, Vol. 48
(1986), 465-479.
Stevenson, Betsey and Justin Wolfers, "'Til Death Do Us Part: The Effects of Divorce Laws on Suicide,
Domestic Violence and Intimate Homicide," mimeo, Stanford University, 2002.
Tauchen, Helen V., Ann Dryden Witte, and Sharon K. Long, “Violence in the Family: A Non-random
Affair,” International Economic Review, Vol. 32, No. 2, (May 1991), 491-511.
Tauchen, Helen V. and Ann Dryden Witte, “The Dynamics of Domestic Violence,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 2, (May 1995), 414-418.
Wilson, Margo and Martin Daly, “Spousal Homicide Risk and Estrangement,” Violence and Victims,
Vol. 8, No. 1 (1993), 3-16.
24

Wrangham, Richard and Dale Peterson, Demonic Males: Apes and the Origins of Human Violence,
London: Bloomsbury, 1996.
Yoshikawa, Hirokazu and Elisa A. Rosman, "A Research Agenda for Primary Prevention of Domestic
Violence Prepetration in Young Adulthood," mimeo, New York University, 2002.

25

Appendix: A Necessary but Uninformative Quadratic
It is convenient to write the function G(π ) in a form sufficiently general to accommodate
assortative mating as well as divorce:
G (π ) = Aπ 2 + Bπ (1 − π ) + C (1 − π ) 2 + Dπ + E

or, equivalently
G (π ) = aπ 2 + bπ + c

where
a=A–B+C
b = B – 2C + D
c = C + E.
From the quadratic formula:
π* =

−b ± b 2 − 4ac
2a

2
The existence argument implies that b − 4ac ≥0 so that the quadratic has real roots. The uniqueness
argument implies that if the roots are distinct, one and only one of them lies in the interval [0, 1].

In the absence of assortative mating, D = -1 and E = 0, so
a = A − B + C = sv pv − sv pv − sv pv + sv pv
b = B − 2 C − 1 = sv pv + sv pv − 2s v pv − 1
c = C = sv pv .

26

Fig. 1 -- Long-Run Equilibrium.

pv ′

π =1

0

π=0

pv

27

Fig. 2 -- Existence and Uniqueness of Long-Run Equilibrium.

1
G( )

1

0

π

-1

28

