NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CAPITAL ACCOUNT LIBERALIZATION AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE:
SURVEY AND SYNTHESIS

Hali J. Edison
Michael W. Klein
Luca Ricci
Torsten Sloek

Working Paper 9100
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9100

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002

A part of this work was used as input for Chapter 4 of the October 2001 World Economic Outlook.The
authors thank Tamim Bayoumi,Ross Levine,Dennis Quinn,and Frank Warnock for comments and suggestions
and Yutong Li for assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Hali J. Edison, Michael W. Klein, Luca Ricci and Torsten Sloek. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Capital Account Liberalization and Economic Performance: Survey and Synthesis
Hali J. Edison, Michael W. Klein, Luca Ricci and Torsten Sloek
NBER Working Paper No. 9100
August 2002
JEL No. F32, F33, F36
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the literature on the effects of capital account liberalization and stock market
liberalization on economic growth. The various empirical measures used to gauge the presence of controls
on capital account transactions as well as indicators of stock market liberalization are discussed. We
compare detailed measures of capital account controls that attempt to capture the intensity of enforcement
with others that simply capture whether or not controls are present. Our review of the literature shows the
contrasting results that have been obtained. These differences may reflect differences in country coverage,
sample periods and indicators of liberalization. In order to reconcile these differences, we present new
estimates of the effects on growth of capital account liberalization and stock market liberalization. We
find some support for a positive effect of capital account liberalization on growth, especially for
developing countries.

Hali J. Edison
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431
hedison@imf.org

Michael W. Klein
Fletcher School, Tufts University
Medford, MA 02155
and NBER
michael.klein@tufts.edu

Luca Ricci
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431
lricci@imf.org

Torsten Sloek
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431
tsloek@imf.org

INTRODUCTION
Economic theory suggests that unfettered international capital flows can foster a more
efficient allocation of resources, provide opportunities for risk diversification, and help
promote financial development. In recognition of these potential benefits, governments of
industrial countries have undertaken widespread capital account liberalization over the past
quarter-century. Many attribute efficiency gains, increased diversification opportunities, and
financial development in these countries to opening up capital markets.
A natural policy prescription, therefore, is to extend this process of international
financial integration to other, economically less developed, countries.1 But this view has been
quite controversial. Some argue that, while capital account liberalization is desirable, it is
important to proceed slowly.2 Others question the desirability of unfettered capital flows
regardless of the liberalization process since, on the grounds that unregulated capital flows
could facilitate the occurrence and spreading of currency crises.3
1

The benefits of open capital markets were stressed by Lawrence Summers in his 2000
Richard T. Ely Lecture to the American Economic Association when he said “…to the extent
that international financial integration represents an improvement in financial
intermediation,... [perhaps] because institutions involved in the transfer of capital across
jurisdictions improve efficiency with which capital is allocated, it offers a potentially
significant increase in economic efficiency.” (p. 3)
2

For example in the Report of the Managing Director to the International Monetary and
Financial Committee on Progress in Strengthening the Architecture of the International
Financial System and Reform of the IMF it is written “In a number of discussions in recent
years on issues related to capital account issues, the Executive Board has emphasized the
substantial benefits of capital account liberalization, but stressed the need to carefully
manage and sequence liberalization in order to minimize risks.”
3

In an influential article in Foreign Affairs, Bhagwati (1998) argued that “substantial gains
[from capital controls] have been asserted, not demonstrated …” (p. 7).

1

Given the potential importance of countries’ policies on capital account liberalization
and the different lessons one might draw based upon which articles one reads in this
expanding literature, it seems an opportune time to review the evidence. In this paper we
survey the literature on the links between capital account liberalization and economic
performance with a focus on the empirical cross-country studies of the effects of capital
account liberalization on growth.
One source of the debate on the role of capital account liberalization is the mixed set
of empirical results derived in the literature. A possible reason for this ambiguity arises from
the difficulty in identifying and quantifying capital account liberalization in a consistent
manner across a wide set of countries. Consequently, different studies have applied different
empirical measures. Another reason for differences in empirical results is that, while most
studies start with essentially the same benchmark cross-country growth model, there is
divergence with respect to the set of countries included in the analysis, the sample period that
is investigated, the dataset employed, and the estimation technique applied. In order to
provide an informative comparison of the various contributions made in the literature, we
undertake an empirical analysis to investigate the sensitivity of results to the measure of
capital account openness, country coverage, and econometric methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes and presents
different measures of capital account openness. The presentation of these indicators shows
the extent of capital account liberalization across the world over the past quarter century.
The description of these indicators is also an important precursor to our summary of the
empirical literature on capital account liberalization and economic growth in Section III.
Section III compares and contrasts contributions to this literature. We note how these studies
2

differ with respect to data, methods and results. These differences hamper comparison across
studies. Therefore, in Section IV, we attempt to reconcile some of the differences by
presenting results using different indicators of capital account openness in a common data
set. In that section, we investigate the sensitivity of the estimated effect of capital account
liberalization on economic growth to the use of different indicators of liberalization, to the
set of countries used in the analysis, and to the econometric methods employed. The new
estimates presented in Section IV provide evidence that capital account liberalization
promotes growth, but the significance of this effect varies across regions. Section V offers
some concluding remarks.

I. MEASURES OF CAPITAL ACCOUNT RESTRICTIONS
A natural starting point for any data-based discussion of the consequences of capital
account liberalization is a review of different empirical measures of capital liberalization that
have been employed to gauge whether a country allows the free flow of capital across its
borders. In practice, there are few indicators of capital account restrictions available across a
wide cross-section of countries. Most measures are qualitative and rules-based, though there
has been some attempt to go beyond an on/off categorization by reflecting the intensity with
which controls are imposed.
Two of the most widely used capital account restriction measures draw on data
assembled by the IMF and published annually since 1950 in its Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (AREAER). We begin by discussing these rules
based indicators. We then present some alternative methods of dating stock market
liberalization. Following this, we consider recent quantitative measures. We conclude this
3

section with a short discussion of the efficacy of efforts to limit capital flows, a topic that is
important when considering the relationship between de jure measures of capital account
controls and the de facto effects of these controls.
Table 1 provides a summary of the measures of capital account controls and capital
account liberalization. This summary table will facilitate comparing and contrasting the
indicators discussed in this section. Each row of this table corresponds to one of the
indicators. The first column presents the name of the indicator that we will use in our
discussion of the determinants of growth below. The second column provides the source of
the indicator, referring either to an article where the indicator is first presented or to a
publication whose issues can be used to construct the indicator. Columns 3 through 6 of the
table present a brief description of the indicator, the range of values the indicator takes, the
years covered and the countries covered by the indicator.

A. Rules-Based Measures
IMF Measures
Every issue of the International Monetary Fund’s Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions published between 1967 (which refers to
conditions in 1966) and 1996 (which refers to conditions in 1995) includes a summary table
in which a single row directly addresses the presence of capital controls; line E.2, labeled
“Restrictions on payments for capital transactions.”4 The information in this row has been the
4

The set of categories that reflect the presence of capital controls expanded with the 1997
issue of Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions with the
specification of 13 categories including, for the first time, a distinction between restrictions
(continued…)
4

basis for generating an indicator of the existence of rules or restrictions that inhibit crossborder capital flows or discriminate on the basis of citizenship or residence of transacting
agents. (Table 1, Row 1)

Share Measure
A standard way to use the information from line E.2 of the International Monetary
Fund’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions is to construct,
for each country, a variable reflecting the proportion of years in which countries had
liberalized capital accounts. We call this variable Share (Table 1, Row 2).5 For example, if
the AREAER judged capital markets open for five years out of a 10-year period, then the
openness measure Share would be 0.5. A potential problem with this approach is that a value
of Share equal to 0.5 is consistent with a situation where a country had open capital markets
for the first five years of a decade, for the last five years of a decade, for every other year of a
decade, or for many other on-again, off-again patterns. In practice, however, as shown in
Panel A of Table 2 (from Klein and Olivei, 2000), there are very few instances of on-again,
off-again capital account controls, at least for the 10-year period that ends in 1995, the last

on inflows and restrictions on outflows. Unfortunately, this modification of the classification
system introduces a structural break in the measure since the two classification
methodologies (one entry versus 13 entries) cannot easily be mapped onto each other. We do
not discuss the expanded categorization in the post-1996 AREAER since we know of no
research on capital account liberalization that has used data spanning these two classification
systems.
5

The first work to employ such dataset—and generate a publicly available electronic
version—was Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti 1995. Other research using such measure includes
Rodrik 1998, and Klein and Olivei 2000.

5

year in which capital account liberalization reflects the entry in a single line of the AREAER.
Thus, over the period 1986 to 1995, a country with a value of Share equal to 0.1 had an open
capital account in 1995 only, a country with a value of Share equal to 0.2 had an open capital
account in 1994 and 1995, and so on. This pattern holds for all industrial countries and for
10 of the 12 developing countries that had some experience with open capital accounts
during this period. Panel B of this table shows that this correspondence between the value of
Share and the number of continuous years of open capital accounts continues to hold for
industrial countries as the sample period is extended back to 1976. But, in this longer sample
period, there are many more cases of on-again, off-again capital account liberalization among
developing countries. In fact, among the developing countries that had any experience with
open capital accounts over the period 1976–1995, the only countries where capital accounts
were not closed after having been opened were Indonesia and Malaysia, both of which had
open capital accounts throughout the entire 1976–1995 period.6

An Intensity Measure
The on/off indicator of capital controls presented in the summary table of the Annual
Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions described above does not
distinguish between strongly administered capital controls and those that are somewhat more
porous. Quinn (1997) attempts to capture the intensity of enforcement of controls on both the
capital account and the current account through a careful reading of the narrative descriptions
6

However, during the 1997/1998 Asian financial crisis Malaysia placed restrictions on its
capital account transactions.

6

in the Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions (Table 1,
Row 3).7
We limit our discussion to Quinn’s measures of capital account liberalization.8 He
scores separately the intensity of controls for capital account receipts and capital account
payments. For each of these two categories the scoring method is as follows: a score of 0
indicates payments are forbidden, 0.5 indicates that there are quantitative or other regulatory
restrictions, 1 indicates that transactions are subject to heavy taxes, 1.5 indicates that there
are less severe taxes, and 2 indicates that transactions are free of restrictions or taxes. The
sum of the values for the two categories is an indicator of overall capital account openness
that ranges between 0 and 4. These indicators are available annually from 1950–1997 for 21
OECD countries, and for the years 1958, 1973, 1982, and 1988 for 43 non-OECD countries.
A glance at Quinn’s dataset indicates that the overall trend towards liberalization is
mostly driven by the OECD countries. Table 3 presents a tabulation of Quinn’s measure of
capital account liberalization for 1973, 1982, and 1988, years for which these indicators are
available for all countries. The top panel of this table presents the data for the full set of 63
countries while the lower panel presents the data for the 42 non-OECD countries only. The
data in the first set of columns of these tables show that, in 1973, 37 of 63 countries,
including 26 of the 42 developing countries, had capital account indicators equal to the midrange (2) or lower. The overall trend towards greater capital account liberalization is
7

Two people separately assigned scores based on their readings of the narrative descriptions
and then these scores were checked for discrepancies.
8

Quinn also scores the intensity of controls for four categories related to current account
restrictions and a category he calls international legal agreements.

7

reflected in the fact that, from 1973 to 1988, the total number of countries with capital
account indicators equal to 2 or lower decreased to 33. But this overall trend hides significant
heterogeneity: over the same period the number of developing countries with a score of 2 or
lower actually increased to 32.
As discussed in more detail below, Quinn (1997) uses the change in the value of the
indicator of capital account restrictions rather than its level in his growth regressions
(Table 1, row 4). The last three columns of each of the two panels in Table 3 uncover
interesting patterns in the churning of the capital account liberalization experience. While
most OECD countries (18 out of 21) increased their degree of liberalization between 1973
and 1988, the developing countries were almost equally split between those that increased it
(15 countries), reduced it (12), or kept it unchanged (15). Note also that by the end of the
1980s, developing countries had converged towards an intermediate level of liberalization;
developing countries that had a relatively low level of liberalization in 1973 tended toward an
increase in this measure while the opposite held for those developing countries with a
relatively high degree of liberalization in 1973.
Quinn’s capital account restriction indicators are meant to be used as cardinal
numbers and, therefore, there is the implication that a country in category 2 is literally twice
as unfettered as one in category 1, or a change in the value of the indicator of 1 is exactly
twice the amount of liberalization as a change in the indicator of 0.5. A less structured
approach for using Quinn’s indicators in regressions would involve the creation of dummy
variables representing each of the values of the indicators. Alternatively, one might decide to
generate fewer dummy variables, say a single dummy variable that takes the value 1 when
Quinn’s indicator takes the value 0.5, 1, or 1.5. In the extreme, one may wonder how to
8

convert Quinn’s measure into a (0,1) dummy, i.e. how to identify which value of Quinn’s
scale would correspond to a threshold for classifying countries as open or closed.
Table 4 suggests that the correspondence between Quinn’s multiple-measures and the
0/1 AREAER measures is approximately achieved if one chooses a threshold of 2 in Quinn’s
scale. Each of the six panels in this Table offers a tabulation of the number of countries that
have capital accounts classified as 0 (closed) or 1 (open) by the AREAER and are given
values of capital account restrictions of 0–2 (more closed) or 3–4 (more open) by Quinn.
There are three panels for the full sample and three for developing countries, with one pair
for each of the more recent years for which Quinn has data for all countries, 1973, 1982, and
1988. A high correspondence between the AREAER and Quinn measures would be reflected
in relatively large diagonal elements of the 2 x 2 matrix and relatively small off-diagonal
elements. In fact, over 80 percent of the countries in the full sample and over 90 percent of
the countries for the developing countries sample fall into one of the diagonal cells for each
of the three years. For the full sample, there are few cases where the AREAER indicates open
capital accounts while Quinn indicates closed capital accounts (that is, it is rare to find a
relatively large number in the upper right cell of the 2 x 2 matrix). Most of the discrepancies
between the two indicators are cases where the AREAER indicates closed capital accounts
and Quinn gives a value of 2.5, 3, 3.5, or 4. A more detailed presentation would show that
almost all the cases of non-zero entries in the lower-left cell represent a value of 2.5 or 3
assigned by Quinn. Thus, there seems to be quite a high correspondence between Quinn’s
measures and those of the AREAER, when one chooses a threshold of 2 in Quinn’s scale in
order to classify a country’s capital account as closed or open. The relevant question is

9

whether the gradations presented by Quinn offer significant information, a point we return to
below.

Other On/Off Measures
OECD Code of Liberalization of Capital Movements
An alternative measure of capital account liberalization, albeit one available only for
OECD member countries is provided in various issues of the Code of Liberalization of
Capital Movements published by the Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) about every other year (Table 1, row 5).9 Each volume of the Code of
Liberalization of Capital Movements offers data on the extent to which restrictions
contemporaneously apply on a range of types of international transactions including direct
investment, liquidation of direct investment, admission of securities to capital markets,
buying and selling of securities, buying and selling of collective investment securities,
operations in real estate, financial credits and loans, personal capital movements. The OECD
also specifies whether the restrictions apply to commercial banks and other credit
institutions, and to institutional investors.
In all, the Code of Liberalization of Capital Movements reports on whether or not
there are restrictions on eleven categories of capital account transactions. Klein and Olivei
(2001) construct a variable that represents the proportion of these eleven categories that are
free of restrictions, averaged over time. Thus, this variable (like the Share variable described
9

Between 1986 and 1985, these volumes were published in March 1986, March 1988,
November 1990, June 1993, and 1995.

10

above) potentially ranges from 0 to 1 over the sample period but (unlike Share) its value for
any one country in any year can take a value between 0 and 1 in increments of 1/11. For the
period 1986 to 1995, the four largest values for this variable are 0.89 (Germany), 0.92
(United States), 0.921 (Netherlands) and 0.93 (United Kingdom) while two countries have
values below one-half, Greece (0.49) and Portugal (0.43). The correlation between this
measure and the IMF Share measure using the single annual 0/1 measures drawn from
AREAER is 0.86.

Montiel-Reinhart Intensity Measure
Montiel and Reinhart in a series of paper develop and use an alternative measure of
intensity of controls on international transactions based on annual information for 15
countries (Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Czech Republic, Egypt,
Indonesia, Kenya, Malaysia, Mexico, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Uganda) for the
period 1990–1996.10 This indicator ranges from 0 to 2 and, unlike the measures previously
discussed, a higher number represents a stronger capital account restrictions. In particular, a
value of 0 for a particular country in a particular year represents a situation where “no
restrictions or taxes were imposed on capital inflows and no restrictions on the domestic
indebtedness of domestic financial institutions were in place that appeared to be in excess of
commonly used prudential measure.”11 A value of 1 represents restrictions that take the form

10

See for example, Montiel, 1996; Reinhart and Reinhart 1998; Montiel and Reinhart, 1999.

11

All the quotes in this paragraph are from Montiel and Reinhart, 1999, notes to Table 3,
p. 628.

11

of “overzealous prudential regulations (such as strict limits on the foreign exchange exposure
of banks)” while a value of 2 indicates “the existence of explicit measures, such as
prohibitions, deposit requirements, or financial transaction taxes, designed to limit capital
flows.” (Table 1, row 6) The choice of assigning a value of 0, 1, or 2 for a particular country
in a particular year is based upon information provided in the annual report of that country’s
central bank.
Each of the 15 countries in their sample begins with a value of 0 for the capital
control proxy in 1990. Ten countries retain a value of 0 throughout the 1990–1996 period and
five countries end the period with a value of 2. More to the point for this discussion, the only
instance of an intermediate value of 1 is for Colombia in 1991 and 1992, after which it
switches to 2 for 1993–1996. Thus, their effort to distinguish between the intensity of capital
controls does not really yield many cases where “mild” capital controls are in place. In
particular, were these data used to construct “shares” over the 1990–1996, there would be
little difference between using the range of values 0, 1, and 2 or using only 0 and 1.12

Stock Market Liberalization Indicators
Several papers have focused on the liberalization of controls on the international sale
or purchase of equities. Research in this area has typically focused on dating the opening of
equity markets to foreign investors. Levine and Zervos (1998) and Henry (2000a, 2000b),
who extended this work, have compiled dates from a variety of sources including The Wilson
12

Montiel and Reinhart also provide a “sterilization index” which is scored 0, 1, or 2 and
which has many more cases of intermediate values than does the capital control proxy.

12

Directory of Emerging Market Funds, IFC Investable Indexes, various issues of The
Economist Intelligence Unit and the IMF’s AREAER. For instance, for each of the 11
countries in his sample, Henry uses the dates reflecting official policy decrees as the first date
in which a country fund is available, or a 10-percentage point jump in the IFC Investable
Index (Table 1, row 7).13
Bekaert (1995) and Bekaert and Harvey (1995) also determine dates when equity
markets in emerging economies opened to foreign investors based upon a variety of
indicators including Official Liberalization Dates, the date of introduction of American
Depository Receipts (ADR), the date of the introduction of country funds, and a date
estimated through a regime-switching model based on the time series of net U.S. capital
flows (see Table 1 in Bekaert and Harvey, 2000). The number of countries covered is
extended in a paper by these two authors and Lundblad (2001) to 95 countries, 16 of which
had liberalized stock markets over the full period 1980 to 1997 and 27 of which had some
experience with stock market liberalizations over this period. (See their Appendix Table A1;
these dates are referred to in our Table 1, row 8).
Table 5 presents the dates of “Official International Financial Liberalization” for the
30 countries classified as either emerging markets or frontier markets by the International
Finance Corporation, as reported by Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2001). Note that, in
13

For a description of his method, see the discussion on p. 533 of Henry, 2000a. Table 1 in
this paper (p. 534) lists the dates and Table II compares these dates with those used by other
authors. This paper is available on his web page. Henry also makes available on his web page
a document that lists major policy events, drawn from various issues of the Economist
Intelligence Unit’s Quarterly Economic Report, “Appendix 1: Chronological Listing of
Major Policy Events in Developing Countries.” This includes the 11 countries included in his
Table 1 as well as Taiwan. See
(continued…)
13

comparing the entries in this table with the entries in Table 2, only Indonesia and Malaysia
had both equity market liberalization and capital account liberalization (as reported by the
IMF in the AREAER) and, equity market liberalization followed capital account liberalization
for both of these countries.
A recent study by Edison and Warnock (2001) provides a new measure of restrictions
on foreign ownership of domestic equities, which shows the intensity of controls at a point in
time as well as their evolution over time. The measure, discussed in full details in their article
and used in cross-sectional work of Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2000), builds on the
work of the International Finance Corporation. In particular, for emerging market countries,
the IFC publishes two indexes of equity prices, the Global (IFCG) and Investable (IFCI)
indexes. Since the IFCI index is comprised of IFCG stocks minus the portion not available to
foreigners, the ratio of the market capitalizations of the IFCI to IFCG indexes is a measure of
the availability of a country’s stocks to foreigners, and one minus the ratio is a measure of
foreign ownership restrictions (Table 1, Row 9). This measure can be seen as an extension of
the liberalization analysis of Bekaert and Harvey (2000) and Henry (2000a). Indeed, the
initial relaxation of controls shown by the Edison-Warnock measure corresponds quite well
with the Bekaert-Harvey liberalization date.14 This new measure provides additional
information, giving an indication of the extent of the liberalization and its evolution over
time. It shows that international financial liberalizations can be gradual—a point also made in

http://faculty-gsb.stanford.edu/henry/personal/homepage.htm.

14

The liberalization dates in Henry (2000a) are somewhat earlier for some emerging markets,
primarily those for which country funds existed in the mid-1980s.

14

Bekaert and Harvey (1995)—which would argue against the use of an event study approach
or structural break analysis.

B. Quantitative Measures
An alternative to the practice discussed above, of constructing indicators from
published regulations, is to derive quantitative measures of the limits placed on capital
account transactions from the values of economic variables. There are three different sets of
variables that researchers have considered in this vein: national savings rates paired with
national investment rates, interest rate differentials, and international capital flows. While, at
first blush, it may seem preferable to use actual performance rather than published
regulations in order to gauge the restrictiveness of capital controls, we will see that, as with
rules-based measures, there are conceptual and practical challenges associated with the use of
these quantitative measures.
To the best of our knowledge, neither a comparison of national savings rates with
national investment rates nor interest rate differentials has been used in studying the effects
of capital account liberalization on long-run economic growth. There have been some recent
efforts to use actual capital flows to estimate the effects of capital account restrictiveness on
growth. Despite the limited use of these measures in analyzing the links between capital
account liberalization and growth, we discuss each of these three sets of measures since they
have been used to gauge the extent of capital account restrictions across countries and across
time periods.

15

Feldstein and Horioka (1980) published a study that was quite influential due, in part,
to the fact that it was one of the first efforts to quantitatively measure the extent of capital
mobility across a broad range of countries. They analyzed the behavior of savings and
investment in a number of countries to measure the “true” degree of capital mobility, arguing
that the degree of correlation between the two series was a good indicator of impediments to
capital movements. In any particular year, savings matches investment in a country with
stringent capital account restrictions while there need not be a link between savings and
investment in a country with free capital mobility. Feldstein and Horioka found that, over the
period 1960–1974, as well as over the three five-year sub-periods making up this 15-year
period, average savings rates and average investment rates were highly positively correlated.
Based on this finding, they concluded that there were significant impediments to capital
movements.15
But this conclusion has been criticized since the savings and investment rates of a
country may be highly correlated, even if that country has no restrictions on international
capital flows. For example, Obstfeld (1986) shows that, even with perfect capital mobility,
savings and investment may be highly correlated just because of the types of shocks hitting
an economy. Obstfeld also demonstrated that the savings–investment correlations were
higher for large countries than for small countries, a result one would expect to find if there
was free capital mobility and outcomes in large countries influenced worldwide economic
conditions. Furthermore, Obstfeld documents a reduction in savings-investment correlations
15

Montiel (1996) used the Feldstein-Horioka method to assess capital mobility by using
results of the industrial countries as a benchmark to assess the degree of capital mobility for
emerging markets.

16

in the post-1973 period. A different criticism of Feldstein and Horioka’s conclusions
concerning the extent of capital mobility based on savings–investment correlations comes
from Bayoumi (1990) who shows that this correlation may just reflect efforts by
governments to target the current account.
Another set of quantitative measures of capital mobility includes onshore-offshore
interest rate differentials and deviations from covered interest rate parity. Unlike stock
market returns or other quantitative measures, short-term interest rates can be analyzed
without first transforming them in model-specific ways. However, data availability restricts
this method to a limited number of countries.
Recently, efforts have been made to gauge the extent of capital mobility through the
use of actual capital inflows and outflows, either as a percentage of GDP (Kraay 1998) or, as
in Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (forthcoming), by using an annual measure of portfolio and direct
investment assets and liabilities as a percent of GDP as a long-run indicator of financial
openness (see IMF, 2001, Chanda, 2001, and O’Donnell, 2001). These measures are
analogous to measures of trade openness, and can be thought of in a similar manner. For
example, like the level of trade openness, which is typically calculated as the sum of imports
and exports over GDP, the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti measure is a good indicator of openness
at a point in time. But both the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti measure, and that of Kraay, may
fluctuate from year-to-year since capital flows are endogenous and there can be large
valuation adjustments due to, say, a large swing in equity values (Eichengreen 2001).
However, changes in these measures over longer periods are likely to be indicative of
changes in openness. In the subsequent section, this stock measure will be referred to as the
openness measure.
17

C. Comparisons of Rules-Based and Quantitative Measures of Capital Account
Liberalization16
We would hope to find that a measure of capital account restrictiveness based on
published regulations and rules is correlated with one that reflects the actual behavior of
capital flows. Figure 1 offers some evidence that enables us to judge the correspondence
between these two types of measures. This figure includes the time series of a rule-based
measure, related to the restrictions on capital flows as reported to the IMF by national
authorities, as well as a measure of capital account openness based on the estimated stocks of
gross foreign assets and liabilities as a ratio of GDP.
Figure 1 shows that both the rules-based and the quantitative measures indicate that
capital accounts in industrial countries have become considerably less restricted over time. A
particularly rapid decline in controls occurred during the 1980s, when the members of the
European Community (now called the European Union) liberalized capital controls.
Following this, there was a dramatic rise in cross-border capital flows. Among industrial
countries, Canada, the Netherlands, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom appear to have the
most unfettered international capital flows, based on the estimated stocks of gross foreign
assets and liabilities as a percent of national income.
In developing countries, the story is more complex. In general, both measures suggest
a less dramatic shift toward liberalization and openness than in industrial countries. For the
developing countries as a whole, the rules-based restriction measure suggests that, after a
period of liberalization in the 1970s, the trend toward openness reversed in the 1980s.
16

Parts of this section are adapted from the World Economic Outlook, October 2001.

18

Liberalization resumed in the early 1990s, but the pace has been relatively slow; the rulesbased measure indicates that the current level of the indicator on average is only at the same
level as it was in the late 1970s. By comparison, the capital account openness measure based
on the estimated stocks of gross foreign assets and liabilities as a ratio of GDP shows a
modest decline in openness to capital flows during the early 1970s, followed by a moderate
increase in the 1980s, which accelerated sharply in the early 1990s.

D. Efficacy of Capital Account Controls
Some of the rules-based indicators discussed above attempt to distinguish between
the intensity with which capital account restrictions are imposed. But rules-based measures
focus on de jure restrictions rather than the de facto efficacy of controls. Obviously, it is
easier to determine whether laws controlling capital flows are on the books than whether
these laws are enforced or, if they are enforced, whether they effectively stem the flow of
capital that would otherwise be moving into or out of a country.
Various episodes suggest that capital controls have, at best, a temporary effect on
stemming capital inflows or outflows. For example, Spain attempted to use capital controls to
shield itself from the disruptions in the European Monetary System in September 1992 but
the peseta was devalued in November anyway. Capital controls on inflows in Colombia
(1993–1998) and Brazil (1993–1997) did not prevent the continued appreciation of their
currencies. In Brazil, the presence of sophisticated financial institutions enabled people to get
around controls. Likewise, the much-heralded controls on capital inflows to Chile, which
took the form of unremunerated reserve requirements (URR), lost their effectiveness as
people found loopholes that enabled them to avoid these regulations. Capital controls in
19

Thailand and Malaysia may have altered the maturity structure of capital inflows, though
capital controls did not insulate the Thai baht from the consequences of speculative pressures
in 1997.17
If, in fact, capital controls are generally ridden with holes and are not efficacious,
then we would not expect to find a strong link between capital account liberalization and any
measures of economic performance, all else equal. We next turn to a review of empirical
analyses of whether or not capital account liberalization is significantly associated with
economic growth.

II. REVIEW OF LITERATURE ON CAPITAL ACCOUNT LIBERALIZATION AND GROWTH
Economic theory suggests a number of benefits that may accompany capital account
liberalization. Open capital accounts can foster a more efficient allocation of resources,
provide opportunities for risk diversification and help promote financial development. But
there is also a good deal of skepticism concerning the benefits of capital mobility.
While analysis of the costs of capital account liberalization have been limited, there is
a large and growing literature that tests the potential benefits of capital account liberalization
through its influence on long-run growth and development, by directly investigating the
empirical relationship between capital account liberalization and economic growth. Almost
17

Efforts to quantify the effects of capital controls include Giavazzi and Giovannini (1989)
who looked at EMS members in the 1980s, and Edwards (1999) and De Gregorio, Edwards,
and Valdes (2000) who considered the effects of Chile’s unremunerated reserve
requirements. More recently Edison and Reinhart (2001) and Kaplan and Rodrik (2001) have
examined the effectiveness of Malaysian capital controls, which were applied during the
Asian financial crisis.

20

all of these studies augment a basic growth model that includes variables such as the level of
schooling, investment, population growth, and the level of GDP in the initial year with a
measure of capital account liberalization.
Table 6 presents an overview of these studies of the effects of capital account
liberalization on growth. Each row of this table presents information on one study. The
columns of the table offer information on the country coverage, the indicator of
liberalization, the estimation techniques and the general result of the studies.
The information presented in Table 6 indicates that there is a wide divergence in
results across studies. This may reflect a number of differences in these studies. First, the
country coverage is different across studies, with some authors analyzing industrial countries,
others developing countries, and others a mixture of the two. Second, there are differences in
the sample period, which may be particularly important for developing countries given the
recent nature of many capital account liberalizations. Third, the applied methodology (crosssectional, time series, or panel) and the estimation technique (ordinary least squares,
instrumental variables, or generalized method of moments) differ across studies.
In addition to particular differences across studies, there are some general drawbacks
with the literature that analyzes the relationship between liberalization and growth. As noted
in the previous section, rules-based measures of capital account controls and liberalization
used in the bulk of these studies are relatively crude. However, it should be noted that the
previous section has also shown that various measures offer a broadly consistent picture of
the time series and cross sectional behavior of capital account liberalization. On a more
conceptual note, while capital account liberalization is often treated as exogenous to the
growth process, in practice countries with particular growth experiences or at particular
21

levels of development may be more prone to liberalize their capital accounts, implying the
potential for reverse causality.18 But the authors of many of these studies recognize this
potential shortcoming and attempt to address it through the use of instrumental variable
estimation.
We next survey these studies in more detail, beginning with work that offers support
for the hypothesis that capital account liberalization promotes economic growth, and then
turning to studies that cast some doubt on this relationship.

A. Supporting Evidence of Capital Account Liberalization on Growth
Quinn (1997) is one of the first studies to identify a positive result between capital
account liberalization and growth. Quinn augments the set of variables included in a standard
growth regression with either a variable representing his indicator of the change in financial
openness (described above) or the change in a broader measure of openness.19 The change in
the financial openness variable and the change in the broader openness variable are
calculated by subtracting the 1958 value of the index from its 1988 value. Quinn’s empirical
estimates suggest that the change in capital account liberalization has a strongly significant
effect on the growth in real GDP per capita in his cross section of 58 countries over the
period 1960 to 1989. It is hard to disentangle the separate effects of financial openness and a

18

For example, a country with weak economic performance might choose to adopt capital
controls and there is a danger in such a case to interpret incorrectly that the country’s low
growth depends on those controls.

19

The base regression includes also initial GDP per capita, investment as a share of GDP,
population growth and secondary-school enrollment rates.

22

broader measure of openness in Quinn’s results because he does not include a regression with
both of these indicators and, therefore, to the extent that the change in financial openness is
correlated with the change in the openness of trade in goods and services, the finding of a
significant effect of the change in capital account liberalization on growth may reflect the
correlation of changes in restrictions on the capital account and the current account.
Klein and Olivei (2000) find a positive effect of capital account liberalization on
growth among industrial countries, but they do not find evidence that capital account
liberalization promotes growth in non-industrial countries. This study follows a slightly
different strategy from other research in this area by first focusing on the role of capital
account liberalization on financial development and then considering the effect of financial
development on growth. Klein and Olivei regress the capital account liberalization indicator
Share described above (along with other standard regressors) on the change in financial
depth over the period 1986 to 1995. They find a significant effect of capital account
liberalization on the change in financial depth in the cross section of 82 developed and
developing nations. This significant result seems to be due to the presence of the OECD
countries in the sample. Klein and Olivei show that capital account liberalization
significantly affects the change in financial depth in a sample consisting of the 20 OECD
countries, but not in a sample of the non-OECD countries, nor in a narrower non-OECD
sample of 18 Latin American countries, a group that had a relatively high incidence of capital
account liberalizations. They also estimate a growth model that includes the change in
financial depth as regressor and find that financial development is significant determinant of
growth per capita. Klein and Olivei conclude that the beneficial effects of capital account
liberalization, at least with respect to promoting financial depth, are achieved only in an
23

environment in which there is a constellation of other institutions that can usefully support
the changes brought about by the free flow of capital. Bailliu (2000) also finds that capital
account liberalization spurs growth by promoting financial development.
This conjecture, that the growth effects of capital account liberalization depend upon
the level of development of an economy, is supported by the results presented in Edwards
(2001). Edwards finds that both the Quinn level and the ∆Quinn variables are significantly
associated with growth in per capita income in the 1980s for a sample of about 60 countries,
though his results are not robust when he instead uses Share. Edwards estimates regressions
using weighted least squares, with the weights representing national income in 1985. He
includes both the capital account liberalization variables and an interactive term representing
the product of the variables and the logarithm of income per capita in 1980. His estimates
show a negative coefficient on capital account openness and a positive coefficient on the
openness-income interactive term. This suggests that capital account openness detracts from
growth for countries at lower levels of income but promotes growth in industrial countries
and in the richer emerging market countries.
Edwards’ methodology is scrutinized in Arteta, Eichengreen, and Wyplosz (2001).
They question why Edwards obtains such strong results while other studies (cited below) fail
to find any significant effect of capital account liberalization on growth. They point to a
number of potential reasons for this discrepancy. They question whether Quinn’s measures,
representing capital account openness in 1973 and 1988 only, is appropriate for the period
Edwards studies. They also note that weighting observations by 1985 per capita GDP means
that rich countries have much more influence in the regressions than do poor countries. There
are also questions raised concerning the exogeneity of instruments used for capital account
24

liberalization and the exclusion of other potentially relevant measures of openness, such as
the openness of the current account, which may be correlated with capital account openness.
Estimates by Arteta, Eichengreen, and Wyplosz suggest that Edwards’ results may be
sensitive to a variety of factors and, therefore, they conclude that there is little evidence that
capital account liberalization has more favorable effects in high-income and middle-income
countries than in poorer developing countries.
But Arteta, Eichengreen, and Wyplosz do find some support for differences in the
effect of capital account liberalization across countries, depending upon the degree of
macroeconomic stability. They introduce two capital account interaction terms, multiplying
the Quinn openness measure by both the Sachs-Warner (1995) openness measure and the
black-market premium. They find that the interaction term representing the product of capital
account openness and the black market premium is significant but the other interaction term,
representing the product of the Sachs-Warner openness measure and capital account
openness, is not significant. They interpret this to mean that countries that open their capital
accounts grow faster, but only if they first eliminate the black market premium.
Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2001) (henceforth BHL) examine the impact of stock
market liberalization on economic growth. As previous researchers have done, they begin
their analysis by augmenting the standard set of growth model variables with their variable
indicating stock market liberalization. To maximize the time-series content in their
regression, they use a moving average panel data method. This means that they create
overlapping data and therefore have to deal with the resulting moving average error
component by adjusting their standard errors. In general, BHL find that financial
liberalization leads to a 1 percent increase in annual per capital GDP growth over a five-year
25

period and that this effect is statistically significant. BHL investigate the robustness of this
result with respect to alternative sets of liberalization dates, different country groupings, and
different time horizons for measuring economic growth. These results, along with those of
Quinn, appear to be the strongest evidence supporting the hypothesis that capital account
liberalization promotes growth among developing countries.
Following a slightly different tact, O’Donnell (2001) examines the impact of capital
account liberalization using both IMF rules-based measure and a quantitative based measure
of financial openness. Using a rather standard setup, he finds that the rules-based measure
tends to be too coarse an indicator of the degree of capital account liberalization as it does
not take account the nature of different types of controls. However, using the quantitative
measure, he finds that capital account liberalization does seem to speed up economic growth.
However, like other researchers he finds that the benefits to all countries are not equal. This
difference in impact was also echoed in Chanda (2001). He suggests that the impact may
vary with the level of ethnic and linguistic heterogeneity in the society, a proxy for the
number of interest groups. In particular, he finds that capital controls lead to greater
inefficiencies and lower growth among countries with a high degree of ethnic and linguistic
heterogeneity.

B. Studies Not Supporting the Hypothesis that Liberalization Promotes Growth
Several studies have found no correlation between openness and growth. In fact, one
of the first efforts to determine whether capital account liberalization promotes growth using
a cross-section of countries was Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti (1995), although this was not the
main focus of their paper. This study considers average growth of per capita income for five
26

nonoverlapping five-year periods between 1966 and 1989. Their sample includes 61
countries although, with 181 observations in one set of regressions and 238 in another, not
every country appears in each of the five sub-periods. They regress five-year growth rates on
Share and comparable measures that capture the presence of current account controls
(CurrAcct) and a multiple exchange rate system (MultEx) from Exchange Arrangements and
Exchange Restrictions. In addition they include variables such as initial income, political
variables and the level of schooling. The three variables Share, CurrAcct, and MultEx enter
as predicted values from instrumental variable regressions using lagged values as the
instruments. Their results do not support the hypothesis that capital account liberalization
promotes growth. In some cases, capital account controls enter with a positive sign (that is,
Share enters negatively) while the indicator of current account controls sometime enters with
a negative sign (CurrAcct is positive).20
Rodrik (1998), in a widely cited paper, also casts doubt on the effect of capital
account liberalization on growth. In a sample that includes almost 100 countries, developing
as well as developed, he finds no significant effect of capital account liberalization, as
measured by Share, on the percentage change in real income per capita over the period 1975
to 1989 in growth regressions that also include initial per capita income, initial secondaryschool enrollment rate, an index of the quality of governmental institutions and regional
dummy variables. Likewise, he finds no relationship between capital account liberalization
and investment-to-income, nor between capital account liberalization and inflation.
Eichengreen (2001) offers several possible reasons for the differences in the results between
20

See their Table 4, p. 537.

27

the Quinn and Rodrik papers, including the fact that Quinn’s sample includes fewer
developing countries than Rodrik, the smaller proportion of years in Quinn’s study
representing the “lost decade” of the 1980s and differences in the capital account indicator.
The regressions presented in the next section allow us to explore the role of these potential
sources of the differences in the two studies.
Kraay (1998) also finds no significant relationship, using a variety of measures of
capital account openness, including Share, Quinn’s capital account openness indicator (in
levels, with values from 0 to 4), and a measure based on actual net capital flows. Each of
these measures is associated with a different sample size. His regressions take the form of
cross sections, with one observation per country, where the dependent variable is the growth
in output between 1985 and 1997. He uses both OLS and an approach in which the capital
account liberalization variables are instrumented by their own past values. He fails to find a
significant effect of Share or the Quinn indicator on growth, but, when these indicators are
interacted with the average balance of the financial account (from the balance of payments
statistics), he does find some significant effects.

III. EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION
The literature reviewed in the previous section offers a diverse set of results
concerning the effect of capital account liberalization on growth. In this section, in an effort
to reconcile some of the differences in the literature, we estimate the effects of a variety of
measures of capital account liberalization on economic growth. We present estimates of

28

growth regressions that augment a standard economic growth model21 with different
indicators of capital account openness or stock market liberalization, but otherwise use a
common set of regressors, a common regressand, and draw observations from the same time
period.22 For comparability, we use a single dataset, the Klein and Olivei (2000).

A. The Basic Growth Model and the Impact of Capital Account Liberalizaton
The regressand in all of the estimates presented in this section is the growth in real
per capita income over the period 1976 to 1995 (∆lnY76 – 95). The control variables used in
the growth model include the logarithm of real per capita income in 1976 (ln (Y1976)), the
logarithm of secondary school enrollment rate in 1976 (ln(Educ.)), the average investment to
GDP ratio for the years 1974 to 1978 (Invest.74 – 78), the population growth rate from 1976 to
1995 (∆Pop.76 – 95) and a dummy variable for countries in sub-Saharan Africa (Africa).
Column 1 of Table 7 shows the results of a growth regression using these regressors for a
sample of 89 countries. Each of the coefficients in the regression are significant at the 95
percent level of confidence or better, but for the coefficient on the average investment to
GDP ratio.
We use three different indicators of capital account liberalization. First, as discussed
in Section II, Share76 – 95 represents the proportion of years in the period 1976 to 1995 that a
country had open capital accounts, based on information from line E.2 of the IMF’s Annual
21

See for example Barro and Sala-I-Martin (1995) and Levine and Renelt (1992).

22

There remain, however, differences in the samples across regressions due to differences in
the set of countries covered by each indicator of capital market openness. Below we discuss
the sensitivity of results to the use of different samples of countries.

29

Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. Second, we use the 0 to 4
measure of capital account openness in 1982 from Quinn (1997), which we denote as
Quinn82. As discussed above, Quinn used the change in the value of his indicator and,
therefore, we also present a regression in which we use the difference in the value of the 0 to
4 measure of capital account openness between 1973 and 1988, ∆Quinn73 – 88.23 Third, we
use the dates of stock market liberalization from Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2001) to
calculate the proportion of years between 1980 (when the data are first available) and 1995
that a country had a liberalized stock market. This variable, BHL80–95, is therefore analogous
in its construction to Share76-95.
Columns 2 through 5 of Table 7 present growth regressions in which the standard
growth model presented in Column 1 is augmented with, in turn, each of these indicators of
capital account liberalization. The results in this column generally support the hypothesis
that liberalization of the capital account or of the equity market promotes growth, ceteris
paribus. The coefficients on Share76 – 95, Quinn82, and BHL80 – 95 each have a p-value of less
than 0.01. The coefficient on ∆Quinn73 – 88 is positive but insignificant (the p-value is 0.50), a
result at odds with those presented in Quinn (1997) in which the estimated coefficient on the
change in the capital account openness measure is positive and significant.24

23

Recall that Quinn’s measure of capital account openness is available only for the years
1973, 1982 and 1988 for non-OECD countries.

24

In a regression that differs from the one presented in Column 3 only by the use of the Quinn
indicator of capital account openness in 1973 rather than its value in 1982, the coefficient on
the Quinn 0 – 4 indicator of capital account openness has a value of 0.09 with an associated
p-value of 0.08. We have also run regressions similar to the one presented in Column 4 but
with the difference in the Quinn indicator of capital account openness between 1982 and
(continued…)
30

A question that arises when considering the results in Columns 2 through 5 of Table
7 is whether there is an upward bias on the coefficients on liberalization because of reverse
causality; perhaps the countries that are most likely to have liberalized their capital accounts
are the ones that grew most quickly during the relevant period. To address this question, we
present, in Columns 6 through 8 of Table 7, two-stage regressions that instrument for the
values of the liberalization measures. The instruments that we use include government
consumption as proportion of GDP in 1976, imports as proportion of GDP in 1976, a dummy
variable for Latin American countries and another dummy variable for East Asian countries.
In addition, for Share76 – 95 and for BHL 80– 95 we use, as an instrument, the 0 or 1 value of the
capital account openness measure for 1973 from the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange
Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions while for the Quinn 0 to 4 measure of capital
account openness in 1982 we use, as an instrument, the 1973 value of Quinn’s openness
measure.
The results presented in Columns 6 through 8 of Table 7 indicate that, in all three
cases, there is not an upward bias on the liberalization measures coefficients when we use
OLS estimation since, in each case, the coefficient is larger using instrumental variables than
when using OLS. Each of the liberalization coefficients presented in Columns 6 through 8 is
significant at the 99 percent level of confidence or better. The adjusted R2 for the first stage
regression (which is not reported in the table) is 0.61 for Share76 – 95, 0.69 for Quinn82, and
0.59 for BHL80 – 95.

1988, as well as between 1973 and 1982. The coefficients on the change in the capital
account indicator in these regressions are not significant at standard levels.

31

The results of a formal test concerning the possible endogeneity of the capital account
openness variables are presented in Table 7 in the row labeled “DM p-value.” The statistics
in this row are obtained using the artificial regression technique discussed in Davidson and
MacKinnon (1989).25 As shown in this row, the p-values on the coefficients on the
instrumented regressors are 0.13 in the regression using Share76 – 95, 0.52 in the regression
using Quinn82, and 0.01 in the regression using BHL80 – 95. Therefore, estimates using OLS
are not plagued by a significant (at the 10 percent level) problem with respect to consistency
because of the endogeneity of the capital account openness variables in the regressions using
either Share76 – 95, or Quinn82. There is evidence, however, that supports the use of
instrumental variables in the regression using BHL80 – 95. In the remainder of this section, we
present results of the Davidson and MacKinnon test for all regressions and, where
appropriate as indicated by this test, we estimate the regressions using instrumental variables
rather than OLS.26

25

The “artificial regression” is one in which the OLS regression is augmented with the
instrumented values of the potentially endogenous variable. Under the null hypothesis that
the OLS estimates of the coefficients of the regression are consistent (and assuming that the
instrumental variable estimates are consistent), the coefficient on the instrumented regressor
is asymptotically equal to zero. Therefore, if the coefficient on the instrumented variable in
the augmented artificial regression is insignificant, we cannot reject the hypothesis that OLS
provides us with consistent estimators. We employ this test and report the p-value of the
coefficient on the instrumented regressor in the row labeled “DM p-value” in Table 7.

26

In the regressions reported in Tables 8 and 9 there are several capital account openness
variables in each regression since we allow for different coefficients across regions. In these
cases, the DM test is an F-test of the joint significance of all the capital account openness
variables used in the regression.

32

B. The Robustness of the Results
An issue that arises in the literature surveyed above is whether the effect of capital
account liberalization differs between industrial counties and developing countries. We
investigate this in Columns 1 through 3 of Table 8 by reporting separate slope coefficients
for industrial and developing countries (countries are classified as industrial if they were
members of the O.E.C.D. in 1986).27 These results show that the estimated effect on
economic growth of capital account openness or stock market liberalization is larger in
developing countries than in industrial countries.28 For developing countries, coefficients on
both measures of capital account openness, Share76 – 95, and Quinn82, are significant at better
than the 99 percent level. In addition, the coefficient on Quinn82 for industrial countries is
also significant at better than the 99 percent level. The results for stock market liberalization,
estimated using instrumental variables, also indicate strongly significant effects for both
developing countries and industrial countries.
All three regressions reported in Columns 1 through 3 of Table 8 show a significant
effect of capital account liberalization on growth among non–O.E.C.D. countries but differ in
the reported effect among O.E.C.D. countries. One possible source of this difference is the

27

These results are obtained by including in the regressions both the measures of
liberalization and the product of the respective measure and a dummy variable that takes the
value of 1 for the 20 countries in the sample that were members of the O.E.C.D. in 1986.
These countries include Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France,
Greece, Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

28

There is a statistically significant difference (at the 92 percent level) between the estimated
coefficients for developing and industrial countries for BHL80 – 95, but not at the 90 percent
level for Share76 – 95, nor for Quinn82.

33

samples used in each regression. We ran regressions using Share76 – 95, allowing for different
effects across industrial and developing countries, using the subsamples employed when
using either Quinn82 or BHL80 – 95 as a regressor. The Quinn82 sample of 52 countries yields
estimates of the effect of capital account liberalization on growth of 0.17 for industrial
countries and 0.34 for developing countries, with associated p-values of 0.20 and 0.06,
respectively. These point estimates are both a bit smaller and somewhat less significant than
those obtained with the full sample of 89 countries. With the sample of 82 countries used in
the estimation of the effects of BHL80 – 95 on growth, the estimated effect of Share76 – 95 on
growth for industrial countries is 0.20 (with a p-value of 0.07) and for developing countries it
is 0.32 (with a p-value of 0.07). This suggests that differences across indicators due to
differences in samples necessitated by data availability are not pronounced.
The discussion in Section II shows that the majority of cases of capital account
liberalization and stock market liberalization outside of the OECD occurred among countries
in Latin America and East Asia. Columns 4 through 6 of Table 8 continue our investigation
of differential effects of liberalization across sets of countries by allowing for separate slopes
across countries in Latin America, countries in East Asia, OECD member countries, and all
other countries. These estimates suggest that the largest and most significant effect of capital
account liberalization on growth occurred among East Asian countries. For each of the three
variables, the effect of liberalization on growth in East Asia is significant at greater than the
99 percent level of confidence. In other regions, there is less evidence of a significant effect
of capital account liberalization on growth. This effect is significant for the OECD countries
in this set of regressions only when using the Quinn82 indicator of capital account openness.

34

Capital account liberalization is estimated to have a negative effect on growth among Latin
American countries when using the Share76 – 95 indicator.
Differences in the effect of capital account liberalization on growth across the set of
industrial and developing countries are present in some of the research discussed in the
literature review above. But, in those papers, (such as Klein and Olivei (2000) and Edwards
(2001)), capital account liberalization is usually found to have a more significant effect in
promoting growth in industrial countries. The results of this paper, however, suggest that
open capital accounts and liberalized stock markets have a significant effect on growth
among East Asian countries, but there is less consistent evidence of these effects elsewhere,
even among industrial countries.
One concern with the results presented in Tables 7 and 8 is that it is possible that
capital account liberalization is really just a proxy for some other characteristic of the
countries in the sample. Rodrik (1998) argues that capital account liberalization measures
serve as a proxy for the quality of government. We investigate this possibility in Table 9.
This specifications used in the regressions reported in this table differ from those used in
Table 8 only by the inclusion of a measure of government reputation. This measure, from
Knack and Keefer (1995), draws on information from various volumes of the International
Country Risk Guide. The variable potentially ranges from 1 to 10, with larger values
indicating that a government is less likely to repudiate contracts. For most countries, the
variable reflects reputation in 1982.
The results in Table 9 support the importance of government reputation as a
determinant of growth but do not support the claim that capital account liberalization merely
serves as a proxy for government reputation. In each of the six regressions, the coefficient on
35

government reputation is significant at better than the 99 percent level of confidence. While
it is true that the neither the coefficient on Quinn82 for industrial nor for developing countries
is significant in Column 2 (in contrast to the results presented in Table 8), and that the
coefficient on Share76 – 95 for developing countries has a p-value of 0.07 as compared to 0.01
when government reputation is not included as a regressor (Column 1 in each table), the
coefficient on BHL80 – 95 for developing countries reported in Column 3 as well as each of the
coefficients on the capital account openness or stock market liberalization variables for East
Asia in Columns 4 through 6 continue to be significant at better than the 99 percent level of
confidence.
A careful comparison of Tables 8 and 9 shows that the introduction of the
government reputation variable reduces the number of observations in the regressions using
Share86 – 95 by about one-fifth, from 89 to 71. This is part of the reason for the differences in
the results concerning the coefficients on capital account liberalization in Columns 1 and 4
across these two tables. A regression with a specification like that in Column 1 of Table 8
that uses the sample of 71 countries that have non-missing values of the government
repudiation variable (i.e. the sample used in Columns 1 and 4 of Table 9) has estimated
coefficients of 0.17 (with a p-value of 0.09) for industrial countries and 0.34 (with a p-value
of 0.06) for developing countries. These point estimates are lower than those reported in
Column 1 of Table 8 and these coefficients are less significant in the more restricted sample.
When allowing for different estimates across regions of non–O.E.C.D. countries, the main
difference in the value and pattern of significance between the samples of 71 and 89
countries is that the former yields a significant effect of capital account liberalization on
growth for non–O.E.C.D. countries outside of Latin America and East Asia; the estimated
36

coefficient on Share86 – 95 for this group of countries is 1.13, with a standard error of 0.47
(and therefore a p-value of 0.02). The pattern of significance of the effects of stock market
liberalization on growth presented in Column 6 of Table 8 do not change very much if we
restrict the sample to the 68 countries that have non-missing observations for both the
government reputation variable and BHL80 – 95. Therefore, the loss of significance of the
coefficient on BHL80 – 95 for non-O.E.C.D. countries outside of East Asia and Latin America
is likely due to the correlation of government reputation with BHL80 – 95 for these countries.
But note that the coefficient on the BHL80 – 95 for East Asian countries retains its significance
in the results presented in Column 6 of Table 9.

IV.

CONCLUSION

The consequences and desirability of capital account liberalization among developing
countries is likely to remain a topic of debate for the foreseeable future. People on one side
of this debate will maintain those countries that open up to financial flows will set the stage
for more rapid development. Those on the other side will question the advantages actually
conferred by capital account liberalization and, furthermore, will argue that countries become
more vulnerable to financial disruptions not of their own making when their governments
relinquish control over the inflow and outflow of capital.
In this paper we have surveyed what current research is able to tell us about the
consequences of capital account liberalization. We point out that, while industrial countries
have largely liberalized their capital accounts, and there has been some movement towards
more widespread capital account liberalization among developing countries, the majority of
developing countries retain controls over capital flows. The evidence on the effects of this
37

are somewhat mixed. We have shown that empirical evidence presented in existing research
does not strongly point towards a general result concerning the consequences of capital
account liberalization. There is mixed evidence that capital account liberalization promotes
long-run economic growth. Our own regression results suggest that these effects are most
pronounced among countries in East Asia. Other research surveyed in this paper, however,
suggests a more pronounced effect of capital account liberalization among industrial
countries than among a more broadly defined set of developing countries.
Given the importance of this topic, the lack of a clear consensus in the literature, and,
perhaps most importantly, the fact that undertaking capital account liberalization is more
easily achieved than many other policies advocated to governments of developing countries,
it is very likely literature on the topic surveyed in this paper will continue to expand. The
concern that this research is hampered by a strong set of variables reflecting capital account
openness should be somewhat allayed by the statistics presented in this paper showing a
common cross-country picture of capital account openness regardless of the (admittedly
imperfect) indicators that are employed. But, as better indicators are developed, and as we
obtain a longer time series that encompasses a wider range of experiences, we would expect
that our understanding of this important topic will be refined.

38

REFERENCES
Ahearne, Alan, William Griever, and Francis Warnock, 2000, “Information Costs and Home
Bias: An Analysis of U.S. Holdings of Foreign Equities,” International Finance
Discussion Paper 691, (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System).
Arteta, Carlos, Barry Eichengreen and Charles Wyplosz, 2001, “On the Growth Effects of
Capital Account Liberalization,” (unpublished; Berkeley, California: University of
California).
Bailliu, Jeannine, 2000, “Private Capital Flows, Financial Development, and Economic
Growth in Developing Countries,” Bank of Canada Working Paper No. 2000-15,
(Ontario, Canada, Bank of Canada).
Barro, Robert, and Xavier Sala-i, Martin, 1995, “Economic Growths,” (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: MIT Press).
Bayoumi, Tamim, 1990, “Saving-Investment Correlations,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 37, No. 2
(June), pp. 360–86.
Bekaert, Geert, 1995, “Market Integration and Investment Barriers in Emerging Equity
Markets,” World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 9, pp. 75–107.
———, and Campbell Harvey, 1995, “Time-Varying World Market Integration,” Journal of
Finance, Vol. 50, pp. 403–44.
———, and Campbell Harvey, 2000, “Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets,”
Journal of Finance, Vol. 55 (April), pp. 565–613.
———, and Robin Lumsdaine, “Dating the Integration of World Equity Markets,”
forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2001, “Does Financial
Liberalization Spur Growth?” NBER Working Paper No. 8245 (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Bhagwati, Jagdish, 1998, “The Capital Myth: The Difference Between Trade in Widgets and
Trade in Dollars,” Foreign Affairs, Vol. 77, pp. 7–12.
Chanda, Areendam, 2001, “The Influence of Capital Controls on Long-Run Growth: Where
and How Much?” (unpublished; Providence, Rhode Island: Brown University).

39

Davidson, Russell and James G. MacKinnon, “Testing for Consistency Using Artificial
Regressions,” Econometric Theory, vol. 5, pp. 363 – 384.
DeGregorio, José, Sebastian Edwards, and Rodrigo O. Valdes, 2000, “Controls on Capital
Inflows: Do They Work?” NBER Working Paper No. 7645 (April) (Cambridge,
Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Edison, Hali J., and Carmen Reinhart, 2001, “Stopping Hot Money,” Journal of Development
Economics, Vol. 66, pp 533–53.
Edison, Hali J., and Francis E. Warnock, 2001, “A Simple Measure of the Intensity of
Capital Controls,” IMF Working Paper 01/180 (Washington: International Monetary
Fund).
Edwards, Sebastian, 1999, “How Effective are Capital Controls?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Fall, Vol. 13, No. 4, pp. 65–84.
———, 2001, “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging Economies
Different?” NBER Working Paper No. 8076 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National
Bureau of Economic Research).
Eichengreen, Barry, 2001, “Capital Account Liberalization: What Do Cross-Country Studies
Tell Us?'” (unpublished; Berkeley, California: University of California.
Feldstein, Martin, and Charles Horioka, 1980, “Domestic Saving and International Capital
Flows,” The Economic Journal, Vol. 90, No. 358, pp. 314–29.
Giavazzi, Francesco, and Alberto Giovannini, 1989, Limiting Exchange Rate Flexibility: The
European Monetary System, (Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press).
Grilli, Vittorio, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, 1995, “Economic Effects and Structural
Determinants of Capital Controls,” IMF Staff Papers, Vol. 42, No. 3, pp. 517–51.
Henry, Peter Blair, 2000a, “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging
Market Equity Prices,” Journal of Finance, Vol. LV, No. 2 (April), pp. 529–64.
———, 2000b, “Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?” Journal of
Financial Economics, Vol. 58, Nos. 1-2 (October), pp. 301–34.
International Monetary Fund, 2001,. World Economic Outlook, October (Washington:
International Monetary Fund).
———, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions, Various
Issues, (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

40

Kaplan, Ethan, and Dani Rodrik, 2001, “Did the Malaysian Capital Controls Work?” NBER
Working Paper No. 8142 (Cambridge, Massachusetts: National Bureau of Economic
Research).
Klein, Michael W., and Giovanni Olivei, 2000, “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial
Depth and Economic Growth,” unpublished; (Boston, Massachusetts: Fletcher School
of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University).
Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer, "Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross-Country
Tests Using Alternative Institutional Measures," Economics and Politics, vol. 7,
1995, pp.207-27.
Kraay, Aart, 1998, “In Search of the Macroeconomic Effects of Capital Account
Liberalization,” unpublished; (Washington: The World Bank).
Lane, Phillip, and Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, “The External Wealth of Nations: Measures of
Foreign Assets and Liabilities for Industrial and Developing Nations,” Journal of
International Economics, forthcoming.
Levine, Ross, and Sara Zervos, 1998, “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 88, (June), pp 537–58.
Levine, Ross, and David Renelt, 1992, “A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross Country Growth
Regressions,” American Economic Review, pp. 942–63.
Montiel, Peter, 1996, “Managing Economic Policy in the Face of Large Capital Inflows:
What Have We Learned?” in Private Capital Flows to Emerging Markets After the
Mexican Crisis, ed. by G. Calvo and M. Hochreiter, (Washington: Institute for
International Economics), pp 189–218.
Montiel, Peter, and Carmen Reinhart, 1999, “Do Capital Controls and Macroeconomic
Policies Influence the Volume and Composition of Capital Flows? Evidence from the
1990s,” Journal of International Money and Finance, Vol. 18, No. 4, pp 619–35.
Obstfeld, Maurice, 1986, “Capital Mobility in the World Economy: Theory and
Measurement,” in Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, Vol. 24,
ed. by K. Brunner and A. Meltzer, (Spring).
O’Donnell, Barry, 2001. “Financial Openness and Economic Performance,” (unpublished;
Dublin, Ireland: Trinity College).
Quinn, Dennis, 1997, “The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation,”
American Political Science Review, Vol. 91, No. 3, (September), pp. 531–51.

41

Rodrik, Dani, 1998, “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility?” (February), mimeo;
(Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University).
Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner, 1995, “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Vol. 1, pp. 1–118
(Washington: Brookings Institute).
Summers, Lawrence, 2000, “International Financial Crises: Causes, Prevention, and Cures,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 90, No. 2 (May), pp. 1–16.

42

Table 1. Summary of Indicators of Restrictions
Name
1. IMF

2. Share

Source
IMF
AREAER, line
E2, various
issues
AREAER, line
E2, various
issues

Range
0 (never restricted) to
1 (always restricted)

Years
1967 – 1995
after which
format changes

Country Coverage
117 countries for years 1976-95
to
137 countries for years 1986 -95

Uses IMF measure to create proportion of
years that capital account is judged free of
restrictions. Can be constructed for any range,
1966-95.
Constructed from narrative descriptions in
AREAER regarding capital account
restrictions.

0 (never restricted) to
1 (always restricted)

1967 – 1995
after which
format change

117 (76-95) to 137 (86-95)

Larger numbers mean less
restricted, more open or
meet agreements. Values in
½ point increments, 0 - 4
Actual Ranges for Capital
Account
1988 – 1982; -1 to 2
1988 – 1973; -2 to 2
0 (always restricted) to
1 (never restricted)

Full Sample:
1958, 1973,
1982, and 1988.

63 countries of which 20 are
advanced and 43 are developing
countries

Construct from
dates above

63 countries 20 are advanced
and 43 are developing countries

1986, 1988,
1990, 1993,
1995

21 OECD countries

0 (unrestricted),
1 (mild restrictions),
2 (severe restrictions)
Constructed as 0/1 dummies
for event studies or Share of
years open for cross-section.

Annual, 1990 1996

15 emerging markets

Earliest: May
86.
Latest: Dec. 91

11 emerging markets

Earliest: 1980,
Latest: 1997

95 countries. 43 had some
experience with financial
liberalization (25 emerging
market, 18 OECD)
29 emerging markets

3. Quinn

Quinn (1997)

4. ∆Quinn

Quinn (1997)

Difference in Quinn Indicators

5. OECD- Share

Code of
Liberalisation
of Capital
Movements
Montiel &
Reinhart
(1999)
Levine and
Zervos
(1998) and
Henry (2000a
and b)
Bekaert
Harvey &
Lundblad,
2001
Edison and
Warnock
(2001)
Kraay (1998)

Proportion of the 11 categories free of
restrictions, averaged over the relevant period.

6. MR
7.Levine/Zervos
and Henry

8. BHL

9. EW
11. Capflows
12. CapStocks

Lane and
MilesiFerretti
(2001)

Measures the intensity of capital account
restrictions
Dates of stock market liberalizations in
emerging markets.

Dates of stock market liberalizations in
emerging markets and industrial economies.

One minus the ratio of the IFC investable
index to the IFC global index

Constructed as 0/1 dummies
for event studies or as share
of years open for crosssection.
Constructed to be between 0
and 1

Measure based on actual capital flows

Constructed as percent of
GDP
Constructed as percent of
GDP

Measure based on accumulated or stock of
gross capital flows.

30

Earliest 1988 to
present

All countries with BOP Statistics
Earliest 1970 1998

70 countries, mix of advanced
and developing

- 30 -

Description
Constructed as an on/off indicator of the
existence of rules/restrictions that inhibit
cross-border flows.

Table 2. IMF Capital Account Restriction Measure
A. Value of Share and Years When Capital Markets Open, 1986 - 1995

(For countries that had open markets at some point in time, i.e. Share ≠ 0)
A. Share
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1.0

Years Open
1995
1994-95
1993-95
1992-95
1991-95
1990-95
1988-92, 1995
1989-95
1986-92
1988-95
1986-95

Industrial Countries
Norway
Spain
Portugal, Sweden
Ireland
Finland, Austria
France, Italy

Developing Countries
Costa Rica, Niger
Trinidad & Tobago
Honduras, Peru

Ecuador
Guatemala
Uruguay
Denmark
Australia, Belgium, Canada,
Japan, Netherlands, New Zealand,
United Kingdom, United States

Bolivia, Indonesia, Malaysia,
Panama

B. The Evolution of Capital Account Restrictions, 1976-1985
(For countries that had open markets at some point in time during this Period)
Years Open
1984 – 1985
1978 – 1985

Industrial Countries
Australia, New Zealand
Japan, United Kingdom

1976 – 1985

Belgium, Canada, Germany,
Netherlands, United States

Years Open
1980 – 1981
1976 – 1979
1976 – 1984
1976 – 1985

Source: IMF AREAER and Klein and Olivei 2001.

31

Developing Countries
Costa Rica
Guatemala, Honduras
Ecuador
Indonesia, Malaysia

Table 3. Quinn’s Indicators of Capital Account Liberalization
Number of Overall Countries
Indicator
Value

In 1973

In 1982

In 1988

0 (restricted)
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4 (liberalized)
Total

2
4
11
13
7
7
9
5
5
63

1
5
9
15
13
4
7
0
9
63

0
3
7
14
9
6
11
4
9
63

With no
change in
value
1973 -1988
0
1
4
6
0
2
2
0
3
18

With
increase in
value
1973 -1988
2
3
6
6
6
4
4
2
–
33

With
decrease in
value
1973 -1988
–
0
1
1
1
1
3
3
2
12

Number of Developing (non-OECD) Countries
Indicator
Value

In 1973

In 1982

In 1988

0 (restricted)
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
4 (liberalized)
Total

2
4
10
9
1
5
4
3
4
42

1
5
8
14
8
1
0
0
5
42

0
3
7
13
9
3
2
2
3
42

Source: Quinn (1997) and authors’ calculations.

32

With no
change in
value
1973 -1988
0
1
4
6
0
2
0
0
2
15

With
increase in
value
1973 -1988
2
6
5
2
0
2
1
0
–
15

With
decrease in
value
1973 -1988
–
0
1
1
1
1
3
3
2
12

Table 4. Comparison of Quinn and IMF Indicators
(Number of countries for each combination of indicators)
Panel 1: Full Sample: Year 1973

Panel 4: Developing Countries Year 1973

IMF Indicator

Quinn
Indicator

0–2
3–4

Total

0

1

36
10

0
15

36
25

Quinn
Indicator

46

15

61

Total

Panel 2: Full Sample: Year 1982

0–2
3–4

Total

0

1

38
7

4
12

42
19

Quinn
Indicator

45

16

61

Total

Total

1
0
12

26
16

30

12

42

0–2
3–4

Total

0

1

32
0

4
6

36
6

32

10

42

Panel 6: Developing Countries Year 1988

IMF Indicator

0–2
3–4

0
26
4

IMF Indicator

Total

Panel 3: Full Sample: Year 1988

Quinn
Indicator

0–2
3–4

Total

Panel 5: Developing Countries Year 1982

IMF Indicator

Quinn
Indicator

IMF Indicator

Total

IMF Indicator

Total

0

1

32
12

0
17

32
29

Quinn
Indicator

44

17

61

Total

Source: Authors’ calculations.

33

0–2
3–4

Total

0

1

32
2

0
8

32
10

34

8

42

Table 5: Dates of Equity Market Liberalization of Emerging Market or Frontier Market Countries
Country

Liberalization
Country
Liberalization
Date
Date
Argentina
1989
Malaysia
1988
Bangladesh
NL
Mexico
1989
Brazil
1991
Morocco
1997
Chile
1992
Nigeria
1995
Colombia
1991
Pakistan
1991
Cote d’Ivoire
NL
Philippines
1991
Egypt
1997
Portugal
1986
Greece
1987
Sri Lanka
1992
India
1992
South Africa
1992
Indonesia
1989
Thailand
1987
Israel
1996
Trinidad & Tobago
NL
Jamaica
NL
Tunisia
NL
Jordan
1995
Turkey
1989
Kenya
NL
Venezuela
1990
Korea
1992
Zimbabwe
1993
Countries classified as emerging or frontier by the International Finance corporation.
NL refers to Not Liberalized.
Source: Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad, 2001

34

Table 6. Overview of Studies of the Impact of Capital Account Liberalization on Growth
Study
Quinn 1997

Countries
58

Lib. Measure
∆Quinn, between
1988 and 1958

Dependent Variable and Estimation Method
Growth in income per capita 1960 – 1989. Cross Section, OLS.

- 35 -

Main Results for GDP Growth
∆Quinn significantly raises growth in income per
capita, though no regression is presented with both
∆Capital Controls and ∆Openness.
Significant effect of Share on ∆FD, though results
Klein & Olivei
67
Share
Growth in income per capita, 1976 – 1995. Cross Section, IV.
seem to be driven by OECD countries in sample.
2000
Change in Financial Depth (∆FD ) as a function of Share and
Significant effect of instrumented values of ∆FD
then per capita income growth as a function of instrumented
and FD on growth.
value of ∆FD (and initial FD).
Growth in income per capita, 1980 – 1989. Cross Section. WLS
Quinn level significantly raises GDP growth.
Edwards 2001
55 to 62
Quinn in 1988; or
(1985 GDP as weight), IV. Also uses interaction of Quinn in
Interaction suggests that, at low GDP, opening
∆Quinn 1988 –
1988 and log(GDP in 1980).
capital account may lower GDP growth.
1973
Arteta,
51
Quinn in Initial
Growth in income per capita 1973 – 81, 1982 – 87, 1988 – 92, or Quinn significant for pooled results but not for
Eichengreen. &
to 59
Year; or
pooled for these 3 periods. Follows Edwards (2001) but with
shorter subsamples. ∆Quinn not significant.
Wyplosz, 2001
∆Quinn over
OLS rather than WLS and with different instruments.
Significant effect of interaction of Quinn with either
relevant period
quality of law or openness.
Bekaert, Harvey &
30
Official Dates of
Growth rates in income per capita for various time periods
Stock market liberalization significantly contributes
Lundblad 2001
Emerging
Stock Market
between 1981 and 1997, resulting in overlapping data.
to growth in income per capita, with largest effects
markets
Liberalization
shortly after liberalization
O’Donnell 2001
94
Share or
Growth in income per capita over 1971 – 1994. Regressions
Neither Share nor interaction of Share and FD
Volume
include interaction between FD and Share, and Volume and FD.
significant, but Volume sometimes significant.
Chanda 2001
57
Share
Growth in income per capita over 1975 – 1995. Share interacted
Share significantly raises growth in ethnically
non-OECD
with measure of ethnic heterogeneity.
heterogeneous countries and significantly lowers it
in ethnically homogeneous countries.
Grilli & Milesi61
Share
Growth in income per capita for five-year non-overlapping
No Evidience of a significant effect of Share on
Ferretti 1995
periods during 1971 – 1994 period. IV estimation.
growth of income per capita.
Rodrik 1998
About 100
Share
Growth in income per capita over 1975 – 1995. Cross Section,
No Evidience of a significant effect of Share on
OLS.
growth of income per capita.
Kraay 1998
64, 94, or
Share; Quinn;
Growth in income per capita over 1985 – 1997. Cross Section.
No effect of Share or Quinn on Growth. Coefficient
117
or Volume
OLS & IV. Samples of 117 (Share); 94 (Volume); or 64 (Quinn). on Volume significant and positive.
NOTES: Share is proportion of years that IMF’s AREAR shows open capital accounts. Quinn is Quinn’s 0 – 4 measure of capital account intensity.
∆Quinn is change in value of Quinn 0 – 4 measure. Volume is measure of volume of capital flows. Cross Section refers to 1 observation per country.

35

Table 7
Growth and Capital Account Liberalization
Dep. Var.
∆lnY76 – 95
ln Y1976
(s.e.)
ln (Educ.)
(s.e.)
Invest.74 – 78
(s.e.)
∆Pop.76 – 95
(s.e.)
Africa
(s.e.)
Share76 – 95
(s.e.)
Quinn82
(s.e.)
∆Quinn73 – 88
(s.e.)
BHL80 – 95
(s.e.)
DM p-value
R2
no. of obs.

1
-0.24
(0.04)
0.12
(0.05)
0.007
(0.006)
-0.80
(0.17)
-0.37
(0.11)

2
-0.31
(0.05)
0.12
(0.05)
0.01
(0.005)
-0.90
(0.17)
-0.33
(0.10)
0.34
(0.12)

V. OLS
3
-0.48
(0.08)
0.16
(0.08)
0.02
(0.007)
-1.09
(0.31)
-0.41
(0.17)

4
-0.41
(0.09)
0.22
(0.10)
0.02
(0.01)
-1.11
(0.35)
-0.45
(0.17)

5
-0.33
(0.05)
0.15
(0.05)
0.007
(0.005)
-0.55
(0.27)
-0.33
(0.11)

6
-0.35
(0.06)
0.13
(0.05)
0.01
(0.006)
-0.97
(0.18)
-0.32
(0.11)
0.56
(0.17)

0.19
(0.06)

VI. IV
7
-0.49
(0.08)
0.15
(0.09)
0.02
(0.007)
-1.06
(0.33)
-0.41
(0.17)

8
-0.42
(0.06)
0.14
(0.05)
0.008
(0.004)
-0.02
(0.33)
-0.35
(0.13)

0.22
(0.06)
0.05
(0.08)
0.43
(0.15)

0.47
89

0.52
89

0.59
52

0.44
51

0.53
82

0.13
0.50
87

0.52
0.58
52

1.07
(0.28)
0.01
0.34
81

Regressions include a constant (not reported). Robust standard errors.
Definition of Variables:
∆lnY76 – 95 = growth in ln real per capita income, 1976 to 1995; ln Y1976 = ln real per capita income
in 1976; ln(Educ.) = ln(secondary school enrollment rate); Invest.74 – 78 = Average Investment,
1974 to 1978; ∆Pop.76 – 95 = Population growth, 1976 to 1995; Africa = Dummy variable for
African countries; Share76 – 95 = Proportion of years with open capital accounts, 1976 to 1995,
from IMF’s AREAER; Quinn82 = 0 to 4 measure of capital account openness in 1982 and
∆Quinn73 – 88 = Difference in 0 to 4 measure of capital account openness between 1973 and 1988,
both from Quinn (1997); BHL80 – 95 = Proportion of years between 1980 and 1995 with liberalized
stock market, using dates of stock market liberalization from Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad
(2001).
Instruments for Capital Account Liberalization Measures:
Government consumption as proportion of GDP in 1976; Imports as proportion of GDP in 1976;
Dummy variables for Latin American countries and East Asian countries; Quinn’s 0 to 4 measure
of capital account openness in 1973 (for Quinn82) or IMF’s AREAER 0/1 value in 1973 (for
Share76 – 95 and for BHL80 – 95).
Bold denotes p-value of coefficient 0.05 or less.
Italic denotes p-value of coefficient 0.05 to 0.10.

Table 8
Differential Effects by OECD Membership or Region
1
Share76–95
-0.29
(0.05)
0.13
(0.05)
0.01
(0.005)
-1.00
(0.20)
-0.30
(0.11)

2
Quinn82
-0.44
(0.07)
0.19
(0.08)
0.02
(0.007)
-1.33
(0.42)
-0.35
(0.14)

3
BHL80–95
-0.35
(0.06)
0.14
(0.05)
0.004
(0.004)
-0.17
(0.33)
-0.22
(0.14)

4
Share76–95
-0.29
(0.07)
0.12
(0.05)
0.01
(0.006)
-1.03
(0.31)
-0.33
(0.11)

5
Quinn82
-0.37
(0.09)
0.16
(0.09)
0.009
(0.006)
-1.16
(0.37)
-0.43
(0.10)

6
BHL80–95
-0.24
(0.06)
0.14
(0.05)
0.002
(0.004)
-0.69
(0.26)
-0.22
(0.11)

Openness Measures by Region
OECD
0.20
0.14
0.08
0.22
0.13
0.92
(s.e.)
(0.11)
(0.05)
(0.28)
(0.11)
(0.05)
(0.13)
non –OECD
0.43
0.21
1.67
(s.e.)
(0.16)
(0.07)
(0.49)
East Asia
0.69
0.26
1.15
(s.e.)
(0.12)
(0.04)
(0.17)
Latin America
0.05
0.20
-0.25
(s.e.)
(0.11)
(0.08)
(0.27)
Other non–OECD
0.52
0.14
0.82
(s.e.)
(0.38)
(0.12)
(0.33)
DM p-value
0.38
0.82
0.02
0.23
0.89
0.10
(OLS or IV)
(OLS)
(OLS)
(IV)
(OLS)
(OLS)
(OLS)
R2
0.53
0.61
0.37
0.61
0.72
0.62
no. of obs.
89
52
81
89
52
82
All estimates using OLS or IV with robust standard errors. Row labeled “p-value of
sum” is p-value of sum of capital account liberalization and capital account liberalization
times OECD dummy variable coefficients. Regressions include a constant (not reported).
All variables as listed in notes to Table 7. Gov. Rep. = Knack and Keefer (1995) measure
of degree to which governments do not repudiate contracts, range is 1 – 10 and larger
values indicate government less likely to repudiate contract.
Bold denotes p-value of coefficient 0.05 or less.
Italic denotes p-value of coefficient 0.05 to 0.10.

37

- 37 -

Dep. Var.
∆lnY76 – 95
ln Y1976
(s.e.)
ln (Educ.)
(s.e.)
Invest.74 – 78
(s.e.)
∆Pop.76 – 95
(s.e.)
Africa
(s.e.)

Table 9
Including Government Reputation as a Regressor
1
Share76–95
-0.41
(0.06)
0.16
(0.04)
0.004
(0.004)
-0.09
(0.25)
-0.46
(0.08)
0.17
(0.03)

2
Quinn82
-0.42
(0.06)
0.12
(0.05)
0.01
(0.004)
-0.46
(0.07)
-0.46
(0.33)
0.18
(0.04)

3
BHL80–95
-0.40
(0.05)
0.13
(0.04)
-0.0002
(0.003)
-0.02
(0.21)
-0.48
(0.05)
0.17
(0.03)

4
Share76–95
-0.36
(0.06)
0.15
(0.04)
-0.001
(0.004)
-0.10
(0.24)
-0.50
(0.07)
0.14
(0.04)

5
Quinn82
-0.33
(0.05)
0.10
(0.06)
0.001
(0.003)
-0.43
(0.15)
-0.53
(0.06)
0.14
(0.03)

6
BHL80–95
-0.37
(0.05)
0.13
(0.04)
-0.002
(0.003)
-0.01
(0.21)
-0.49
(0.05)
0.15
(0.03)

Openness Measures by Region
OECD
-0.09
-0.06
0.05
-0.09
-0.07
0.05
(s.e.)
(0.09)
(0.05)
(0.09)
(0.08)
(0.04)
(0.09)
non –OECD
0.22
0.06
0.54
(s.e.)
(0.12)
(0.06)
(0.12)
East Asia
0.43
0.13
0.72
(s.e.)
(0.11)
(0.02)
(0.11)
Latin America
-0.05
0.18
-0.23
(s.e.)
(0.09)
(0.04)
(0.28)
Other non–OECD
0.03
0.28
0.76
(s.e.)
(0.39)
(0.06)
(0.30)
DM p-value
0.23
0.59
0.15
0.41
0.53
0.27
2
R
0.74
0.78
0.82
0.79
0.86
0.84
no. of obs.
71
50
68
71
50
68
All estimates using OLS with robust standard errors. Row labeled “p-value of sum” is pvalue of sum of capital account liberalization and capital account liberalization times
OECD dummy variable coefficients. Regressions include a constant (not reported). All
variables as listed in notes to Table 7. Gov. Rep. = Knack and Keefer (1995) measure of
degree to which governments do not repudiate contracts, range is 1 – 10 and larger values
indicate government less likely to repudiate contract.
Bold denotes p-value of coefficient 0.05 or less.
Italic denotes p-value of coefficient 0.05 to 0.10.

38

- 38 -

Dep. Var.
∆lnY76 – 95
ln Y1976
(s.e.)
ln (Educ.)
(s.e.)
Invest.74 – 78
(s.e.)
∆Pop.76 – 95
(s.e.)
Africa
(s.e.)
Gov’t. Reputation
(s.e.)

Figure 1. Summary of Measures of Capital Account
Openness 1
The two measures of liberalization show similar overall patterns, but the
openness measure points to greater progress in the 1990s.
Restriction measure
(left scale, inverted)

Openness measure
(right scale)

1.5

0.0

0.2

1.2

0.2

0.4

0.4

0.9

0.4

0.3

0.6

0.6

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.3

0.8

0.1

0.0

Advanced
Economies

0.5

1.0
0.0
1970 74 78 82 86 90 94 98

Developing Countries by
Region

2

0.5

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.2

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.4

0.3

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.1

0.8

0.1

0.0

Africa

Asia

0.5

1.0
0.0
1970 74 78 82 86 90 94 98

1.0
0.0
1970 74 78 82 86 90 94 98

0.0

0.5

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.2

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.4

0.3

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.8

0.1

0.8

0.1

Middle East and
Europe

1.0
0.0
1970 74 78 82 86 90 94 98

Western Hemisphere

1.0
0.0
1970 74 78 82 86 90 94 98

Sources: IMF, Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange
Restrictions, various issues; International Financial Statistics; and IMF staff
1
calculations.
The restriction measure is calculated as the "average" value of the on/off
measure for the country group. The openness measure is calculated as the
average
stock of accumulated capital flows (as percent of GDP) in a country
2
group.
For country coverage, see Table 4.2.

39

0.5

- 39 -

1.0
0.0
1970 74 78 82 86 90 94 98

Developing
Countries

