                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




            BANK PANICS AND THE ENDOGENEITY OF CENTRAL BANKING


                                               Gary Gorton
                                               Lixin Huang


                                          Working Paper 9102
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9102


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2002




Thanks to Franklin Allen, Eslyn Jean-Baptiste, Michael Bordo, John Boyd, Charles Calomiris, Ed Green,
Richard Kihlstrom, Holger Mueller, Ben Polak and to seminar participants at New York University, the Yale
Banking Conference, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Conference on the Origins of Central
Banking for comments and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Gary Gorton and Lixin Huang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Bank Panics and the Endogeneity of Central Banking
Gary Gorton and Lixin Huang
NBER Working Paper No. 9102
August 2002
JEL No. G21, E58


                                             ABSTRACT

        Central banking is intimately related to liquidity provision to banks during times of crisis, the
lender-of-last-resort function. This activity arose endogenously in certain banking systems. Depositors
lack full information about the value of bank assets so that during macroeconomic downturns they
monitor their banks by withdrawing in a banking panic. The likelihood of panics depends on the
industrial organization of the banking system. Banking systems with many small, undiversified banks,
are prone to panics and failures, unlike systems with a few big banks that are heavily branched and well
diversified. Systems of many small banks are more efficient if the banks form coalitions during times
of crisis. We provide conditions under which the industrial organization of banking leads to incentive
compatible state contingent bank coalition formation. Such coalitions issue money that is a kind of
deposit insurance and examine and supervise banks. Bank coalitions of small banks, however, cannot
replicate the efficiency of a system of big banks.




Gary Gorton                                                     Lixin Huang
Department of Finance                                           Department of Economics
The Wharton School                                              University of Pennsylvania
University of Pennsylvania                                      Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367                                     lixin2@ssc.upenn.edu
and NBER
gorton@wharton.upenn.edu
                                                                                                  1



I.      Introduction

The most important function of a central bank is to provide liquidity to the banking system in
times of crisis.    The classic work on central banking, Lombard Street, by Walter Bagehot,
published in 1873, offered the advice that in times of panic the central bank (Bank of England)
should lend freely and continue to pay out currency. At the time Lombard Street was published,
there was no central bank in the U.S. and yet the private arrangement of banks in the U.S.
clearinghouse system had already discovered Bagehot’s precepts and was acting on them. In this
paper we argue that the lender-of-last-resort function of “central banking” arose endogenously
through the formation of state contingent bank coalitions, such as clearinghouses, which provided
liquidity during banking panics. Moreover, in the model we propose, banking panics are not
irrational manifestations of multiple equilibria. Rather, they represent depositors monitoring their
banks in banking systems composed of many small banks. Since panics do not happen in
banking systems with large, heavily branched, well diversified, banks, this is consistent with the
historical experience of countries internationally.

A thesis of this paper is that central banking (the lender-of-last-resort) emerges as a response to
the banking system’s problems. The problem is the ability of depositors to monitor their banks.
Monitoring banks corresponds to banking panics, and such panics may involve inefficiencies
because banks may be mistakenly liquidated. Another thesis we develop is that banking panics
are not a manifestation of an inherent problem with banks per se. On the contrary, the theory we
develop views panics as a rational form of monitoring of banks by uninformed depositors.
Briefly, depositors know the state of the macroeconomy, but not the idiosyncratic state of their
own bank. The way to check on a bank is to ask the bank to convert its demand deposits into
currency. But, banks as a whole cannot do this and then the banking system faces liquidation.
Historically, and in the model we present, banks form coalitions that can turn illiquid loan
portfolios into liquid claims that can convince depositors that the banks, as a group, are solvent,
even if a depositor’s particular bank is not. This is the lender-of-last-resort function.

The model closely follows the U.S. experience with panics, not surprisingly since the U.S. is the
leading example of the case of frequent banking panics. In the case of the U.S., liquidity
provision by banks literally took the form of private money called “clearinghouse loan
certificates.” These certificates were issued by bank coalitions and functioned as a form of
deposit insurance from the point of view of depositors because they served to convert claims on a
single bank into claims on the group of banks in the coalition. For depositors to accept these
                                                                                                    2

certificates required that banks coinsure each other. Moreover, for this insurance system to work,
there must be banking panics that impose externalities on the banks doing well, forcing them to
subsidize other banks. We show how banking panics play a critical economic function enforcing
the incentive compatibility of bank coalitions. In order for the bank coalition to form during
times of panic, the banks had to agree to mutually monitor each other to enforce reserve and
capital requirements.     This monitoring is the historical origin of bank examination and
supervision.

While bank coalitions in the U.S. were highly developed because of the industrial organization of
the U.S. banking system, bank coalitions appear to be part of the banking histories of most
countries, as we discuss below. Sometimes coalitions were formal arrangements; sometimes they
were informal arrangements. Sometimes the coalitions were organized around a single dominant
bank, such as the Suffolk Bank of pre-Civil War New England, J.P. Morgan in the 19th century, or
the Bank of Montreal in Canada.          Sometimes private banks formed a coalition with the
government, as British banks often did with the Bank of England. Not all these coalitions issued
private money directly to the public, but all had features of coinsurance that correspond to
liquidity creation.

The extent to which coalitions were formed and were formalized is related to the frequency with
which they were called upon to provide liquidity. This likelihood is related to some other
important facts about banking history. In particular, historically, there is significant cross section
variation in countries’ panic experiences. Historical studies have led to a consensus that the cross
section variation in panic experience is due to variation in the industrial organization of the
banking system. We review some of the evidence below. Such evidence is important because it
suggests that panics are not an inherent feature of banking per se, as is commonly supposed and
asserted theoretically. Our study is explicitly aimed at showing the importance of this industrial
organization and its relation to the frequency of panics and bank failures.

The model we analyze is simple. There are two core assumptions. First, there is asymmetric
information between banks, who are better informed, and their depositors. Second, banks may
engage in moral hazard if their equity falls below a critical value. These are fairly standard
assumptions. As one might expect, these assumptions lead depositors to sometimes want to
withdraw their bank deposits. Withdrawals may be inefficient because the bank may, in fact, be
quite well off, but depositors do not know this. We consider different organizational forms of the
banking industry, systems with a few highly branched, well diversified, banks, as well as systems
                                                                                                     3

with many small independent unit banks. Panics do not occur in all of these systems, though
withdrawals do. This is because the need for monitoring by depositors varies depending on the
nature of the banking system, corresponding to economic history.

There is a large existing literature on banking panics (See Gorton and Winton (2002) for a review
of this literature). The dominant view among theorists emanates from Diamond and Dybvig
(1983) who see banks as inherently unstable institutions prone to panics. Our view is different. It
is closer to that of Calomiris and Kahn (1991) who also see panics as a monitoring device. But,
the critical feature of their model is that depositors, who produce private information about the
bank run, get into line first to withdraw. With first-come-first-served as the allocation rule, such
information-producing depositors can cover the cost of their information production. Thus
Calomiris and Kahn explain the first-come-first-served rule. But, this does not generate system
wide panics, but rather runs on individual banks. We do not assume a first-come-first-served
rule.

We show that a system of large, well-diversified, banks is more efficient than a system of many
small, independent, unit banks. A bank coalition can improve the efficiency of the system of
small banks, but it cannot achieve the allocation provided by the system of large banks. The
government cannot improve upon either the coalition system or the system of large banks unless
(i) the government is assumed to have much more power than private agents, e.g., it can seize
bank assets; (ii) there are negative externalities that the banks or the coalition fail to internalize;
or (iii) the government has access to resources outside the model. It is difficult to find an
economic rationale for the government to be the lender-of-last-resort, though see Gorton and
Huang (2001).

The paper proceeds as follows. In Section II we very briefly review some of the historical and
cross-country evidence on the performance of banking systems and the history of panics. Our
aim is to develop a set of stylized facts that a theory of panics and endogenous bank regulation
should address. In Section III we present a simple model of a banking system that is then
analyzed in subsequent sections. Our first step is to analyze two polar cases using the model.
The first case is a banking system with small independent unit banks (Section IV) and the second
is a system of large, well-diversified, branched banks (Section V). Neither of these systems
literally represents reality, though they come close to the experiences of some countries. The
U.S. historically has been a system of small independent unit banks and when private
                                                                                                            4

clearinghouses were in existence, not all banks were members.1 The system of large branched
banks, the other polar case, does resemble many of the world’s banking systems, such as Canada.
But, even these systems occasionally have problems that necessitate coalition formation, as we
briefly discuss below. In Section VI we consider the system with small independent unit banks
that can form a coalition in the event of a banking panic. Section VII concludes.

II.      An Overview of the Historical and Cross Country Evidence

Banking panic regularities are documented in a fairly large literature on the historical and
international experience of banking panics, and we only briefly review it here. Bordo (1985,
1986), Calomiris and Gorton (1991), Calomiris (1993), Gorton and Winton (2001), and Gorton
and Huang (2001) survey much of the literature.


The most important empirical regularity is that the industrial organization of the banking industry
is a critical determinant of the propensity for an economy to experience panics. Banking panics
are less likely to occur in banking systems in which there are a few relatively large, well-
branched, and well-diversified banks. Surveying the international evidence, Calomiris (1993)
cites industrial organization as the single most important factor explaining the incidence of
panics. This is also the conclusion of Bordo (1986) who studies the experiences of six countries
(U.S., U.K., Canada, Sweden, Germany, and France) over the period 1870 to 1933. Bordo (1985)
concludes: “the United States experienced panics in a period when they were a historical curiosity
in other countries” (p. 73). See also Grossman (1994). Studies of cross section variation within
the United States lead to the same conclusion. In particular, states that allowed branching
experienced lower failure rates. See Calomiris (1990, 1993), Bremer (1935) and White (1983,
1984). It is simply not the case panics are inherent to banking.


A comparison of the U.S. and Canadian banking experiences from the middle of the 19th century
is a particularly instructive example of the importance of industrial organization in banking and
its relation to central banking. Haubrich (1990), Bordo, Rockoff, and Redish (1994, 1995), and
White (1984), among others, study the drastic contrast between these two systems. During the
period 1870 to 1913, Canada had a branch banking system with about forty chartered banks, each
extensively branched, while at the same time the United States had thousands of banks that could




1
  Some banks were too far away to be members. Rural banks and banks in smaller cities did not have formal
clearinghouse arrangements.
                                                                                                                     5

not branch across state lines. The U.S. experienced panics, while Canada did not.2 There were
high failure rates in the U.S. and low failure rates in Canada. Thirteen Canadian banks failed
from 1868 to 1889, while during the same period hundreds of bank failed in the U.S. (see the
Comptroller of the Currency (1920)). During the Great Depression, there were few bank failures
in Canada, but the Canadian banking system did shrink by the about the same amount as in the
U.S. (see White (1984)). Overall, the Canadian banking system survived the Great Depression
with few effects, while in the U.S., which had enacted the Federal Reserve Act in 1914, the
banking system collapsed. Canada’s central bank came into being in 1935, well after the Great
Depression.


A second apparent regularity concerning banking panics is that there is an important business
cycle and, possibly, seasonal component to the timing of panics. Panics come at or near business
cycle peaks. The interpretation is not that panics caused downturns. There is not enough data to
analyze that issue (at least, to date). Rather, the idea is that depositors received information
forecasting a recession and withdrew in an anticipation of the recession, a time when bank
failures were more likely. See Bordo (1986), Gorton (1988), Calomiris and Gorton (1991), and
Donaldson (1992). While the relation of panics to the business cycle will be incorporated into the
model below, the “regularity” is somewhat fragile as there are few observations of panics.3


Associated with the likelihood of bank panics is the prevalence of private arrangements among
banks. In the U.S., for example, where panics were not infrequent, there was the development of
the private clearinghouse system. The U.S. clearinghouse system developed over the course of
the 19th century (see Andrew (1908b), Sprague (1910), Cannon (1910), Timberlake (1984),
Gorton (1984, 1985), Gorton and Mullineaux (1987), Moen and Tallman (2000), and Wicker
(2000), among others). For purposes here the main point concerns the method clearinghouses
developed to turn illiquid loan portfolios into money, private money that could be handed out to
depositors in exchange for their demand deposits during times of panic. During a banking panic
member banks were allowed to apply to a clearinghouse committee, submitting assets as
collateral in exchange for certificates. If the committee approved the assets, then certificates

2
  Calomiris and Gorton (1991) identify six panics in the United States prior to 1865, seven during the National Banking
Era.
3
  Some have argued that there is also a seasonal factor in panics. The seasonal factor in the timing of panics is noted
by Andrew (1907), Kemmerer (1910), Miron (1986), Donaldson (1992), and Calomiris and Gorton (1991), among
others. But, Wicker (2000), for example, disputes the evidence. The seasonal factor seems less clear than the business
cycle component, but could easily be incorporated.
                                                                                                                      6

would be issued only up to a percentage of the face value of the assets. During the Panics of
1873, 1893, and 1907 the clearinghouse loan certificate process were issued directly to the banks’
depositors, in exchange for demand deposits, in denominations corresponding to currency.4                            If
the depositors would accept the certificates as money, then the banks’ illiquid loan portfolios
would be directly monetized. The loan certificates were the joint liability of the clearinghouse,
not the individual bank. In this way, a depositor who was fearful that his particular bank might
fail was able to insure against this event by trading his claim on the individual bank for a claim on
the portfolio of banks in the clearinghouse. This was the origin of deposit insurance.

Bank coalitions are also not unique to the United States.5 There are many examples of bank
coalitions forming on occasion in other countries as well (see Cannon (1908, 1910) for
information on the clearinghouses of England, Canada, and Japan). We mention a few examples.
According to Bordo and Redish (1987) “the Bank of Montreal (founded in 1817) emerged very
early as the government’s bank performing many central bank functions. The pattern of the Bank
of Montreal (and earlier precursors like the Suffolk Bank in the U.S.) in which the bank coalition
is centered on one large bank, is quite common. Another common feature is the cooperation of a
(perhaps, informal) coalition of banks with the government to rescue a bank in trouble or stem a
panic. For example, major Canadian banks joined with the Canadian government to rescue the
Canadian Commercial Bank in March 1985. (See Jayanti, Whyte, and Do (1993).) Similarly, in
Germany the Bankhaus Herstatt was closed June 26, 1974. There was no statutory deposit
insurance scheme in Germany, but the West German Federal Association of banks used $7.8
million in insurance to cover the losses. Germany is a developed capitalist country where deposit
insurance is completely private, being provided by coalitions of private banks that developed
following the Herstatt crisis of 1974. See Beck (no date).

The model below is developed to be consistent with these stylized facts.




4
 The amount of private money issued during times of panic was substantial. During the Panic of 1893 about $100
million of clearinghouse hand-to-hand money was issued (2.5 percent of the money stock). During the Panic of 1907,
about $500 million was issued (4.5 percent of the money stock). See Gorton (1985).
5
  The clearinghouse system was not the only private central bank-like institution in U.S. history. Before the U.S. Civil
War, coincident with the beginnings of the clearinghouse system, the Suffolk Bank of Massachusetts was the focal
point of a clearing system and acted as a lender-of-last-resort during the Panic of 1837. See Mullineaux (1987),
Calomiris and Kahn (1996), Rolnick, Smith, and Weber (1998a, 1998b), and Whitney (1878).
                                                                                                    7

III.    The Model

There are three dates, 0, 1, and 2 in the model economy and two types of agents:
consumers/depositors and bankers. Bankers are unique in having the ability to locate risky
investment opportunities. Also, only banks can store endowments (i.e., provide the service of
safekeeping).

There is a continuum of bankers. Each banker has capital β and a measure one of potential
depositors. Each bank has access to a riskless storage technology and to a risky investment
technology. The fraction of the portfolio invested in the riskless storage technology is α; this
investment will be referred to as reserves. The remaining fraction 1-α+β is invested in the risky
technology. Investments in the risky projects have to be made at date 0, and the returns are
realized at date 2. The date 2 return to a risky project depends on the state of the economy, which
is a random variable, realized at date 1. The return to a unit (of endowment good) invested in the
risky project is ~π + ~r , that is, there is a systematic component, ~  π , and an idiosyncratic
component, ~r , to the return. So, the state of the macroeconomy is indicated by ~      π , while the
bank’s individual prospects are indicated by ~r . We assume that ~  π is uniformly distributed in the
interval [π , π ]. For future reference, the probability density function of ~
          L     H                                                             π will be referred to as
                   1
A, where A ≡            . The idiosyncratic return for a risky project, ~r , is uniformly distributed
                πH − πL

                                                                                         0 + 2M
in the interval [0, 2Μ]. For future reference, the mean of ~r is denoted by M, i.e., M =        .
                                                                                              2

At date 1, information about the date 2 return is realized, but there is asymmetric information
between bankers and depositors. Depositors observe the realized state of the macroeconomy (π),
but they do not observe the realized state of their bank’s idiosyncratic return (r). Each banker
knows his own bank’s state (r), and observes the realizations of other banks’ idiosyncratic shocks
at date 1. Idiosyncratic shock realizations at date 1 are not verifiable among banks, but realized
cash flows at date 2 are verifiable. So, to be clear, banks cannot write contracts with other banks
contingent on idiosyncratic shocks at date 1. At date 0, we assume that banks’ choice of reserve
level α and the level of bank capital β , are observable and verifiable.

There is a moral hazard problem in that bankers have an opportunity to engage in fraud at date 1.
Fraud is socially wasteful. If a banker engages in fraud, he gets a proportion f of the return (i.e.
f(π+r)), where f is between 0 and 1. The remaining amount, (1−f)(π+r), is wasted and depositors
                                                                                                         8

receive nothing. Projects can be liquidated at date 1, yielding a constant return of Q, regardless of
the state of the project.

Depositors have a subsistence level of 1. Their utility function is:

                        c + c (1 + ε1 ) + c2 (1 + ε 2 ) if c0 + c1 + c2 ≥ 1
         u (c1 , c2 ) =  0 1
                                 −∞          if c0 + c1 + c2 < 1

where c0, c1 and c2 are consumptions at date 0, 1 and 2 respectively. ε1 and ε2 represent
depositors’ preference for later consumption. We assume ε2 > ε1 >0, and they are both very small
such that they can be ignored in the following analysis. Depositors' utility function implies that
they will always wait until date 2 to withdraw if they believe their deposits are safe. However,
they will withdraw at date 1 if they anticipate that there is any chance that their bankers are going
to engage in fraud. Depositors deposit in a single bank.

Finally, bankers are risk neutral and they get the entire surplus from investment.

We assume the following:

                  πL + πH
Assumption 1.             + M > 1 > Q . This assumption says that, ex ante, a risky project is more
                     2
efficient than riskless storage, if there is no liquidation or fraud. However, if liquidation or fraud
happens, then a risky project is dominated by investment in riskless storage.

Assumption 2. (1+β )(1−f)(πL+M) < 1. This assumption assures that there is a potential moral
hazard problem. Suppose a banker invests all of his assets in the risky project, and the economy
turns out to be in the worst possible state (πL) at date 1. Consider the banker with the mean return
πL+M. If the banker engages in fraud, he will receive f(1+β )(πL+M). If he does not engage in
fraud, his payoff will be (1+β )(πL+M)−1. The assumption that (1+β )(1−f)(πL+M) < 1 ensures
that the banker has an incentive to engage in fraud.

Assumption 3. πL > Q > f(πH+2M). In words, there is a dead weight loss if liquidation or fraud
occurs. If fraud does not occur, then the value of a risky project is greater than the liquidation
value, Q, even if the project is in the lowest possible state. If fraud occurs, then the value of a
risky project is less than the liquidation value even if the project is in the highest possible state.
                                                                                                  9

Assumption 4. A risky project is indivisible when liquidation occurs. Although at date 0, a
banker can choose how much to invest in a risky project, at date 1 all the assets in a risky project
must be liquidated if liquidation occurs.

Assumption 5. (1+β )Q>1. That is, if depositors withdraw from their bank at date 1, then their
deposit contract can always be honored.

Under these assumptions, a banker may have an incentive to engage in moral hazard in certain
states of the world. Depositors, however, are rational. If they anticipate that the bankers are
going to engage in fraud, they withdraw their deposits to prevent it. Bankers can commit to not
engage in moral hazard by holding reserves. The higher the level of reserves, the lower the
probability that a bank run occurs. However, ex post, if the state of the economy is good at date
1, then it would have been better to have invested in risky projects. The bankers' task at date 0 is
to choose an optimal reserve level, α (the fraction of bank assets held in the riskless storage
technology). This is the only choice variable. The optimal reserve choice depends on whether
bank branching is allowed and on the interaction between the bankers. We interpret branching
restrictions and different interactions between the bankers as different banking systems. Below,
we will solve the bankers’ optimization problem under the different organizations of the banking
industry, examining the reserve level, banking stability, and social welfare under each system.

The essential ingredients of the model are the information asymmetry and the moral hazard
problem. In particular, at date 1 each banker has private information about the idiosyncratic
shock to his own bank. Based on this information the banker may have an incentive to engage in
fraud. Depositors want to monitor banks to prevent this from happening, but have only one tool
at their disposal: they can withdraw from the bank. The assumed information structure is meant
to capture an essential feature of banking, namely, that the value of bank assets is opaque. See,
e.g., Morgan (2000).

The moral hazard problem in this model is fraud. This is realistic as fraud has historically been
the most common reason for bank failure. See Comptroller of the Currency (1920, 1988a,
1988b), Benston and Kaufman (1986). The Comptroller of the Currency (1873), reporting on the
Panic of 1873, wrote that all the bank failures during the panic were due to “the criminal
mismanagement of their officers or to the neglect or violation of the national-bank act on the part
of their directors” (p. xxxv). A century later, the Comptroller of the Currency (1988b) reported
that:
                                                                                                   10

      The study found insider abuse in many of the failed and rehabilitated banks during their
      decline. Insider abuse—e.g., self-dealing, undue dependence on the bank for income or
      services by a board member or shareholder, inappropriate transactions with affiliates, or
      unauthorized transactions by management—was a significant factor leading to failure in 35
      percent of the failed banks. About a quarter of the banks with significant insider abuse also
      had significant problems involving material fraud. (p. 9).



For purposes of the model, it is important that there be a moral hazard problem, but it is not
essential that the problem be fraud. Any one of a number of moral hazard problems would
suffice. Fraud, however, is a realistic and significant problem.

There are two functions of banks in the model economy. First, banks are unique in being able to
identify risky investment opportunities; consumers/depositors cannot find these opportunities.
Second, banks can provide a claim, a demand deposit, which is consistent with the subsistence
requirement of consumers. Because of their utility functions, consumers need to be assured that
their claim will be worth 1 unit and banks can satisfy this need. Implicitly, individual banks can
diversify to this extent. Gorton and Pennacchi (1990) show that uninformed consumers/traders
with uncertain consumption demands prefer to transfer wealth intertemporally with claims that
are riskless. Riskless claims are not subject to trading losses to informed traders if consumers
need to consume at date 1 rather than date 2. The realization of date 1 consumption needs forces
these uninformed consumers to sell their claims on a market where they lose money to informed
agents. A better arrangement for these consumers could be claims on a diversified bank that are
always worth 1 unit (i.e., so that there is no private information that informed traders could learn).
We do not explicitly incorporate all this here. Rather, in the model here the structure of
preferences dictates the type of claim that banks will offer depositors: the bank must offer the
right to withdraw deposits at face value at date 1, i.e., a demand deposit contract.

We now turn to examining the functioning of the banking system when it is organized in different
ways. We consider three basic forms of organization, two polar cases and one intermediate case.
The first case is a system of many small independent unit banks. The next is a system of large,
well-diversified banks, and the last is a system of small unit banks that can form a coalition in
certain states of the world.

IV.       The System of Independent Unit Banks

The first banking system we examine is one in which there are many small, independent unit
banks. That is, implicitly the banks are small so they are undiversified. This is because they have
                                                                                                  11

no branches and they do not interact with each other ex ante or ex post (they are independent).
This system characterizes those periods of U.S. history, for example, where banks were not
allowed to branch and where they did not form explicit or implicit coalitions. We will call this
banking system the “Unit Bank” system.

Unit Banks are “small” in the following sense:

Assumption 6. A banker in charge of a Unit Bank can only manage one risky project. A banker
cannot diversify the risk by dividing his asset portfolio into many risky projects.

Implicitly, we imagine that banks are spatially separated so that risky projects have the
idiosyncratic risk of the individual bank’s location. The assumption also implies that at date 1,
the project of a banker cannot be transferred to another bank. A project becomes worthless when
taken over by another bank/banker. In other words, a project involves a relationship specific
investment that cannot be transferred.

We solve the bankers' optimization problem by backward induction. First, given a Unit Bank's
choice of reserve level, α, we characterize the states in which bankers will have incentives to
engage in moral hazard and, hence, depositors will withdraw their deposits. Second, we will
calculate the bankers’ optimal choice of reserve level, α, at date 0.

At date 1, depositors receive the signal about the state of the macroeconomy, π; they expect that
the return to their bank's risky project is π +E(r). Based on the state of the macroeconomy they
infer whether their banker has an incentive to engage in fraud.

Depositors do not observe the realization of their bank’s idiosyncratic shock, r. Because of their
utility functions they do not care about the likelihood of their bank engaging in fraud, but only in
whether there is any chance of this occurring. They, therefore, assume that r=0 and check
whether their banker has an incentive to engage in fraud. This leads to:

Lemma 1: At date 1, given a banker’s reserve level α and the realized state of the economy π, if
            1− α
π<                       , then there is a positive probability that bankers will engage in fraud. If
     (1 − f )(1 + β - α)
            1− α
π≥                       , then no banker has an incentive to engage in fraud.
     (1 − f )(1 + β - α)
                                                                                                           12


Proof: Suppose the banker has reserves of α and the realized idiosyncratic shock is r=0. The
realized state of the macroeconomy is π. If the banker does not engage in fraud, his payoff will
be π(1+β -α)+α-1. If he engages in fraud his payoff will be πf(1+β -α), since he cannot steal
                                                                                1− α
anything from the reserves. If πf(1+β -α)>π(1+β -α)+α-1, or π <                               , the banker
                                                                         (1 − f )(1 + β - α )

engages in fraud. Otherwise he has no incentive to engage in fraud. //

Lemma 1 illustrates the viewpoint of depositors who do not know r, the realization of the
idiosyncratic component of the return. They observe the state of the macroeconomy, π, and can
calculate whether, given that state, there is a chance that bankers will engage in moral hazard.
Because their utility functions are kinked and they will get minus infinity if consumption is less
than one, depositors do not care about the likelihood of moral hazard occurring, but rather
whether there is any chance of moral hazard occurring.

                                                                                               1− α
If depositors find that there is a chance that bankers will engage in fraud (i.e. π <                        ),
                                                                                        (1 − f )(1 + β - α )

then they withdraw all their savings. Since all the depositors receive the same macroeconomic
information and all the banks are, form their viewpoint, homogeneous, if one bank suffers from a
run, there are runs on all the other banks. Therefore, a panic occurs.

Lemma 2: At date 1, given the banker's reserve α and the realized state of the economy π, if
            1− α
π<                        , then a banking panic occurs.
     (1 − f )(1 + β - α )


Note that the panic is defined by two characteristics of date 1 actions. First, depositors cannot
distinguish between banks because of the lack of bank-specific information and so, if they choose
to withdraw at date 1, they withdraw from all banks. Second, this causes all the banks to be
liquidated, which in this model we can think of as failure since the banks go out of existence
prematurely. In terms of the model, we emphasize this with the following definition.

Definition: A banking panic is a date 1 event in which depositors at all banks seek to withdraw
their deposits and banks cannot honor these demands, resulting in a suspension of convertibility
and the liquidation of at least some banks.

Note, for future reference, that if all depositors seek to withdraw their deposits at date 1, but their
requests can be honored without suspension or liquidations of banks, then we do not deem this
event to be a banking panic.
                                                                                                                                 13

At date 0, anticipating what will happen in different states of the world at date 1, bankers choose
the optimal reserve level to maximize their expected payoff. One the one hand, bankers want to
maximize investment in the risky projects because this is more profitable, but on the other hand,
they want to avoid being prematurely liquidated in a banking panic at date 1. According to
                                                                                                       1 − (1 + β)(1 − f ) π L
Lemma 1 and Lemma 2, if bankers hold reserves such that α ≥ α U
                                                              max ≡                                                            , then
                                                                                                          1 − (1 − f ) π L

they have no incentive to engage in the moral hazard, even if the economy is in the lowest state.
Therefore, bankers solve the following optimization problem at date 0:

                             πr                                      πH
            Max α        ∫π       [α + (1 + β − α )Q − 1]dF (π~ ) + ∫ r [α + (1 + β − α )(π + M ) − 1]dF (π~ )
                              L                                                π



                                         1− α
            s.t. π r =
                                  (1 − f )(1 + β - α)

                              U
                    α ∈ [0, α max ]

The solution to the bankers’ date 0 problem is characterized in the following proposition.


Proposition 1: There exists a unique optimal reserve level α ∈ [0, α U
                                                                     max ] that solves the bankers'
                                                                πL + πH           1 1 2        1                    1
optimization problem. Define: C U ≡ 1 − (                               + M ) + A[ (     ) −(      − π L )(Q − M ) − π 2L ] .
                                                                   2              2 1− f      1− f                  2


                     Aβ 2
If C U ≤                                 , then the optimal α is αU =0;
             2(1 − f ) 2 (1 + β) 2


                              Aβ 2
If C U ≥                 2              U
                                                  , then the optimal α is αU = α max
                                                                                 U
                                                                                     ;
             2(1 − f )       (1 + β − α max )2


            Aβ 2                                        Aβ 2
If                                < CU <                                    , then there is an interior solution
     2(1 − f ) 2 (1 + β) 2                 2(1 − f ) 2 (1 + β − α U
                                                                  max )
                                                                        2


                      β      A                                           1 − αU
αU = 1 + β −                     . Panic occurs whenever π ≤ πU ≡                        .
                   (1 − f ) 2C U                                  (1 − f )(1 + β − α U )


Proof: See Appendix.
                                                                                                   14

The following corollary is clear from Proposition 1.


Corollary 1: The optimal αU is decreasing in bankers' capital β .

The purpose of a panic is to monitor the bankers, to prevent them from engaging in fraud. The
panic is not irrational; it is not motivated by externalities due to actions of other depositors when
there is a sequential service constraint. Rather, the panic is related to the macroeconomy, which
may create incentives for bankers to engage in moral hazard. The fear of not being able to satisfy
subsistence should the banker engage in moral hazard, a kind of extreme risk aversion, causes the
depositors’ withdrawals. However, not all bankers will engage in moral hazard. The problem is
that depositors do not know which bankers have high idiosyncratic shock realizations and which
have low idiosyncratic shock realizations. Depositors liquidate all banks. Because of this
possibility, bankers hold high reserve levels, but this is inefficient.

V.        The Big Bank System

At the other extreme from a banking system composed of many independent unit banks is a
system where banks are large and heavily branched. We call this the “Big Bank” system. Most
banking systems in the world are closer to this system than to the system of independent unit
banks, discussed above.

Definition: A Big Bank is a bank with a portfolio of assets that has a realized return of π + M at
date 1.

So, a Big Bank’s return is the systematic return plus the diversified idiosyncratic mean return, M.
This is the essential point, namely, that the idiosyncratic risk is diversified away, implicitly by
virtue of the bank’s size via branching. Consequently, at date 1, when the state of the economy is
revealed, the return to a Big Bank's risky projects is also known. The state of macroeconomy is
sufficient information for assessing the state of a Big Bank. As a result, depositors know for sure
whether a Big Bank is going to engage in moral hazard or not. If they anticipate that their Big
Bank will engage in fraud, they run on the Big Bank. Otherwise they wait until date 2 to
withdraw.

Assumption 7: Liquidation and fraud can occur at the project level.
                                                                                                              15

Big Banks invest in a portfolio of projects, implicitly each being run by a branch manager. The
Big Bank makes decisions about this portfolio of projects and, in particular, has the flexibility to
liquidate individual projects and to engage in fraud at the level of these projects.

We solve the representative Big Bank’s problem in two steps. First, we begin by treating the
bank by analogy with the system of independent unit banks. That is, we assume that a measure of
such small banks can get together at date 0 and form a Big Bank. We determine when such a
bank would face a bank run at date 1 and then determine the optimal reserve level chosen by this
bank at date 0. We will draw some conclusions at this point. Then the second step of the analysis
recognizes that a Big Bank can alter its portfolio at date 1, liquidating some projects while letting
the other projects continue. So, the second step of the analysis takes this into account.

We proceed as above and solve the Big Bank's optimization problem using backward induction.
First, given the Big Bank's choice of reserve level, we characterize the states in which a bank run
occurs. Comparing the banker’s incentives, as above, leads to:

Lemma 3: At date 1, given the Big Bank's reserve level, α, and the realized state of the economy
                       1− α
π, if π + M <                       , the Big Bank will engage in fraud and therefore depositors will run
                (1 − f )(1 + β - α)

                                             1− α
on the Big Bank. If π + M ≥                               , the Big Bank has no incentive to engage in fraud and
                                      (1 − f )(1 + β - α)

depositors will not run the bank.

At date 0, anticipating what will happen in different states of the world at date 1, a Big Bank
chooses its optimal reserve level to maximize its expected payoff. If a Big Bank holds reserves
                B ≡           1 − (1 + β)(1 − f )( π L + M )
such that α ≥ α max                                          , then it has no incentive to engage in moral hazard
                                  1 − (1 − f )( π L + M )

even if the economy is in the lowest state. A Big Bank solves the following optimization problem
at date 0:

                   πr                                         πH
        Max α     ∫π       [α + (1 + β − α )Q − 1]dF (π~ ) + ∫ r [α + (1 + β − α )(π + M ) − 1]dF (π~ )
                       L                                      π



                                       1− α
        s.t. π r + M =
                                (1 − f )(1 + β - α)


                α ∈ [0, α max
                          B
                              ]
                                                                                                                           16

The solution is given in:

Proposition 2: There is a unique optimal α ∈ [0, α max
                                                   B
                                                       ] that solves the Big Banks' optimization
                                      πL + πH           1 1               1                        1
problem. Define C B ≡ 1 − (                   + M ) + A[ (     − M)2 − (      − M − π L )(Q − M ) − π 2L ] .
                                         2              2 1− f           1− f                      2


                  Aβ 2
If C B ≤                          , then the optimal α is αB =0;
           2(1 − f ) 2 (1 + β ) 2

                        Aβ 2
If C B ≥                                 , then the optimal α is αB = α max
                                                                        B
                                                                            ;
           2(1 − f ) 2 (1 + β − α max
                                  B
                                      )2

            Aβ 2                                 Aβ 2
If                           < CB <                                   , then there is an interior solution, namely,
     2(1 − f ) 2 (1 + β) 2            2(1 − f ) 2 (1 + β − α max
                                                             B
                                                                 )2

                   β          A                                                        1 − αB
αB = 1 + β −                        . A bank run occurs when π ≤ π B ≡                                   −M .
                (1 − f )     2C B                                               (1 − f )(1 + β − α B )


The optimal αB is decreasing in bankers' capital β .

Proof: See Appendix.

As mentioned at the outset of this section, Big Banks have another tool at their disposal that has
not been taken into account yet. Big Banks have the flexibility to partially liquidate their
portfolios at date 1. In fact, a Big Bank only needs to liquidate some of the risky projects when a
bank run occurs. Recall that liquidation (and fraud) can occur at the project level. In order to
deal with depositors’ withdrawals at date 1, a Big Bank only needs to liquidate a fraction x of the
risky projects such that α +(1+β−α)xQ is equal to 1. Actually, however, a Big Bank can do even
better if it can commit to not engage in fraud by liquidating some of the projects and holding the
proceeds as additional reserves. Although the risky projects have idiosyncratic returns, they have
the same liquidation value Q. Suppose the Big Bank is to liquidate a fraction x of the risky
projects. It should liquidate optimally, as follows. It will liquidate those projects that have
realized idiosyncratic returns, r, in the interval [0, x2M]. The remaining (1-x) fraction of projects
has realized idiosyncratic returns r in the complementary interval: [x2M, 2M]. The average
return     on       the       remaining,        i.e.,     nonliquidated,       (1-x)     fraction         of    projects   is
     x 2M + 2 M
π+              = π + (1 + x ) M .            If the Big Bank allows the remaining projects to continue
         2
without engaging in fraud, its payoff is α +(1+β−α)xQ + (1+β−α) (1-x)( π + (1+ x )Μ) -1. If the
                                                                                                     17


Big Bank engages in fraud on the remaining projects, its payoff will be f(1+β−α)(1-
x)( π + (1+x )Μ). Therefore, the Big Bank has to liquidate a fraction x of the risky projects such
that: α +(1+β−α)xQ + (1+β−α)(1-x)( π + (1+ x )Μ) -1 ≥ f (1+β−α) (1-x)( π + (1+ x )Μ). The
optimal x is the solution to the following problem:

         Max x α +(1+β−α)xQ + (1+β−α) (1-x)( π + (1+ x )Μ) -1

                    s.t. (1+β−α)(1-x)( π + (1+ x )Μ) -1 ≥ f (1+β−α) (1-x)( π + (1+ x )Μ)

                    x ∈ [0,1].

The solution is given by:

Lemma 4: There is a unique x ∈ [0, 1] that solves the above problem. The unique solution is:


                                            4 M (1 − f )(1 − α)
     Q − (1 − f ) π − (Q − (1 − f )π) 2 −                       + 4 M (1 − f ) 2 ( π + M )
                                                1+ β − α
x=                                                                                           .
                                         2 M (1 − f )


Moreover, x is decreasing in α, β and π.

Proof: See Appendix.

Now the Big Bank’s problem at date 0 can be written as:

                    πr                                                                           ~
         Max α     ∫π L {α + (1 + β − α)xQ + [(1 + β − α)(1 − x )(π + (1 + x )M ) − 1]}dF( π) +

                     πH
                   ∫π r   [α + (1 + β − α)( π + M ) − 1]dF( ~
                                                            π)


                                    1− α
         s.t. π r + M =
                             (1 − f )(1 + β - α)


                                               4 M (1 − f )(1 − α)
           Q − (1 − f ) π − (Q − (1 − f ) π) 2 −                   + 4 M (1 − f ) 2 ( π + M )
                                                    1+ β − α
      x=
                                              2M (1 − f )


      α ∈ [0, α max
                B
                    ]
                                                                                                  18


Proposition 3: The above objective function is strictly concave in α. There is a unique optimal

reserve level, α ∈ [0, α max
                         B
                             ] , that solves the big bank's optimization problem.

Proof: See Appendix.

To emphasize, note that in the Big Bank system banks may experience withdrawals at date 1, but
they do not fail, i.e., they are not liquidated. In the model there is no difference between the bank
liquidating projects and holding the proceeds as reserves and withdrawals. In other words, the
Big Bank system can be viewed as experiencing deposit withdrawals, but there are no bank runs
or failures. The Big Bank system does not experience banking panics. The independent unit
banks have bank runs, and failures, because each unit bank’s project is indivisible when
liquidation occurs.

There is no closed form solution for the representative Big Bank’s choice of α at date 0 when it
has the flexibility to choose which projects to liquidate at date 1. But, it is clear that the system
with flexibility is even more efficient than the Big Bank system without this flexibility. (A
portfolio of options is more valuable than an option on a portfolio.)

In broad outlines, the distinction between the Big Bank system and the system of small
independent Unit Banks corresponds to the difference between the Canadian and U.S. systems.
As mentioned above, the Canadian system generally displayed fewer failures and no panics. In
addition, as the table below makes clear, Canadian banks held fewer reserves (in the form of
securities) and, correspondingly, they made more loans per asset dollar.
                                                                                               19


           Table: Bank Balance Sheet Items for Canada and the U.S., 1870-1919

                     1870-79         1880-89           1890-99       1900-09         1910-19

                                                       Canada

Loan/Assets            0.717          0.706             0.696         0.722           0.640

Securities/Assets      0.013          0.021             0.071         0.087           0.110

Debt/Equity            1.458          1.914             2.796         4.232           6.876

                                                  United States

Loan/Assets            0.487          0.563             0.589         0.546           0.567

Securities/Assets      0.253          0.169             0.117         0.164           0.168

Debt/Equity            1.826          2.334             2.620         4.184           5.352



Source: Table 4 of Bordo, Redish, and Rockoff (1995) (based on U.S. Comptroller of the
Currency, Annual Reports, and Curtis (1931)).



After 1920, the comparison is also stark. By 1920 the private clearinghouse system in the U.S.
that functioned as a lender-of-last-resort was gone, having been replaced by the Federal Reserve
System. In Canada, the bank merge movement, from 1900 to 1925, reduced the number of banks
and resulted in a small number of banks with large branch networks. Prior to the merger
movement, Canadian banks were branched, but there were many more banks. The post-merger
movement banking system in Canada is clearly the Big Bank system. The comparison between
the two systems during this period is the subject of Bordo, Rockoff, and Redish (1994), quoted
above, who emphasize the fact that between 1920 and 1980 there was one bank failure in Canada,
in contrast to hundreds and thousands in the U.S., particularly during the Great Depression.
There were no banking panics in Canada, though the reduction in deposits during the Great
Depression was of similar magnitude, as noted above.

VI.     Bank Coalitions

The above sections analyzed two polar case banking systems. Arguably, there are banking
systems that resemble the Unit Banking system or the system of Big Banks, but as discussed
above, historically bank coalitions have almost always been present in some form. The above
two cases, the Unit Banking system and the Big Bank system, can be thought of as representative
                                                                                                   20

benchmarks.    In this section, we introduce the possibility of a bank coalition, i.e., a state
contingent agreement between banks. The discussion of bank coalitions will follow the U.S.
clearinghouse experience, briefly described above, but the argument is more general, as discussed
below.

The basic idea for the coalition is as follows. The failure of individual small Unit Banks as a
result of bank runs at date 1, despite holding high levels of reserves, can be improved upon if the
small banks can replicate, at least partially, the performance of a Big Bank. Big Banks are
diversified and so face different incentives to engage in moral hazard. In particular, Big Banks
can liquidate part of their portfolio, in the face of withdrawals, and increase their reserves. For
small banks to attempt to replicate the performance of a Big Bank, a certain level of
diversification must be achieved. Then, at date 1, if there is a bank panic, coalition members can
then credibly form a Big Bank by combining their assets and liabilities.

Credibility of the coalition is established by a signal of coalition solvency; the signal is the
coalition’s act of issuing claims to depositors in exchange for individual bank deposits. These
claims, the loan certificates, are supported by a sharing rule that combines assets and liabilities at
date 1 and which provides incentives for the member banks with high idiosyncratic shock
realizations to monitor member banks with low idiosyncratic shock realizations. “Monitoring”
means preventing member banks from engaging in moral hazard, by liquidating these banks or
subsidizing them. The internal workings of the coalition are not observable to depositors, so they
will not accept the loan certificates unless they believe that the coalition’s behavior will, in fact,
be as described above. In equilibrium depositors’ beliefs will be consistent with the behavior of
the coalition. We now turn to providing the details.

A. The Setting With Bank Coalitions

Suppose that there are small independent Unit Banks at date 0. They are prohibited from forming
a Big Bank. (For example, banks are prohibited from branching across state lines.) Without
forming a Big Bank, however, these small Unit Banks can decide to form a coalition at date 0 and
the coalition partially replicates the Big Bank in certain states of the world at date 1. The
coalition will be a rule indicating that some banks are to be liquidated and a sharing rule for the
remaining banks. At date 0, Unit Banks can get together to form a coalition and reach an
agreement about their individual capital and reserve levels. Because the idiosyncratic shocks are
not verifiable, and thus not contractible, the coalition has no power to force its members to
comply with the rules and the member banks are free to quit at any time they want. The only
                                                                                                    21

requirement to become a member of the coalition at date 0 is to hold the required reserve level
(and capital level). At date 1 the depositors cannot observe whether the rules have been carried
out or not. They can only observe whether the coalition liquidates some of the member banks and
combines the assets and liabilities of the remaining member banks.

The sequence of events at date 1 begins with depositors observing the realized state of the
macroeconomy and deciding whether to withdraw their deposits or not. Then the banks decide
whether to trigger the operation of the coalition. (Subsequent subgames are explained below.)
We define the coalition and the operation of the coalition as follows:

Definition: The bank coalition is an agreement between member banks at date 0 about the
following issues:

    (i)     Bank reserve levels, α, at date 0.

    (ii)    A date 1 state-contingent rule, P(α, π), indicating when the coalition is to operate
            (P=1) or not operate (P=0), in which case banks act as Unit Banks.                   (The
            contingency, in fact, will be a panic; this is shown below in Lemma 4.)

    (iii)   If the coalition is set into operation, then the coalition applies two rules: a liquidation
            rule and a debt transfer rule. The first rule, L(α, π, r), is a mapping from [0, 2M] to
            {1, 0}, indicating whether a member bank (in state {α, π}) with idiosyncratic shock r
            is to be liquidated (L=1) or not liquidated (L=0).      If the member is not liquidated,
            then the second rule applies. That rule, D(α, π, r), is a mapping from [0, 2M] to R+,
            indicating the liability reallocated to a member bank with idiosyncratic shock r.

If at date 1 the coalition is set into operation, then depositors observe that the coalition suspends
convertibility in all banks. The coalition pools the liabilities of nonliquidated banks and issues
loan certificates, which are debt claims to the coalition, backed by all the assets of all the member
banks. Depostiors also observe that the coalition liquidates some of the member banks.

Suppose that at date 1 the state of the world is such that the coalition operates. The issue of loan
certificates and suspension of convertibility signal this to depositors. Then the coalition first
applies the liquidation rule, ending the projects of some member banks. According to the second
rule, all the non-liquidated members pool their liabilities together.         A member bank with
idiosyncratic shock r is reallocated the liability D(α, π, r) by the coalition. Although r is not
                                                                                                           22


verifiable, D is verifiable at date 2.6 The liability D(α, π, r) indicates how much of the coalition’s
debt, the individual bank with idiosyncratic shock r is responsible for at date 2.

At date 2 the coalition has a budget constraint:           ∫ D(α, π, r )dFNL (r ) ≥ 1 ,   where FNL(r) is the

distribution function of the non-liquidated banks’ idiosyncratic shocks. If a member bank cannot
honor its liability to the coalition, all the member banks that are solvent share the default amount.
At date 2, if the coalition is solvent, all the solvent bankers receive what remains after they honor
their individual liabilities, and honor their shared part of other members’ default liabilities. If the
coalition is insolvent, none of the member banks can be solvent. Consequently only those
bankers who engaged in fraud get the payoff from fraud.

If the coalition does not operate, each member bank acts as an independent bank and deals with
its own depositors’ withdrawal demands.

The operation of the coalition is intended to achieve two goals. First, by liquidating some of the
member banks the coalition tries to inform depositors that the non-liquidated banks are in
relatively more sound states. This partially alleviates the panic caused by the asymmetric
information between the banks and depositors. Second, by pooling the liabilities the coalition
tries to convince depositors that incentives to engage in fraud can be removed by monitoring and
coinsurance among the remaining banks. Whether the coalition is successful in achieving these
goals will depend upon the beliefs of the depositors.

Before we study the equilibrium, we specify the following assumptions about the coalition.

Assumption 8: If a bank does not join the coalition at date 0, it cannot apply for membership at
date 1.

This means that if a bank does not join the coalition at date 0, it acts as an independent Unit Bank.
The purpose of this assumption is to save the complicated analysis of transactions between the
coalition and non-members in different states at date 1.

Assumption 9: The identity of the date 0 coalition members, and the coalition itself, is
observable at all dates.


6
  Moreover, the coalition needs to prevent member banks revealing their r by showing depositors their
D(α, π, r). We can imagine that the coalition takes out a note “You owe the coalition D(α, π, r)” and asks
the banker for his signature. In this way, only the coalition holds the verifiable contracts, which specify all
non-liquidated banks’ liabilities D(α, π, r).
                                                                                                     23

This assumption has two implications. First, if a bank quits the coalition at date 1, then its
depositors know that it is no longer a member of the coalition. Second, if a group of banks quit
the original coalition and form another coalition, then depositors can distinguish the deviating
coalition from the original coalition. (This assumption is for simplicity.)

Assumption 10: At date 1, bank coalition members learn the realizations of other members’
idiosyncratic shocks, r.

Bank coalitions were involved in clearing each other’s liabilities and this is one mechanism
through which information about other members’ states of the world was acquired historically. In
addition, the coalition can require that information be reported to the coalition. As discussed
above, the clearinghouse required that certain information be reported and sent bank examiners to
monitor members’ conditions.

Assumption 11: The coalition maximizes the total payoffs to its member banks.

For simplicity, we do not go into the details how decisions are made inside the coalition. We
assume that the internal organization of the coalition is equivalent to assuming the existence of a
coalition decision maker who is independent of any of the member banks and maximizes the total
payoffs to all member banks.7

Assumption 12: When a banker joins the coalition, property rights in his bank are maintained,
that is, he cannot be forced to operate his bank in a certain way, nor can he be involuntarily
separated from his bank’s assets.

Banks are private firms. Joining the coalition at date 0 does not change this. The intent of this
assumption is to emphasize that while the coalition can liquidate member banks, it can only do so
if the banker who owns the bank agrees. If a member bank is not liquidated, then the banks’
original owners must operate banks that are not liquidated.            Under this assumption, non-
liquidated good banks need to bribe/subsidize non-liquidated bad banks to keep them in the
coalition, so that they do not engage in fraud. This restricts the coalition’s sharing rules because
each banker has to be promised a payoff at least equal to the value to him from deviating and
engaging in fraud. Otherwise the coalition would have more freedom to set the sharing rules
because in order to make member banks accept the rules it only needs to threaten to drive them


7
  We take the basic features of the coalition, such as its objective function, as exogenous, and do not
investigate how the coalition comes into being or whether other types of coalitions would be superior in
some way. These are interesting questions, but we do not pursue them in here.
                                                                                                      24

out of the coalition. Keep in mind that the project of a banker about to engage in fraud cannot be
transferred to another bank since, by assumption, bankers can only manage a single project. In
other words, we have assumed that a project becomes worthless when taken over by another
bank/banker. A project’s value depends on a relationship specific investment that cannot be
transferred.

B. Equilibrium with Bank Coalitions

The sequence of events begins at date 1 with depositors observing the state of the macroeconomy
and deciding whether to withdraw or not. To simplify the exposition of the equilibrium we will
start at this node of the game and then go on to the remaining subgames. This first decision of
depositors is the decision to panic or not, and so deserves attention.

At date 1, each member bank of the coalition holds reserves of α when the state of the economy π
                             1− α
is realized. If π ≥                       , then even the bank with the lowest idiosyncratic shock (i.e.,
                      (1 − f )(1 + β - α)
r=0) has no incentive to engage in fraud. Hence there is no need for depositors to run the banks.
                1− α
If π <                       , then some banks have an incentive to engage in fraud. We first show
         (1 − f )(1 + β - α)
that without a bank panic, banks have no incentives to pool their liabilities.

Lemma 4: The coalition will not operate at date 1 if depositors do not panic.

Proof: See Appendix.

The lemma says that if there is no panic no bank coalition will operate. Banks will behave as
Unit Banks. Because the rules of the coalition, adopted at date 0, are not binding, banks are free
to deviate from those rules. They can, in principle, adopt any set of rules concerning transfers
among members (as long as such rules satisfy the budget constraint for the coalition). The lemma
says that any such set of transfers is dominated by banks acting as Unit Banks.

The banking panic creates an externality for banks that would not engage in the moral hazard
problem, the “good” banks. If these good banks did not face the panic, they would have no
incentive to monitor the banks that are going to engage in fraud, the “bad” banks. Because
depositors cannot distinguish good banks from bad banks, all banks face the prospect of being
liquidated. This creates the incentive for good banks to monitor bad banks.
                                                                                                             25

Depositors anticipate that if they do not run the banks, the coalition will not do anything to
prevent member banks from engaging in fraud. So, they run all banks if and only if
            1− α
π<                       . Once the depositors run the banks, the coalition has to operate to convince
     (1 − f )(1 + β - α)
the depositors that it can remove the incentives to engage in fraud from some of its member banks
and therefore there is no need to liquidate those banks.

We now turn to the subgames following the depositors’ panic decision. We define a coalition
equilibrium in the face of a panic as follows:

Definition: When there is a bank panic, a coalition equilibrium consists of the strategies and
beliefs of the various agents in the economy as follows:

1. To maximize the total payoff to all member banks, the coalition suspends convertibility and
    issues loan certificates. It then applies the liquidation rule by announcing which banks are
    liquidated, and applies the debt transfer rule by reallocating liabilities to the remaining banks.

2. Each member bank maximizes its payoff by choosing whether to accept the coalition’s rules or
    to quit the coalition.

3. Depositors observe: (i) the measure of banks liquidated by the coalition; (ii) which member
    banks quit the coalition; and (iii), which members remain in the coalition. Based on what
    they observe, they update their beliefs. On the equilibrium path, their beliefs are updated
    based on Bayes’ rule and the strategies taken by the coalition and its member banks. Off the
    equilibrium path, their beliefs have to be consistent with Bayes’ rule and the strategies of the
    coalition and its members. If their bank is liquidated by the coalition, then their deposits are
    paid off at date 1.8 If their bank is not liquidated, they need to decide whether to accept the
    loan certificates in exchange for demand deposits. If depositors believe their deposits are safe,
    they always withdraw at date 2. Otherwise they withdraw at date 1.

4. Non-liquidated banks decide whether to engage in fraud.

Based on the definition, the following proposition gives the coalition equilibrium in the face of a
bank panic at date 1.




8
 This is for simplicity. The alternative requires the liabilities of the liquidated banks to be honored by the
coalition at date 2.
                                                                                                                  26


                                                          1− α
Proposition 4: Suppose that at date 1 π <                              and, consequently, depositors run
                                                   (1 − f )(1 + β - α)
                                                         1 − α − π(1 − f )(1 + β - α )
the   banks.    Define     x * ( α, π) ≡ max{0, min{1,                                 − 1}} .   In   the   coalition
                                                             M (1 − f )(1 + β - α)

equilibrium:

1) The coalition operates; it issues loan certificates; P(α,π) =1 . Then the coalition applies the
liquidation rule, setting L(α, π, r)= 1 (i.e., liquidation) for banks with idiosyncratic shocks r∈ [0,
x*(α, π)2M] and pays these bankers α+(1+β -α)Q-1. For banks that are not liquidated, the
complementary set, the coalition reallocates liabilities according to the members type, r: D(α, π,
r)= α +(1-f)(1+β−α)(π+r);

2) No member bank quits the coalition;

3) Depositors believe that: (i) the coalition has liquidated the banks with idiosyncratic shocks in
the interval: [0, x*(α,π)2M]; (ii) remaining member banks have idiosyncratic shocks distributed
in the interval: [x*(α,π)2M, 2M]; and (iii), none of the non-liquidated member banks have
incentives to engage in fraud. They liquidate any bank that quits the coalition and accept loan
certificates issued by the coalition;

4) None of the member banks engage in fraud;

5) Off equilibrium path beliefs are as follows. If depositors observe a fraction y of banks quit the
coalition, a fraction z of the banks remain non-liquidated in the coalition and a fraction 1-y-z of
banks are liquidated by the coalition, then they believe that the idiosyncratic shocks of those
banks out of the coalition are distributed in the interval: [0, y2M], and that the idiosyncratic
shocks of those non-liquidated banks in the coalition are distributed in the interval: [(1-z)2M,
2M]. They liquidate all the banks out of the coalition, and accept the loan certificates if and only
if 1-z ≥ x*(α, π).

Proof: See Appendix.

The proposition shows how the coalition behaves as a lender-of-last-resort by monitoring and by
providing insurance.9 Monitoring corresponds to liquidating bad banks, those with the worst


9
  As is well known, in these types of models there are many (sunspot) equilibria, corresponding to other
possible beliefs off the equilibrium path. This indeterminacy can be eliminated along the lines of Goldstein
and Pauzner (1999), and Morris and Shin (2000) who show that adding even an infinitesimal amount of
                                                                                                           27


idiosyncratic shock realizations. Member banks of type r∈ [0, x*(α, π)2M] are liquidated. These
banks would have engaged in fraud. The insurance comes from the transfers implemented among
the non-liquidated banks. Member banks of type r∈[x*(α,π)2M, 2M] are not liquidated, but are
assigned new debt obligations according to D(α, π, r)= α +(1-f)(1+β−α)(π+r). Their original
debt, i.e., face value of the demand deposits, was one.                         Note that banks with
            1− α
r<                       − π have their debt reduced, i.e., D(α, π, r)<1, so these banks are subsidized to
     (1 − f )(1 + β − α)

entice them not to engage in fraud. This is efficient because their projects are worth more if they
                                                                                               1− α
are continued, as long as they do not engage in fraud. Member banks with r >                                −π
                                                                                        (1 − f )(1 + β − α)

have their debt increased, i.e., D(α, π, r)>1, so these banks are being taxed to pay the subsidy to
the low r banks. Banks with high idiosyncratic shock realizations cannot be taxed too much, or
they will engage in fraud. The transfers of the debt obligations must satisfy the budget constraint
        2M
that   ∫x *   D( α, π, r )dF( ~r ) = 1 . This budget constraint limits how much insurance the coalition can

provide and, therefore, determines the point at which member banks are liquidated.

Note that when the state of the economy is low and depositors run the banks, the number
(measure) of member banks that the coalition has to liquidate depends on the state of the
                                        1− α
economy. When            π+M ≥                       , there is no need for the coalition to liquidate any
                                 (1 − f )(1 + β - α)

                                               1− α
member banks. When π + 2 M <                                , all the member banks have to be liquidated.
                                        (1 − f )(1 + β - α)

(Note that since depositors can observe π and α, the coalition cannot pretend that it is not in a
                                                                                   1− α
state where all members should be liquidated).              When π + M <                        ≤ π + 2 M , the
                                                                            (1 − f )(1 + β - α)

coalition needs to liquidate some of the member banks.

There is a critical difference between how the coalition and the Big Bank deal with panics. The
difference has to do with the difference between the ownership and property rights in these two
systems. The banker of a Big Bank (implicitly) hires branch managers to manage branches for
him, and he gets the entire surplus. We do not need to consider the branch managers’ incentives
because the branch manager has no property rights over his branch. Consequently, when a Big
Bank closes a branch, it gets α+(1+β−α)Q-1 after paying off the branch depositors and uses this

private information eliminates the multiplicity of equilibria. For simplicity, we have specified the support
                                                                                                             28

amount as additional reserves. These additional reserves change the incentives of the Big Bank.
But, the coalition cannot increase reserves in this way because member banks have the property
rights and hence control of their assets; they are free to quit the coalition. In order to entice them
not to engage in fraud they must be rewarded. The payoff to a deviating bank is α+(1+β−α)Q-1,
which is (weakly) dominated by the payoff it can get if it stays in the coalition.

At date 0, each bank must decide whether to join the coalition and the coalition must determine
the optimal reserve level α. The optimal reserve for the coalition is the solution of the following
problem:

           Max α
            πr                                                                   πH
           ∫π       [α + (1 + β − α ) xQ + (1 − x )(π + (1 + x ) M )]dF (π~ ) + ∫ r [α + (1 + β − α )(π + M )]dF (π~ ) − 1
                L                                                                    π




                                   1− α
           s.t. π r =
                            (1 − f )(1 + β - α)


                                              1 − α − π(1 − f )(1 + β - α )
                         x = max{0, min{1,                                  − 1}}.
                                                  M (1 − f )(1 + β - α)


                         α ∈ [0, α U
                                   max ]

Proposition 5: The coalition’s objective function is strictly concave in α. There is a unique

optimal reserve level, α ∈ [0, α U
                                 max ] , that solves the coalition's optimization problem. At date 0,
every bank strictly prefers to join the coalition.

Proof: See Appendix.

Intuitively, it is clear why each bank strictly prefers to join coalition. Joining the coalition is a
verifiable act at date 0. The bank holds the specified level of reserves and capital and the
coalition announces that the bank is a member. If the bank does not join the coalition at date 0,
then it cannot join the coalition at date 1. If a bank is not in the coalition it is an independent
Unit Bank and the proposition shows that this bank has lower expected profits than a coalition
member.




beliefs.
                                                                                                   29

The coalition system is an intermediate case between the Unit Bank system and the Big Bank
system. The similarity between the coalition system and the independent Unit Bank system is
that we may observe bank failures (i.e., liquidations) when the economy is in a bad state. The
similarity between the coalition system and the Big Bank system is that the coalition can monitor
and insure member banks when the economy is in a bad state, while the Big Bank “monitors”
itself by closing branches. The one unique feature associated with the coalition is that when a
panic occurs, it suspends convertibility and issues certificates. This feature is important because it
is a commitment made to depositors that the non-liquidated member banks will not engage in
fraud and it provides incentives for member banks to monitor and insure each other. The role of
suspension of convertibility here is quite different from a coordination device used to eliminate
Pareto-dominant equilibria in other models (e.g. Diamond and Dybvig (1983)).

C. Comparing the Different Bank Systems

We have studied three different banking systems: the independent Unit Banking system, the Big
Bank system, and the bank coalition. In this section, we compare these systems in terms of
welfare. Keep in mind that, on the one hand, holding reserves is inefficient because the risky
project earns a higher return. But, on the other hand, holding fewer reserves means a higher
chance of a bank panic, or of withdrawals in the case of the Big Bank system.

We first compare the optimal reserve levels and the likelihood of withdrawals under the different
banking systems.

Proposition 6: The Unit Banking system holds more reserves than the coalition system, which, in
turn, holds more reserves than the Big Bank system. Consequently, withdrawals are most likely
in the Big Bank system, followed by the coalition system, and finally by the independent Unit
Banking system.

Proof: See Appendix.

In the Unit Banking system, if depositors monitor banks by withdrawing, then the bank panic
results in all banks being liquidated. Unit Banks are not diversified, nor do they have (private)
deposit insurance like the coalition system. Banks in the Unit Banking system try to avoid the ex
post losses from panics by holding more reserves. Banks in the Big Bank system can liquidate
part of their assets to make a commitment that fraud is not going to happen. By closing some of
the branches, the remaining projects can survive until date 2. Therefore, Big Banks invest more in
the risky projects and holder less reserves. The coalition system lies between the Unit Banking
                                                                                                  30

system and the Big Bank system. State contingent monitoring and co-insurance provide banks in
the coalition with a way to survive panics if they are solvent. However, because the coalition
system cannot completely replicate the Big Bank, banks in the coalition still hold more reserves
than banks in the Big Bank system.

Proposition 6 leads to the important conclusion that there are more bank panics under the
coalition system than under either of the other two organizational forms. Big Banks do not face
panics. Though depositors’ withdrawals are the largest if they do monitor at date 1, Big Banks do
not suspend convertibility, nor are they liquidated. In this sense, there is no panic. Unit Banks
hold high reserves to reduce the likelihood of a date 1 panic. Banks in the coalition system hold
fewer reserves than Unit Banks, but fewer banks are liquidated if there is a panic. Thus, the
incidence of bank panics is a function of the organization of the banking system.

With respect to efficiency:

Proposition 7: The Big Bank system is more efficient than the coalition system, which is more
efficient than the independent Unit Banking system.

Proof: See Appendix.

The Big Bank has two advantages. Unlike a Unit Bank, it is diversified, so the information
asymmetry is eliminated. And second, it can close branches and use the proceeds as reserves to
alter its incentives to engage in fraud.      The coalition is diversified in the sense that the
membership’s aggregate portfolio is diversified, but property rights in the coalition do not allow it
to close member banks and use the proceeds as reserves for the remaining members.

Proposition 7 ranks the various banking systems in terms of welfare. Proposition 6 provides
empirical predictions about banking system stability, that is failure or liquidation of banks. To
illustrate the comparison of different banking systems, we present a numerical example. The
parameters for the example are given in the first line of the box below.
                                                                                                31


                    Comparative Banking Systems: A Numerical Example

               Assumed Parameters: πL=1.0, πH=1.6, β =0.35, Q=0.75, f=0.4, M=0.06.

                                                     Unit Banks       Coalition      Big Banks

       Reserve Level Required for No Date 1          α max
                                                       U
                                                           =0.65      α max
                                                                        B
                                                                            =0.60     α max
                                                                                        U
                                                                                            =0.65
                   Withdrawals

            Equilibrium Reserve Level                 αU=0.51          αC=0.32         αB=0.13

              Bank Failures if Panic                  All Banks      Some Banks       No Banks

        Likelihood of Withdrawal at Date 1               0.2             0.36            0.41

              Expected Value of Bank                  EVU=0.68        EVC=0.78        EVB=0.98




The last row of the table confirms that the Big Bank system is the most efficient, followed by the
coalition, and then the Unit Banks. Equilibrium reserves are highest in the Unit Bank system,
followed by the coalition, and then by the Big Bank system. This corresponds to the comparison
between the U.S. and Canada, shown in the previous table. Also consistent with that comparison
is the observed level of failures. If there are withdrawals at date 1, there are no bank failures
(liquidations) in the Big Bank system, but there are in the coalition system. The entire banking
system fails when there is a panic in the Unit Bank system. As mentioned above, in Canada, the
banking system shrank by the same order of magnitude as in the U.S. during the Great
Depression, but there were no bank failures. In the U.S. during the Great Depression, the private
bank coalition system did not exist anymore (following the 1914 establishment of the Federal
Reserve System), and the entire banking system was insolvent, with roughly 30 percent
liquidated.

VII.      Discussion

We studied the industrial organization of banking. Banking systems with large, well-diversified,
banks do not experience banking panics or failures. Banking panics occur in systems of small
Unit Banks.        Banking panics are not irrational.           Panics result from depositors
monitoring/liquidating banks in a setting where some banks are more likely to be engaging in
                                                                                                 32

moral hazard, but the depositors do not know which banks are the more likely because of
asymmetric information.       The lender-of-last-resort function, including money creation,
monitoring, and deposit insurance arose from private arrangements among banks.                Bank
coalitions formed to monitor members and provide insurance to depositors. Banking panics play
a crucial role in making such private bank coalitions work. Because of the panic banks are forced
to commit to pool resources and liquidate some members.

Note that the model could just as easily be interpreted as a model of the existence of banks. The
Unit Banking system can be thought of as a system of small firms, while the Big Bank system can
be thought of as a Large Firm. Again, these are two benchmarks. Firms issue debt because this
allows them to be monitored. The coalition can now be thought of as a bank and the analysis
demonstrates the role of intermediaries. In either case, the key is the delegation of monitoring to
a coalition/intermediary, but this depends upon the “panic” inducing the coalition/intermediary to
monitor its members/borrowers.

Why did government central banks replace private bank coalitions? In the above analysis, there
is no obvious rationale for the government to step in and provide the lender-of-last-resort function
unless the government has much more power than private agents, more resources than private
agents, or there are costs to panics that have not been considered. Gorton and Huang (2001)
consider the above model, but include a transactions role for bank liabilities. A panic disrupts the
role of bank liabilities as a medium of exchange. They argue that in this context the government
may be able to improve welfare with deposit insurance.
                                                                                                31

                                                    Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1: The bankers solve the following optimization problem at date 0:


           πr                                    πH
 Max α    ∫πL [α + (1 + β − α)Q − 1]dF(~π) + ∫πr      [α + (1 + β − α)( π + M ) − 1]dF( ~
                                                                                        π)


                         1− α
     s.t. π r =
                  (1 − f )(1 + β - α)


                      U ].
            α ∈ [0, α max



                     πr                              πH
Define EV( α) ≡    ∫π L α + (1 + β − α)QdF(π~) + ∫π r     α + (1 + β − α)( π + M )dF( ~
                                                                                      π)



                                       π + πH        πr
                     = α + (1 + β - α)( L
                                          2
                                              + M) −
                                                     πL    ∫
                                                        (1 + β - α)( π + M - Q) dF( ~
                                                                                    π) ,



               π + πH           1 1 2        1                    1
and C U ≡ 1 − ( L     + M ) + A[ (     ) −(      − π L )(Q − M ) − π 2L ] . Then:
                  2             2 1− f      1− f                  2


dEV( α)                  Aβ 2
        = CU −                                and
  dα           2(1 − f ) 2 (1 + β − α) 2


d 2 EV( α)              Aβ 2
           =−                          < 0.
   dα 2       (1 − f ) 2 (1 + β − α) 3


Therefore EV(α) is a strictly concave function of α, and it has a unique maximum value in

                   U ] . Ιf             dEV(0)         dEV (α max ) U
the interval [0, α max                         > 0 and              < 0 , then we have an interior
                                          dα              dα
solution. //

Proof of Corollary 1:


dα U                                   Aβ 2                                Aβ 2
                                                      < CU <
            1      A
     =1−               > 0 when                                                          . //
 dβ      (1 − f ) 2C U          2(1 − f ) 2 (1 + β) 2        2(1 − f ) 2 (1 + β − α max
                                                                                    U )2
                                                                                                            32




Proof of Proposition 2: A Big Bank solves the following optimization problem at date 0:


           πr                                         πH
Max α    ∫πL [α + (1 + β − α)Q − 1]dF(~π) + ∫πr            [α + (1 + β − α)( π + M ) − 1]dF( ~
                                                                                             π)


                                1− α
      s.t. π r + M =
                         (1 − f )(1 + β - α )


                       B ].
             α ∈ [0, α max



                    πr                                     πH
Define EV( α) ≡    ∫πL α + (1 + β − α)QdF(~π) + ∫πr             α + (1 + β − α)( π + M )dF( ~
                                                                                            π)


                  π + πH        πr
= α + (1 + β - α)( L
                     2
                         + M) −
                                πL       ∫
                                   (1 + β - α)( π + M - Q) dF( ~
                                                               π) ,


               π + πH           1 1            1                      1
and C B ≡ 1 − ( L     + M ) + A[ (  − M) 2 − (   − M − π L )(Q − M ) − π 2L ] . Then:
                     2                       2 1− f              1− f                            2


dEV( α)                  Aβ 2
        = CB −                                   and
  dα           2(1 − f ) 2 (1 + β − α) 2


d 2 EV( α)              Aβ 2
           =−                          < 0.
   dα 2       (1 − f ) 2 (1 + β − α) 3


Therefore EV(α) is a strictly concave function of α, and it has a unique maximum value in

                             dEV(0)                   dEV (α max
                                                             B
                                                                 )
interval [0,α max
              B
                  ] . Ιf            > 0 and                        < 0 , then we have an interior solution. //
                               dα                        dα

Proof of Lemma 3: Let G(x)= α +(1+β−α) xQ + (1+β−α)(1−f) (1-x)( π + (1+ x )Μ) -1 .

G(x) is a continuous quadratic function of x. Since G(0)<0 and G(1)>0, there exists a unique
solution in the interval [0, 1] for the equation G(x)=0. The solution is the smaller root of the
quadratic equation, which is:

                                            4 M (1 − f )(1 − α)
     Q − (1 − f )π − (Q − (1 − f ) π) 2 −                       + 4 M (1 − f ) 2 ( π + M )
                                                 1+ β − α
x=                                                                                         . Note that
                                          2 M (1 − f )
                                                                                                                       33

4 M (1 − f )(1 − α )                  4 M (1 − f ) β
                     = 4 M (1 − f ) −                is the only term through which α and β
    1+ β −α                             1+ β −α
                                                                                       4 M (1 − f )(1 − α)
affect x, and it is decreasing in both α and β. x is increasing in                                         , and therefore
                                                                                           1+ β − α

decreasing in α and β.

To show x is decreasing in π, let us define:

                              4 M (1 − f )(1 − α)
Y ≡ (Q − (1 − f )π) 2 −                           + 4 M (1 − f ) 2 ( π + M ) . Then:
                                  1+ β − α


                 1
∂x     1       −
   =−    (1 + Y 2 ((1 − f ) 2 π − (1 − f )Q + 2 M (1 − f ) 2 )
∂π    2M

                                                     1
              1
   (1 − f )     −                                  Y2
=−          Y 2 ( 2 M (1 − f ) − (Q − (1 − f ) π +      ).
    2M                                             1− f

                                                        1
                                                                  −      ∂x
Since x<1, we have 2 M (1 − f ) − (Q − (1 − f ) π > − Y 2 . Thus we have    < 0 . //
                                                                         ∂π

Proof of Proposition 3: The Big Bank’s problem at date 0 is:


           πr
Max α    ∫πL [α + (1 + β − α)xQ + (1 + β − α)(1 − x )(π + (1 + x )M ) − 1]dF(~π) +
           πH
          ∫πr       [α + (1 + β − α)( π + M ) − 1]dF( ~
                                                      π)


                            1− α
s.t. π r + M =
                     (1 − f )(1 + β - α )


                                                     4 M (1 − f )(1 − α)
           Q − (1 − f )π − (Q − (1 − f ) π) 2 −                          + 4 M (1 − f ) 2 ( π + M )
                                                          1+ β − α
      x=
                                                   2 M (1 − f )


                B ]
      α ∈ [0, α max


                         πr
Define EV( α) ≡         ∫π L α + (1 + β − α)xQ + (1 + β − α)(1 − x )(π + (1 + x )M )dF(~π) +
                                πH
                               ∫πr   α + (1 + β − α)( π + M )dF( ~
                                                                 π)
                                                                                                               34


                                           π + πH        πr
                         = α + (1 + β - α)( L
                                              2
                                                  + M) −
                                                         πL       ∫
                                                            (1 + β - α)x( π + xM - Q) dF( ~
                                                                                          π)


                                           1
                                   C2
and rewrite x ( α) = C 0 − (C1 +         ) 2 where
                                 1+β − α


          Q − (1 − f ) π        (Q − (1 − f ) π) 2 − 4 M (1 − f ) + 4 M (1 − f ) 2 ( π + M )
C0 =                     , C1 =                                                              and
           2 M (1 − f )                              4 M 2 (1 − f ) 2

            4 M (1 − f )β        β
C2 =                       =           .
               2
           4 M (1 − f )  2   M (1 − f)




                                         1
               ∂x    C          C2     −
We have           = − 2 (C1 +         ) 2 (1 + β − α) − 2 < 0 and
               ∂α     2       1+β − α

                            3                                  1
 ∂ 2x C22         C2      −
                                      −              C2      −
      =   (C1 +             2           4
                         ) (1 + β − α) − C 2 (C1 +          ) 2 (1 + β − α) − 3
 ∂α 2   4       1+ β − α                           1+ β − α


                                    3
             C2 2         C2      −                                  ∂x
           =      (C1 +          ) (1 + β − α) − 4 + 2(1 + β − α) −1
                                    2                                   . Then:
              4         1+ β − α                                     ∂α


dEV( α)      π + πH        πr                   ∂x
  dα
        =1− ( L
                2
                    + M) +
                           πL              ∫
                              x ( π + xM − Q) −
                                                ∂α
                                                   (1 + β − α)( π + 2 xM − Q)dF( ~
                                                                                 π)



d 2 EV( α)   π r ∂x                  ∂2x
   dα 2
           =
             π L
                  ∫
                 (2
                    ∂α
                       − (1 + β − α)
                                     ∂x 2
                                                              ~) -
                                          )( π + 2 xM − Q)dF( π



 πr                          ∂x 2                     β                     ∂x
∫π       2 M (1 + β − α )(      ) dF (π% ) +                      (π r − Q)    .
     L                       ∂α              (1 − f )(1 + β − α )           ∂α

              ∂x        ∂x                ∂2x
Because          < 0, 2    − (1 + β − α )      < 0, and π + 2 Mx − Q > 0 ,                         we        have
              ∂α        ∂α                ∂x 2

d 2 EV (α )
            < 0 . Therefore EV(α) is a strictly concave function of α, and it has a unique
    dα 2

                                                          dEV(α)                dEV (α max
                                                                                       B
                                                                                           )
maximum value in interval [0,α max
                               B
                                   ] . Ιf                        > 0 and                     < 0 , then we have an
                                                            dα                     dα
interior solution. //
                                                                                                                            35

Proof of Lemma 4: Suppose each bank holds reserve level α and that the state of the
                                        1− α
macroeconomy is π <                                   , i.e., there a panic. Let us consider any measure of
                                 (1 − f )(1 + β - α )
banks with any distribution function F (r~ ) of idiosyncratic shocks in the interval [π, π+2M].
                          1− α
Define r*=                             -π. We have f(1+β−α)(π+r) > α+ (1+β−α)(π+r)-1 for r<r*, i.e.,
                   (1 − f )(1 + β − α)

these bank types will engage in fraud; f(1+β−α)(π+r) = α+ (1+β−α)(π+r)-1 for r=r*; and
f(1+β−α)(π+r) < α+ (1+β−α)(π+r)-1 for r>r*, i.e., these bank types will not engage in fraud.
If there is no bank run, the banks with r<r* engage in fraud and the banks with r ≥ r* do not
engage in fraud. The total payoff to all the banks is:

 r*                                    2M
∫0    f (1 + β − α)( π +r )dF( ~r ) + ∫ * [α + (1 + β − α)( π +r ) − 1]dF( ~r ) .
                                           r


If these banks pool their liabilities, under any system of transfers among members, then they
can be either solvent or insolvent at date 2. If they are solvent, the total of their individual
                                   2M
payoffs cannot exceed            ∫0     [α + (1 + β − α)( π +r ) − 1]dF( ~r ) , which can be reached when none

of these banks engage in fraud. If they are insolvent, the total of their payoffs cannot exceed
 2M
∫0     f (1 + β − α)( π +r )dF( ~r ) , which can be reached when all these banks engage in fraud.

Therefore, the maximum total payoff from pooling under any system of transfers is:

         2M                                                    2M
max{ ∫            [α + (1 + β − α)( π +r ) − 1]dF( ~r ) ,   ∫0        f (1 + β − α)( π +r )dF( ~r ) }.
         0


             r*                                    2M
Since    ∫0       f (1 + β − α)( π +r )dF( ~r ) + ∫ * [α + (1 + β − α)( π +r ) − 1]dF( ~r )
                                                  r


              2M                                                  2M
≥ max{ ∫             [α + (1 + β − α)( π +r ) − 1]dF( ~r ) ,     ∫0     f (1 + β − α)( π +r )dF( ~r ) }, it is better for
              0

these banks choose not to pool their liabilities in a coalition. That is, as a group it is a
dominant strategy to deviate from any proposed coalition.

Hence we have shown it would be better for the non-liquidated banks to stay independent
Unit Banks if there is no bank panic. For those banks that are supposed to be liquidated, the
bankers can get more from engaging in fraud than being liquidated. Since the coalition
maximizes the total payoffs to all member bankers, it is not going to operate without a bank
panic. //
                                                                                                           36

                                                                                            1− α
Proof of Proposition 4: At date 1, depositors run the banks when π <                                     . The
                                                                                     (1 − f )(1 + β - α)

coalition has to operate, choose P(α, π)=1, to save as many member banks as possible from
being liquidated. The coalition starts the monitoring and coinsurance system. First, it can
liquidate some member banks to improve the distribution of idiosyncratic shocks of those
remaining banks. Second, it can implement the system of transfers to pool liabilities. We
restrict the coalition’s actions to two functions: L(α, π, r) and D(α, π, r). L(α, π, r) is a
mapping from [0, 2M] to {1, 0}, indicating whether a member bank (in state {α, π}) with
idiosyncratic shock r is to be liquidated (L=1) or not liquidated (L=0). If the member is not
liquidated, then the second rule, D(α, π, r), which is a mapping from [0, 2M] to R+, indicates
the liability reallocated to a member bank with idiosyncratic shock r.

We first determine the best possible outcomes for the coalition.                     Then we prove the
equilibrium characterized in Proposition 4 generates the best possible outcome.

If the coalition has to liquidate some of the member banks, it is always better to liquidate
those banks with low realizations of idiosyncratic shocks. This is because all the risky
projects have the same liquidation value. For the liquidated member banks, the coalition
gives the bankers α+(1+β−α)Q-1. On the one hand, the coalition has to pay them at least
α+(1+β−α)Q-1, the worst possible payoff they can get if they quit; on the other hand, the
coalition needs not to pay them more than α+(1+β−α)Q-1, since the incentives of these
bankers no longer need to be considered.

Now let us considered the non-liquidated member banks. Suppose a fraction, x, of banks with
low idiosyncratic shocks are liquidated. These will be the banks with the lowest shock
realizations, so the remaining banks will have idiosyncratic shocks distributed in the interval:
[x2M, 2M], which has a mean of (1+x)M. According to Assumption 13, the coalition needs
the original bankers to operate these banks. In order to prevent a banker with idiosyncratic
shock r from engaging in fraud, the coalition has to promise him a payoff of at least f(1+β -
α)(π+r). Therefore, in order to convince depositors that their deposits are safe if they accept
clearinghouse loan certificates, the coalition has to satisfy the following condition:
 2M                                           2M
∫x2M (α + (1 + β − α)(π + r ) − 1)dF( r ) ≥ ∫x2M f (1 + β − α)(π + r )dF(~r ) .
                                      ~                                           Solving for x, we can

                                   1 − α − π(1 − f )(1 + β - α)
rewrite the condition as: x ≥                                   − 1 . The fraction x is between 0 and 1.
                                       M (1 − f )(1 + β - α)

Therefore, imposing this condition, in order to convince depositors that the remaining banks
                                                                                             37

have no incentives to engage in fraud, the coalition must liquidate a fraction, x, of the member
                                                  1 − α − π(1 − f )(1 + β - α)
banks such that x ≥ x * ( α, π) ≡ max{0, min{1,                                − 1}} .
                                                      M (1 − f )(1 + β - α)

The coalition’s task is now reduced to finding the minimum x that can be accepted by the
depositors. According to the proposition, in equilibrium the coalition only needs to liquidate
exactly x*(α, π) of banks. We need to check whether the coalition’s sharing rules can prevent
the non-liquidated member banks from engaging in fraud and depositors’ beliefs satisfying
equilibrium requirements. Moreover, we need to check whether depositors’ off equilibrium
path beliefs ensure that the coalition has no profitable deviation.

First, non-liquidated member banks have no incentive to engage in fraud. A non-liquidated
member bank with idiosyncratic shock of r owes a liability of D(α, π, r)=α +(1-
f)(1+β−α)(π+r) to the coalition. If it does not engage in fraud and honors its liabilities, its
payoff is α +(1+β−α)(π+r)- {α +(1-f)(1+β−α)(π+r)}= f(1+β−α)(π+r), which is what it can
get from engaging in fraud. Thus, it has no incentive to engage in fraud.

Second, depositors observe all the banks remain with the coalition and a fraction x*(α,π) of
member banks are liquidated. To be consistent with the actions taken by the coalition and its
members, their beliefs must be that banks with idiosyncratic shocks in the interval: [0,
x*(α,π)2M] are liquidated and banks with idiosyncratic shocks in the complementary interval,
[x*(α,π)2M, 2M], are not liquidated and have no incentive to engage in fraud. According to
their updated beliefs, their deposits are safe and they accept the certificates. We need to
specify depositors’ off equilibrium path beliefs. Suppose depositors observe a fraction y of
banks quit the coalition, a fraction z of the banks remain non-liquidated in the coalition and a
fraction 1-y-z of banks are liquidated by the coalition. They believe that the idiosyncratic
shocks of those banks out of the coalition are distributed in the interval: [0, y2M], and the
idiosyncratic shocks of those non-liquidated banks in the coalition are distributed in the
interval: [(1-z)2M, 2M].

Finally, we check that the coalition has no profitable deviation. There are two possible
deviations for the coalition. The coalition can liquidate a fraction of member banks less than
x*(α,π). Or it can carry out a different set of sharing rules. According to depositors’ off
equilibrium path beliefs, if the coalition liquidates a fraction of banks less than x*(α,π), the
certificates will not be accepted by depositors and all the member banks will be liquidated.
Therefore, this is not a profitable deviation. On the other hand, no matter what kind of
sharing rules are carried out inside the coalition, the coalition can either be solvent or
insolvent at date 2.    If the coalition is solvent at date 2, its maximum payoff is: (1-
                                                                                                                 38

x*(α,π))(α+(1+β -α)(π+(1+x*(α,π))M)-1), which can be reached when none of the remaining
member banks engage in fraud. If the coalition is insolvent due to some members engaging in
fraud, its maximum payoff is: (1- x*(α,π))f(1+β -α)(π+(1+ x*(α,π))M), reached when all the
non-liquidated banks engage in fraud. Since (α+(1+β -α)(π+(1+ x*(α,π))M)-1)= f(1+β -
α)(π+(1+ x*(α,π))M) if x*(α,π)<1, the coalition has no profitable deviation from the
specified sharing rules. //

Proof of Proposition 5: The coalition’s objective function is:

        Maxα
          πr                                                                      πH
         ∫π       [α + (1 + β − α ) xQ + (1 − x )(π + (1 + x) M ) − 1]dF (π~ ) + ∫ r [α + (1 + β − α )(π + M ) − 1]dF (π~ )
              L                                                                               π

                                 1− α
         s.t. π r =
                          (1 − f )(1 + β - α)

                                    1 − α − π(1 − f )(1 + β - α )
         x = max{0, min{1,                                        − 1}}.
                                        M (1 − f )(1 + β - α)


        α ∈ [0, α max
                  U
                      ]

First, if α ≥ α max
                B
                    , then x=0 for any realization of π. So, we only need to consider the case

                                                    1 − (1 + β)(1 − f )( π L + 2 M )
where α ∈ [0, α max
                B
                    ] . Define α* ≡                                                  .   If α > α*, then x is always
                                                        1 − (1 − f )( π L + 2 M )

less than 1, which means that there is no need to liquidate all the member banks. Then the
objective function can be written as:

                            πr
EVB(α)= EV1 ( α) ≡ ∫                                                                            ~) +
                                   α + (1 + β − α)xQ + (1 + β − α)(1 − x )( π + (1 + x ) M )dF( π
                           πL


                             πH
                            ∫π r    α + (1 + β − α)( π + M )dF( ~
                                                                π)


                                          π + πH        πr
                        = α + (1 + β - α)( L
                                             2
                                                 + M) −
                                                        πL         ∫
                                                           (1 + β - α)x( π + xM - Q) dF( ~
                                                                                         π)


                                                                    1− α
If α ≤ α*, then x is equal to 1 when π ≤                                         − 2 M , which means the coalition
                                                             (1 − f )(1 + β − α)

needs to liquidate all the member banks when π is low enough. Then the objective function
can be written as:
                                                                                                             39

                           π*
EVB(α)= EV 2 ( α) ≡ ∫                               ~) +
                                α + (1 + β − α)QdF( π
                          πL


               πr                                                                        ~
             ∫π* α + (1 + β − α)xQ + (1 + β − α)(1 − x )(π + (1 + x ) M )dF( π) +
                  πH
              ∫π r     α + (1 + β − α)( π + M )dF( ~
                                                   π)


                  π + πH          π*                                   r
                                                               ~) - π (1 + β - α)x( π + xM - Q) dF( ~
= α + (1 + β - α)( L     + M ) − ∫ (1 + β - α)( π + M - Q) dF( π   ∫  *                             π) .
                     2            πL                                π




                                                                         dEV1 ( α) dEV 2 ( α)
Next, we show both EV1(a) and EV2(a) are concave and                              =           when α=α*.
                                                                           dα        dα


dEV1 (α)       π + πH        πr                   ∂x
  dα
         = 1− ( L
                  2
                      + M) +
                             πL        ∫
                                x ( π + xM − Q) −
                                                  ∂α
                                                     (1 + β − α)( π + 2xM − Q)dF( ~
                                                                                  π)



d 2 EV1 ( α)   π r ∂x               ∂2x
    dα 2
             =∫   (2
               π L ∂α
                      − (1 + β − α)
                                    ∂x 2
                                                            ~) -
                                         )( π + 2xM − Q)dF( π



    πr                 ∂x 2                     β                     ∂x
∫π L 2M(1 + β − α)( ∂α )    dF( ~
                                π) +
                                       (1 − f )(1 + β − α)
                                                           ( π r − Q)
                                                                      ∂α
                                                                         .


         ∂x       β                                         ∂2x        2β
Since       =−            (1 + β − α ) − 2 < 0 ,                 =−            (1 + β − α ) − 3 < 0 ,   we have
         ∂α    M (1 − f )                                   ∂α 2    M (1 − f )

    ∂x               ∂2x               d 2 EV1( α)
2      − (1 + β − α ) 2 = 0 , and thus             <0.
    ∂α               ∂x                    dα 2


dEV 2 ( α)       π + πH        π*
  dα
           = 1− ( L
                    2
                        + M) +
                               πL      ∫
                                  ( π + M − Q)dF( ~
                                                  π) +



                  πr                       ∂x
              ∫π* x(π + xM − Q) − ∂α (1 + β − α)( π + 2xM − Q)dF(π~)

d 2 EV 2 ( α)   π r ∂x               ∂2x
    dα 2
              =∫   (2
                π* ∂α
                       − (1 + β − α)
                                     ∂x 2
                                          )( π + 2xM − Q)dF( ~
                                                             π) -



                     πr                    ∂x 2                     β                         ∂x
                   ∫π* 2M(1 + β − α)( ∂α )      dF( ~
                                                    π) +
                                                           (1 − f )(1 + β − α)
                                                                               ( π r − M − Q)
                                                                                              ∂α
                                                                                                 <0.
                                                                                                           40

                                                                                      dEV1 ( α*) dEV 2 ( α*)
Moreover when α=α*, π∗=πL, we have EV1(α*)=EV2(α*), and                                         =            .
                                                                                         dα         dα

Therefore, EVB(α) is a strictly concave function of α and there is a unique α ∈ [0, α max
                                                                                      B
                                                                                          ]
that solves the coalition’s optimization problem.

To prove that all the banks are willing to join the coalition, we need to show that the expected
payoff from joining the coalition is larger than that from operating as an independent bank.
This is part of the proof of Proposition 6, below. //

Proof of Proposition 6: Since we have shown that the objective functions are concave, it

                         dEV U (α ) dEV C (α ) dEV B (α )                    1−α
suffices to show that              >          >           . Let π r =
                           dα         dα         dα                   (1 − f )(1 + β - α )

dEV U (α )            π L +π H            π   r
                                                                 dπ            r

             = 1− (              + M ) + ∫ (π + M - Q) dF(π~ ) -    ( π r + M - Q)
    α                    2                πL                     dα

dEV C (α )            π L +π H           π r −M
             = 1− (              +M)+∫                x C (π + x C M - Q) dF(π~ )
    α                    2               πL



                                                  π r −M   ∂x C
                                        −∫                      (1 + β - α )(π + 2x C M - Q) dF(π~ )
                                              πL           ∂α

dEV C (α )            π L +π H            π r −M
             = 1− (              +M)+ ∫               x B (π + x B M - Q) dF(π~ )
    α                    2               πL



                                          π r −M       ∂x B
                                        -∫                  (1 + β - α )(π + 2x B M - Q) dF(π~ )
                                          πL           ∂α

                                       ∂x B ∂x C
Since we have x B < x C < 1 and            <     < 0 , we have
                                       ∂α    ∂α
dEV U (α ) dEV C (α ) dEV B (α )
          >          >           . Therefore α B < α C < α U .
  dα         dα         dα

Proof of Proposition 7: Given α and π, we use xB(α, π), xC(α, π), and xU(α, π) to denote the
fraction of banks (or projects) that need to be liquidated under the Big Bank system, the
coalition, and the Unit Bank system, respectively. And we use EVB(α, π), EVC(α, π), and
EVU(α, π) to denote the average payoff, respectively, to a bank (or project) over the
distribution of idiosyncratic shock r under these three systems.
                                                                                                            41

                      1− α
When π ≥                           , xB(α, π)=xC(α, π)=xU(α, π)=0, so there is no need to liquidate
               (1 − f )(1 + β - α)
any banks (projects) under any of the three systems. Therefore, EVB(α, π)=EVC(α, π)=
EVU(α, π)=α+(1+β−α)(π+M)-1.

                    1− α                      1− α
When                             −M≤π<                     ,   xB(α, π)=xC(α, π)=0,        xU(α, π)=1,      the
             (1 − f )(1 + β - α)       (1 − f )(1 + β - α)

independent Unit Banks are liquidated, while there is no need to liquidate any banks
(projects)        under      the      Big      Bank        system    or       the      coalition        system.
EVB(α, π)=EVC(α, π)=α+(1+β−α)(π+M)-1, EVC(α, π)=α+(1+β−α)Q-1. Therefore we have
EVB(α, π)=EVC(α, π)>EVC(α, π).

                     1− α
When π <                          − M , xB(α, π)<xC(α, π) ≤ xU(α, π)=1, there are liquidations under all
              (1 − f )(1 + β - α)

the three systems. All the independent unit banks have to be liquidated. Only a fraction of
the banks (projects) need to be liquidated under the Big Bank system and the coalition
system. Note that:

xC(α, π) solves: (1+β−α)( π + (1+ x )Μ) -1=f(1+β−α)( π + (1+ x )Μ).

xB(α, π) solves:

 α +(1+β−α) xQ + (1+β−α) (1-x)( π + (1+ x )Μ) -1=f(1+β−α) (1-x)( π + (1+ x )Μ).

Since α +(1+β−α) xC(α, π) Q + (1+β−α) (1- xC(α, π))( π + (1+xC(α, π) )Μ) -1= α +(1+β−α)
xC(α, π) Q+ f(1+β−α) (1-x)( π + (1+ x )Μ)> f(1+β−α) (1-x)( π + (1+x )Μ), we have
xB(α, π)<xC(α, π).

EVB(α, π)=α+xB(α, π)(1+β−α)Q+(1-xB(α, π))(1+β−α)(π+(1+xB(α, π))M)-1,

EVC(α, π)=α+xC(α, π)(1+β−α)Q+(1-xC(α, π))(1+β−α)(π+(1+xC(α, π))M)-1,

EVU(α, π)=α+(1+β−α)Q-1.

                                                                                    1− α
Therefore, we have EVB(α, π)>EVC(α, π) ≥ EVU(α, π) when π <                                      −M.
                                                                             (1 − f )(1 + β - α)


Since    we        have     EVB(α, π) ≥ EVC(α, π) ≥ EVU(α, π)          for      all    α    and        π,   and
EVB(α, π)>EVC(α, π)>EVU(α, π) for some α and π, the Big Bank system dominates the
coalition, which dominates the Unit Bank system. //
                                                                                              42

                                         References


Andrew, A. Piatt (1907), “The Influence of Crops Upon Business in America,” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 20, 323-353.

Andrew, A. Piatt (1908a), “Hoarding in the Panic of 1907,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
      (February), 290-299.

Andrew, A. Piatt (1908b), “Substitutes for Cash in the Panic of 1907,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics (August), 487-520.

Bagehot, Walter (1887), Lombard Street (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons).

Beck, Thorsten (no date), “Deposit Insurance as a Private Club: Is Germany a Model?,”
       World Bank mimeo.

Benston, George and George Kaufman (1986), “Risks and Failures in Banking: Overview,
       History, and Evaluation,” Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Staff Memorandum #
       86-1.

Bordo, Michael (1985), “The Impact and International Transmission of Financial Crises:
       Some Historical Evidence, 1870-1933,” Revista di Storia Economica 2, 41-78.

Bordo, Michael (1986), “Financial Crises, Banking Crises, Stock Market Crashes and the
       Money Supply: Some International Evidence, 1870-1933,” in Financial Crises and
       the World Banking System (The Macmillan Press: London), edited by Forrest Capie
       and Geoffrey Wood, 190-248.

Bordo, Michael and Angela Redish (1987), “Why Did the Bank of Canada Emerge in 1935?,”
       Journal of Economic History 47, 405-417.

Bordo, Michael, Hugh Rockoff, and Angela Redish (1995), “A Comparison of the Stability
       and Efficiency of the Canadian and American Banking Systems, 1870-1925,” NBER
       Historical Working Paper #67.

Bordo, Michael, Hugh Rockoff, and Angela Redish (1994), “The U.S. Banking System from
       a Northern Exposure: Stability versus Efficiency,” Journal of Economic History 54,
       325-341.

Breckenridge, Roeliff Morton (1910), The History of Banking in Canada (National Monetary
       Commission, 61st Congress, 2nd Session, Document No. 332, Washington D.C.:
       Government Printing Office).

Bremer. C.D. (1935), American Bank Failures (New York: Columbia University Press).

Calomiris, Charles (1989), “Deposit Insurance: Lessons from the Record,” Federal Reserve
       Bank of Chicago Economic Perspectives (May/June), 10-30.

Calomiris, Charles (1990), “Is Deposit Insurance Necessary? A Historical Perspective,”
       Journal of Economic History 50, 283-95.
                                                                                           43




Calomiris, Charles (1993), “Regulation, Industrial Structure, and Instability in U.S. Banking:
       An Historical Perspective,” in Structural Change in Banking (Business One Irwin:
       Homewood, Illinois), edited by Michael Klausner and Lawrence White, 19-116.

Calomiris, Charles and Gary Gorton (1991), “The Origins of Banking Panics: Models, Facts,
       and Bank Regulation,” in Glenn Hubbard, editor, Financial Markets and Financial
       Crises (University of Chicago Press; Chicago), pp. 109-173.

Calomiris, Charles and Charles Kahn (1991), “The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring
       Optimal Banking Arrangements,” American Economic Review 81, 497-513.

Calomiris, Charles and Charles Kahn (1996), “The Efficiency of Self-Regulated Payments
       Systems: Learning from the Suffolk System,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking
       28, 766-797.

Cannon, James G. (1910), Clearing Houses, U.S. National Monetary Commission, 61st
       Congress, 2d Session, Doc. No. 491 (Washington D.C.; Government Printing Office).

Capie, Forrest (1997), “The Evolution of Central Banking,” chapter in Reforming the
       Financial System: Some Lessons From History (Cambridge, England: Cambridge
       University Press).

Chapman, John M, and Ray B. Westerfield (1942), Branch Banking: Its Historical and
      Theoretical Position in America and Abroad (New York: Harper and Brothers).

Comptroller of the Currency (1873), Annual Report (Washington D.C.: Government Printing
      Office).

Comptroller of the Currency (1920), Annual Report (Washington D.C.: Government Printing
      Office).

Comptroller of the Currency (1988a), “An Evaluation of the Factors Contributing to the
      Failure of National Banks,” unpublished memorandum (January 1988).

Comptroller of the Currency (1988b), Bank Failure: An Evaluation of the Factors
      Contributing to the Failure of National (Washington D.C.: Government Printing
      Office).

Curtis, C.A. (1931), “Banking Statistics in Canada,” Statistical Contributions to Canadian
        Economic History Vol. 1 (Toronto: Macmillan).
                                                                                      44

Diamond, Douglas and Philip Dybvig (1983), “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
      Liquidity,” Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-419.

Goldstein, Itay and Ady Pauzner (1999), “Demand Deposit Contracts and the Probability of
        Runs,” Eitan Berglas School of Economics, Tel Aviv University, mimeo.

Goodhart, Charles (1985), The Evolution of Central Banks: A Natural Development?
      (London).

Gorton, Gary (1984), “Private Clearinghouses and the Origins of Central Banking,” Federal
       Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Business Review (January-February), 3-12.

Gorton, Gary (1985), “Clearinghouses and the Origins of Central Banking in the U.S.,”
       Journal of Economic History 45, 277-283.

Gorton, Gary and Lixin Huang (2001), “Banking Panics and the Origin of Central Banking,”
        Wharton School, working paper.

Gorton, Gary and Donald Mullineaux (1987), “The Joint Production of Confidence:
       Endogenous Regulation and the 19th Century Commercial Bank Clearinghouse,”
       Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 19, 457-468.

Gorton, Gary and George Pennacchi (1990), “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity
       Creation,” Journal of Finance 45, 49-72.

Gorton, Gary and Andrew Winton (2002), “Financial Intermediation,” chapter in The
       Handbook of the Economics of Finance (North Holland) edited by George
       Constantinides, Milton Harris, and René Stulz (forthcoming 2002).

Haubrich, Joseph (1990), “Nonmonetary Effects of Financial Crises: Lessons from the Great
       Depression in Canada,” Journal of Monetary Economics 25, 223-252.

Jayanti, S.V., Ann Marie Whyte, and A. Quang Do (1993), “Bank Failures and Contagion
         Effects: Evidence from Britain, Canada and Germany,” Cleveland State University,
         unpublished working paper.

Kemmerer, E.M. (1911), Seasonal Variations in the Relative Demand for Money and Capital
     in the United States, U.S. National Monetary Commission, 61st Congress, 2d Session,
     Doc. No. 588 (Washington D.C.; Government Printing Office).

Livingston, James (1986), Origins of the Federal Reserve System: Money, Class, and
        Corporate Capitalism, 1890-1913 (Ithaca: Cornell University Press).

Lovell, Michael (1957), “The Role of the Bank of England as Lender of Last Resort in the
                                                                                           45

        Crises of the Eighteenth Century,” Explorations in Entrepreneurial History 10, 8-21.



McGrane, Reginald (1924), The Panic of 1837: Some Financial Problems of the Jacksonian
      Era (Chicago: University of Chicago Press).

Miron, Jeffrey (1986), “Financial Panics, the Seasonality of the Nominal Interest Rate and the
        Founding of the Fed,” American Economic Review 76, 125-140.

Moen, Jon and Ellis Tallman (1992), “The Bank Panic of 1907: The Role of Trust
      Companies,” Journal of Economic History 52, 611-630.

Moen, Jon and Ellis Tallman (2000), “Clearinghouse Membership and Deposit Contraction
       during the Panic of 1907,” Journal of Economic History 60, 145-163.

Morgan, Donald (2000), “Rating Banks: Risk and Uncertainty in an Opaque Industry,”
      Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Staff Report No. 105.

Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2000), “Rethinking Multiple Equilibria in
       Macroeconomic Modeling,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual, forthcoming.

Rolnick, Arthur, Bruce Smith, and Warren Weber (1998a), “Lessons from a Laissez-Faire
       Payments System: The Suffolk Banking System (1825-58),” Federal Reserve Bank of
       St. Louis Review 80, 105-116.

Rolnick, Arthur, Bruce Smith, and Warren Weber (1998b), “The Suffolk Bank and the Panic
       of 1837: How a Private Bank Acted as a Lender-of-Last-Resort,” Federal Reserve
       Bank of Minneapolis, Working Paper No. 592.

Smith, Vera (1936), The Rationale for Central Banking (London).

Sprague, O.M.W. (1910), History of Crises Under the National Banking System (Government
       Printing Office: Washington D.C.).

Timberlake, Richard (1984), “The Central Banking Role of Clearinghouse Associations,”
       Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 16, 1-15.

Timberlake, Richard (1987), The Origins of Central Banking in the United States
       (Cambridge: Harvard University Press).

Vreeland, Edward, John Weeks, and Robert Bonynge (1910), Interviews on the Banking and
       Currency Systems of Canada (National Monetary Commission, 61st Congress, 2nd
       Session, Senate Document 584, Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office).
                                                                                       46

Watts, George (1972), “The Origins and Background of Central Banking in Canada,” Bank of
        Canada Review (May).

White, Eugene N. (1983), The Regulation and Reform of the American Banking System,
       1900-1929 ((Princeton: Princeton University Press).

White, Eugene N. (1984), “A Reinterpretation of the Banking Crisis of 1930,” Journal of
       Economic History 44, 119-138.

Whitney, D. R. (1878), The Suffolk Bank (Cambridge, Massachusetts: Riverside Press).

Wicker, Elmus (1980), “A Reconsideration of the Causes of the Banking Panic of 1930,”
       Journal of Economic History 40, 571-583.

Wicker, Elmus (1996), The Banking Panics of the Great Depression (Cambridge University
       Press).

Wicker, Elmus (2000), Banking Panics of the Gilded Age (Cambridge University Press).

Williamson, Stephen (1989), “Bank Failures, Financial Restrictions, and Aggregate
       Fluctuations: Canada and the United States, 1870-1913,” Federal Reserve Bank of
       Minneapolis Quarterly Review (Summer), 20-40.
