                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DYNAMIC ASSET ALLOCATION WITH EVENT RISK


                                                Jun Liu
                                          Francis A. Longstaff
                                                Jun Pan


                                          Working Paper 9103
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9103


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2002




Liu and Longsta .are with the Anderson School at UCLA and Pan is with the MIT Sloan School of
Management. We are particularly grateful for helpful discussions with Tony Bernardo and Pedro Santa-Clara,
for the comments of Jerome Detemple, Harrison Hong, Paul Pfleiderer, Raman Uppal, and participants at
the 2001 Western Finance Association meetings, and for the many insightful comments and suggestions of
the editor Richard Green and the referee. All errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Jun Liu, Francis A. Longstaff and Jun Pan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Dynamic Asset Allocation With Event Risk
Jun Liu, Francis A. Longstaff and Jun Pan
NBER Working Paper No. 9103
August 2002
JEL No. G1


                                              ABSTRACT

        Major events often trigger abrupt changes in stock prices and volatility. We study the implications
of jumps in prices and volatility on investment strategies. Using the event-risk framework of Duffie, Pan,
and Singleton (2000), we provide analytical solutions to the optimal portfolio problem. Event risk
dramatically affects the optimal strategy. An investor facing event risk is less willing to take leveraged
or short positions. The investor acts as if some portion of his wealth may become illiquid and the optimal
strategy blends both dynamic and buy-and-hold strategies. Jumps in prices and volatility both have
important effects.



Jun Liu
The Anderson School at UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481

Francis A. Longstaff
The Anderson School at UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1481
and NBER
francis.longstaff@anderson.ucla.edu

Jun Pan
MIT Sloan School of Management
50 Memorial Drive, E52-454
Cambridge, MA 02142
One of the inherent hazards of investing in financial markets is the risk of a major
event precipitating a sudden large shock to security prices and volatilities. There
are many examples of this type of event, including, most recently, the September
11th, 2001 terrorist attacks. Other recent examples include the stock market crash of
October 19, 1987 in which the Dow index fell by 508 points, the October 27, 1997 drop
in the Dow index by more than 554 points, and the flight to quality in the aftermath
of the Russian debt default where swap spreads increased on August 27, 1998 by
more than twenty times their daily standard deviation, leading to the downfall of
Long Term Capital Management and many other highly leveraged hedge funds. Each
of these events was accompanied by major increases in market volatility.1

    The risk of event-related jumps in security prices and volatility changes the
standard dynamic portfolio choice problem in several important ways. In the standard
problem, security prices are continuous and instantaneous returns have infinitesimal
standard deviations; an investor considers only small local changes in security prices
in selecting a portfolio. With event-related jumps, however, the investor must also
consider the eﬀects of large security price and volatility changes when selecting a
dynamic portfolio strategy. Since the portfolio that is optimal for large returns need
not be the same as that for small returns, this creates a strong conflict that must be
resolved by the investor in selecting a portfolio strategy.

    This paper studies the implications of event-related jumps in security prices
and volatility on optimal dynamic portfolio strategies. In modeling event-related
jumps, we use the double-jump framework of Duﬃe, Pan, and Singleton (2000). This
framework is motivated by evidence by Bates (2000) and others of the existence of
volatility jumps, and has received strong empirical support from the data.2 In this
model, both the security price and the volatility of its returns follow jump-diﬀusion
processes. Jumps are triggered by a Poisson event which has an intensity proportional
to the level of volatility. This intuitive framework closely parallels the behavior of
actual financial markets and allows us to study directly the eﬀects of event risk on
portfolio choice.

    To make the intuition behind the results as clear as possible, we focus on the
simplest case where an investor with power utility over end-of-period wealth allocates


                                           1
his portfolio between a riskless asset and a risky asset that follows the double-jump
process. Because of the tractability provided by the aﬃne structure of the model, we
are able to reduce the Hamilton-Jacobi-Bellman partial diﬀerential equation for the
indirect utility function to a set of ordinary diﬀerential equations. This allows us to
obtain an analytical solution for the optimal portfolio weight. In the general case,
the optimal portfolio weight is given by solving a simple pair of nonlinear equations.
In a number of special cases, however, closed-form solutions for the optimal portfolio
weight are readily obtained.

    The optimal portfolio strategy in the presence of event risk has many interesting
features. One immediate eﬀect of introducing jumps into the portfolio problem is
that return distributions may display more skewness and kurtosis. While this has
an important influence on the portfolio chosen, the full implications of event risk for
dynamic asset allocation run much deeper. We show that the threat of event-related
jumps makes an investor behave as if he faced short-selling and borrowing constraints
even though none are imposed. This result parallels Longstaﬀ (2001) where investors
facing illiquid or nonmarketable assets restrict their portfolio leverage. Interestingly,
we find that the optimal portfolio is a blend of the optimal portfolio for a continuous-
time problem and the optimal portfolio for a static buy-and-hold problem. Intuitively,
this is because when an event-related jump occurs, the portfolio return is on the
same order of magnitude as the return that would be obtained from a buy-and-
hold portfolio over some finite horizon. Since these two returns have the same eﬀect
on terminal wealth, their implications for portfolio choice are indistinguishable, and
event risk can be interpreted or viewed as a form of liquidity risk. This perspective
provides new insights into the eﬀects of event risk on financial markets.

    To illustrate our results, we provide two examples. In the first, we consider
a model where the risky asset follows a jump-diﬀusion process with deterministic
jump sizes, but where return volatility is constant. This special case parallels Merton
(1971) who solves for the optimal portfolio weight when the riskless rate follows a
jump-diﬀusion process. We find that an investor facing jumps may choose a portfolio
very diﬀerent from the portfolio that would be optimal if jumps did not occur. In
general, the investor holds less of the risky asset when event-related price jumps can


                                           2
occur. This is true even when only upward price jumps can occur. Intuitively, this is
because the eﬀect of jumps on return volatility dominates the eﬀect of the resulting
positive skewness. Because event risk is constant over time in this example, the
optimal portfolio does not depend on the investor’s horizon.

    In the second example, we consider a model where both the risky asset and its
return volatility follow jump-diﬀusion processes with deterministic jump sizes. The
stochastic volatility model studied by Liu (1999) can be viewed as a special case of
this model. As in Liu, the optimal portfolio weight does not depend on the level
of volatility. The optimal portfolio weight, however, does depend on the investor’s
horizon since the probability of an event is time varying through its dependence on
the level of volatility. We find that volatility jumps can have a significant eﬀect
on the optimal portfolio above and beyond the eﬀect of price jumps. Surprisingly,
investors may even choose to hold more of the risky asset when there are volatility
jumps than otherwise. Intuitively, this means that the investor can partially hedge
the eﬀects of volatility jumps on his indirect utility through the oﬀsetting eﬀects of
price jumps. Note that this hedging behavior arises because of the static buy-and-
hold component of the investor’s portfolio problem; this static jump-hedging behavior
diﬀers fundamentally from the usual dynamic hedging of state variables that occurs
in the standard pure-diﬀusion portfolio choice problem.

    We provide an application of the model by calibrating it to historical U.S. data
and examining its implications for optimal portfolio weights. The results show that
even when large jumps are very infrequent, an investor still finds it optimal to reduce
his exposure to the stock market significantly. These results suggest a possible reason
why historical levels of stock market participation have tended to be lower than
would be optimal in many classical portfolio choice models. While volatility jumps
are qualitatively important for optimal portfolio choice, the calibrated exercise shows
that they generally have less impact than price jumps.

    Since the original work by Merton (1971), the problem of portfolio choice in the
presence of richer stochastic environments has become a topic of increasing interest.
Recent examples of this literature include Brennan, Schwartz, and Lagnado (1997) on
asset allocation with stochastic interest rates and predictability in stock returns, Kim


                                           3
and Omberg (1996), Campbell and Viceira (1999), Barberis (2000), and Xia (2001) on
predictability in stock returns (with or without learning), Lynch (2001) on portfolio
choice and equity characteristics, Schroder and Skiadas (1999) on a class of aﬃne
diﬀusion models with stochastic diﬀerential utility, Balduzzi and Lynch (1999) on
transaction costs and stock return predictability, and Brennan and Xia (1998), Liu
(1999), Wachter (1999), Campbell and Viceira (2001) on stochastic interest rates,
and Ang and Bekaert (2000) on time varying correlations. Aase (1986), and Aase
and Øksendal (1988) study the properties of admissible portfolio strategies in jump
diﬀusion contexts. Aase (1984), Jeanblanc-Picqué and Pontier (1990), and Bardhan
and Chao (1995) provide more general analyses of portfolio choice when asset price
dynamics are discontinuous. Although Merton (1971), Common (2000), and Das and
Uppal (2001) study the eﬀects of price jumps and Liu (1999), Chacko and Viceira
(2000), and Longstaﬀ (2001) study the eﬀects of stochastic volatility, this paper
contributes to the literature by being the first to study the eﬀects of event-related
jumps in both stock prices and volatility.3

    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section I presents the event-
risk model. Section II provides analytical solutions to the optimal portfolio allocation
problem. Section III presents the examples and provides numerical results. Section
IV calibrates the model and examines the implications for optimal portfolio choice.
Section V summarizes the results and make concluding remarks.


                            I. The Event-Risk Model


    We assume that there are two assets in the economy. The first is a riskless asset
paying a constant rate of interest r. The second is a risky asset whose price St is
subject to event-related jumps. Specifically, the price of the risky asset follows the
process

                                               p
           dSt = (r + ηVt − µλVt ) St dt +   Vt St dZ1t + Xt St− dNt ,              (1)
                                              p
                dVt = (α − βVt − κλVt ) dt + σ Vt dZ2t + Yt dNt                     (2)

where Z1 and Z2 are standard Brownian motions with correlation ρ, V is the in-

                                           4
stantaneous variance of diﬀusive returns, and N is a Poisson process with stochastic
arrival intensity λV . The parameters α, β, κ, λ, and σ are all assumed to be non-
negative. The variable X is a random price-jump size with mean µ and is assumed
to have support on (−1, ∞) which guarantees the positivity (limited liability) of S.
Similarly, Y is a random volatility-jump size with mean κ and is assumed to have
support on [0, ∞) to guarantee that V remains positive. In general, the jump sizes
X and Y can be jointly distributed with nonzero correlation. The jump sizes X and
Y are also assumed to be independent across jump times and independent of Z1 , Z2 ,
and N .

    Given these dynamics, the price of the risky asset follows a stochastic-volatility
jump-diﬀusion process and is driven by three sources of uncertainty: (1) diﬀusive
price shocks from Z1 , (2) diﬀusive volatility shocks from Z2 , and (3) realizations
of the Poisson process N . Since a realization of N triggers jumps in both S and
V , a realization of N has the natural interpretation of a financial event aﬀecting
both prices and market volatilities. In this sense, this model is ideal for studying
the eﬀects of event risk on portfolio choice. Because the jump sizes X and Y are
random, however, it is possible for the arrival of an event to result in a large jump
in S and only a small jump in V , or a small jump in S and a large jump in V . This
feature is consistent with observed market behavior; although financial market events
are generally associated with large movements in both prices and volatility, jumps
in only prices or only volatility can occur. Since µ is the mean of the price-jump
size X, the term µλV S in equation (1) compensates for the instantaneous expected
return introduced by the jump component of the price dynamics. As a result, the
instantaneous expected rate of return equals the riskless rate r plus a risk premium
ηV . This form of the risk premium follows from Merton (1980) and is also used by
Liu (1999), Pan (2002), and many others. Note that the risk premium compensates
the investor for both the risk of diﬀusive shocks and the risk of jumps.4

    These dynamics also imply that the instantaneous variance V follows a mean-
reverting square-root jump-diﬀusion process. The Heston (1993) stochastic-volatility
model can be obtained as a special case of this model by imposing the condition
that λ = 0, which implies that jumps do not occur. Liu (1999) provides closed-form


                                          5
solutions to the portfolio problem for this special case.5 Also nested as special cases
are the stochastic-volatility jump-diﬀusion models of Bates (2000) and Bakshi, Cao,
and Chen (1997). Again, since κ is the mean of the volatility jump size Y , κλV in
the drift of the process for V compensates for the jump component in volatility.

     This bivariate jump-diﬀusion model is an extended version of the double-jump
model introduced by Duﬃe, Pan, and Singleton (2000). Note that this model falls
within the aﬃne class because of the linearity of the drift vector, diﬀusion matrix, and
intensity process in the state variable V . The double-jump framework has received a
significant amount of empirical support because of the tendency for both stock prices
and volatility to exhibit jumps. For example, a recent paper by Eraker, Johannes,
and Polson (2000) finds strong evidence of jumps in volatility even after accounting
for jumps in stock returns.6 Duﬃe, Pan, and Singleton also show that the double-
jump model implies volatility “smiles” or skews for stock options that closely match
the volatility skews observed in options markets.7


                     II. Optimal Dynamic Asset Allocation


     In this section, we focus on the asset allocation problem of an investor with power
utility

                                     
                                        1
                                      1−γ x1−γ , if x > 0,
                           U (x) =                                                   (3)
                                     
                                         −∞,       if x ≤ 0,
where γ > 0, and the second part of the utility specification eﬀectively imposes a
non-negative wealth constraint. This constraint is consistent with Dybvig and Huang
(1988) who show that requiring wealth to be non-negative rules out arbitrages of
the type described by Harrison and Kreps (1979). As demonstrated by Kraus and
Litzenberger (1976), an investor with this utility function has a preference for positive
skewness.

     Given the opportunity to invest in the riskless and risky assets, the investor
starts with a positive initial wealth W0 and chooses, at each time t, 0 ≤ t ≤ T , to
invest a fraction φt of his wealth in the risky asset so as to maximize the expected

                                               6
utility of his terminal wealth WT ,


                                  max         E0 [ U (WT ) ] ,                       (4)
                              {φt , 0≤t≤T }


where the wealth process satisfies the self-financing condition


                                                  p
      dWt = (r + φt (η − µλ) Vt ) Wt dt + φt         Vt Wt dZ1t + Xt φt− Wt− dNt .   (5)

Although the model could be extended to allow for intermediate consumption, we use
this simpler specification to focus more directly on the intuition behind the results.

    Before solving for the optimal portfolio strategy, let us first consider how jumps
aﬀect the nature of the returns available to an investor who invests in the risky asset.
When a risky asset follows a pure diﬀusion process without jumps, the variance of
returns over an infinitesimal time period ∆t is proportional to ∆t. This implies that
as ∆t goes to zero, the uncertainty associated with the investor’s change in wealth
∆W also goes to zero. Thus, the investor can rebalance his portfolio after every
infinitesimal change in his wealth. Because of this, the investor retains complete
control over his portfolio composition; his actual portfolio weight is continuously
equal to the optimal portfolio weight. An important implication of this is that an
investor with leveraged or short positions in a market with continuous prices can
always rebalance his portfolio quickly enough to avoid negative wealth if the market
turns against him.

    The situation is very diﬀerent, however, when asset price paths are discontinuous
because of event-related jumps. For example, given the arrival of a jump event at time
t, the uncertainty associated with the investor’s change in wealth ∆Wt = Wt − Wt−
does not go to zero. Thus, when a jump occurs, the investor’s wealth can change
significantly from its current value before the investor has a chance to rebalance his
portfolio. An immediate implication of this is that the investor’s portfolio weight
is not completely under his control at all times. For example, the actual portfolio
weight will typically diﬀer from the optimal portfolio weight immediately after a
jump occurs. This implies that significant amounts of portfolio rebalancing may be

                                              7
observed in markets after an event-related jump occurs. Without complete control
over his portfolio weight, however, an investor with large leveraged or short positions
may not be able to rebalance his portfolio quickly enough to avoid negative wealth.

    Because of this, the investor not only faces the usual local-return risk that ap-
pears in the standard pure diﬀusion portfolio selection problem, but also the risk that
large changes in his wealth may occur before having the opportunity to adjust his
portfolio. This latter risk is essentially the same risk faced by an investor who holds
illiquid assets in his portfolio; an investor holding illiquid assets may also experience
large changes before having the opportunity to rebalance his portfolio. Because of
this event-related “illiquidity” risk, the only way that the investor can guarantee that
his wealth remains positive is by avoiding portfolio positions that are one jump away
from ruin. This intuition is summarized in the following proposition which places
bounds on admissible portfolio weights.

PROPOSITION 1: Bounds on Portfolio Weights. Suppose that for any t, 0 < t ≤ T ,
we have                           "    Ã Z                  !#
                                                  T
                         0 < Et     exp −             λVs ds      < 1,               (6)
                                              t

where λVt is the jump arrival intensity. Then, at any time t, the optimal portfolio
weight φ∗t for the asset allocation problem must satisfy

                    1 + φ∗t XInf > 0        and         1 + φ∗t XSup > 0,            (7)

where XInf and XSup are the lower and upper bounds of the support of Xt (the random
price jump size). In particular, if XInf < 0 and XSup > 0,

                                      1                   1
                                −          < φ∗t < −          .                      (8)
                                    XSup                 XInf



    Proof: See Appendix.

    Thus, the investor restricts the amount of leverage or short selling in his portfolio
as a hedge against his inability to continuously control his portfolio weight. If the
random price jump size X can take any value on (−1, ∞), then this proposition

                                             8
implies that the investor will never take a leveraged or short position in the risky
asset.

     These results parallel Longstaﬀ (2001) who studies dynamic asset allocation in
a market where the investor is restricted to trading strategies that are of bounded
variation. In his model, the investor protects himself against the risk of not being able
to trade his way out of a leveraged position quickly enough to avoid negative wealth
by restricting his portfolio weight to be between zero and one. Intuitively, the reason
for this is the same as in our model. Having to hold a portfolio over a jump event
has essentially the same eﬀect on terminal wealth as having a buy-and-hold portfolio
over some discrete horizon. In this sense, the problem of illiquidity parallels that of
event-related jumps. Interestingly, discussions of major financial market events in
the financial press often link the two problems together.

     One issue that is not formally investigated in this paper is the role of options
in alleviating the cost associated with the jump risk. Intuitively, put options could
be used to hedge against the negative jump risk, allowing investors to break the
jump-induced constraint and hold leveraged positions in the underlying risky asset.8
In practice, the benefit of such option strategies depends largely on the cost of such
insurance against the jump risk. Moreover, in a dynamic setting with jump risk, it
might be hard to perfectly hedge the jump risk with finitely many options. Putting
these complications aside, it is potentially fruitful to introduce options to the portfolio
problem, particularly in light of our results on the jump-induced constraints.9 A
formal treatment, however, is beyond the scope of this paper.

     We now turn to the asset allocation problem in equations (4) and (5). In solving
for the optimal portfolio strategy, we adopt the standard stochastic control approach.
Following Merton (1971), we define the indirect utility function by



                         J(W, V, t) =      max          Et [ U (WT ) ].                (9)
                                        {φs , t≤s≤T }



The principle of optimal stochastic control leads to the following Hamilton-Jacobi-
Bellman (HJB) equation for the indirect utility function J,

                                              9
                     Ã
                         φ2 W 2 V                      σ2 V
               max                JW W + φρσW V JW V +      JV V
                 φ          2                           2


                     + (r + φ(η − µλ)V )W JW + (α − βV − κλV )JV

                                                                   !
                            ¡                               ¢
                     + λV E[J(W (1 + φX), V + Y, t)] − J + Jt          = 0,          (10)


where JW , JV , and Jt denote the derivatives of J(W, V, t) with respect to W , V , and
t, and similarly for the higher derivatives, and the expectation is taken with respect
to the joint distribution of X and Y .

    We solve for the optimal portfolio strategy φ∗ by first conjecturing (which we
later verify) that the indirect utility function is of the form


                                     1
                     J(W, V, t) =       W 1−γ exp(A(t) + B(t)V ),                    (11)
                                    1−γ
where A(t) and B(t) are functions of time but not of the state variables W and
V . Given this functional form, we take derivatives of J(W, V, t) with respect to its
arguments, substitute into the HJB equation in equation (10), and diﬀerentiate with
respect to the portfolio weight φ to obtain the following first-order condition,


            (η − µλ)V + ρσBV − γφ∗ V + λV E[(1 + φ∗ X)−γ XeBY ] = 0.                 (12)

    Before solving this first-order condition for φ∗ , it is useful to first make several
observations about its structure. In particular, note that if λ is set equal to zero, the
risky asset follows a pure diﬀusion process. In this case, the investor faces a standard
dynamic portfolio choice problem in which the first-order condition for φ∗ becomes


                                 ηV + ρσBV − γφ∗ V = 0.                              (13)

Alternatively, consider the case where the investor faces a static single-period portfolio
problem where the return on his portfolio during this period equals (1 + φX). In this

                                            10
case, the investor maximizes his expected utility over terminal wealth by selecting a
portfolio to satisfy the first-order condition,


                                 E[(1 + φ∗ X)−γ X] = 0.                           (14)


Now compare the first-order conditions for the standard dynamic problem and the
static buy-and-hold problem to the first-order condition for the event-risk portfolio
problem given in equation (12). It is easily seen that the left-hand-side of equation
(12) essentially incorporates the first-order conditions in equations (13) and (14). In
the special case where µ and Y equal zero, the left-hand-side of equation (12) is
actually a simple linear combination of the first-order conditions in equations (13)
and (14) in which the coeﬃcients for the dynamic and static first-order conditions
are one and λV , respectively. This provides some economic intuition for how the
investor views his portfolio choice problem in the event-risk model. At each instant,
the investor faces a small continuous return, and with probability λV , may also face
a large return similar to that earned on a buy-and-hold portfolio over some discrete
period. Thus, the first-order condition for the event-risk problem can be viewed as
a blend of the first-order conditions for a standard dynamic portfolio problem and a
static buy-and-hold portfolio problem.

    So far, we have placed little structure of the joint distribution of the jump sizes
X and Y . To guarantee the existence of an optimal policy, however, we require that
the following mild regularity conditions hold for all φ that satisfy the conditions of
Proposition 1,




                          M1 ≡ E[(1 + φ∗ X)−γ XeBY ] < ∞,                         (15)


                          M2 ≡ E[(1 + φ∗ X)1−γ eBY ] < ∞.                         (16)


The following proposition provides an analytical solution for the optimal portfolio
strategy.

                                            11
PROPOSITION 2: Optimal Portfolio Weights. Assume that the regularity conditions
in equations (15) and (16) are satisfied. Then the asset allocation problem in equa-
tions (4) and (5) has a solution φ∗ . The optimal portfolio weight is given by solving
the following nonlinear equation for φ∗ ,

                                      η − µλ ρσB   λM1
                               φ∗ =         +    +     ,                         (17)
                                         γ    γ     γ

subject to the constraints in (7), and where B is defined by the ordinary diﬀerential
equation
                         B 0 + σ 2 B 2 /2 + (φ∗ ρσ(1 − γ) − β − κλ) B
                   µ                                           ¶
                       γ(γ − 1)φ∗2                   ∗
               +                   + (η − µλ)(1 − γ)φ + λM2 − λ = 0.             (18)
                            2


    Proof: See Appendix.

    From this proposition, φ∗ can be determined under very general assumptions
about the joint distribution of the jump sizes X and Y by solving a simple pair of
equations. Given a specification for the joint distribution of X and Y , equation (17)
is just a nonlinear expression in φ∗ and B. Equation (18) is an ordinary diﬀerential
equation for B with coeﬃcients that depend on φ∗ . These two equations are easily
solved numerically using standard finite diﬀerence techniques. Starting with the
terminal condition B(T ) = 0, the values of φ∗ and B at all earlier dates are obtained
by solving pairs of nonlinear equations recursively back to time zero. Given the
simple forms of equations (17) and (18), the recursive solution technique is virtually
instantaneous. Observe that solving this pair of equations for φ∗ and B is far easier
than solving the two-dimensional HJB equation in (10) directly. For many special
cases, the optimal portfolio weight can actually be solved in closed-form, or can be
obtained directly by solving a single nonlinear equation in φ∗ . Several examples are
presented in the next section.

    We first note that the optimal portfolio weight is independent of the state vari-
ables W and V . In other words, there is no “market timing” in either wealth or
stochastic volatility. The reason why the portfolio weight is independent of wealth
stems from the homogeneity of the portfolio problem in W . The reason the optimal

                                             12
portfolio does not depend on V is formally due to the fact that we have assumed that
the risk premium is proportional to V . Intuitively, however, this risk premium seems
sensible since both the instantaneous variance of returns and the instantaneous risk
of a jump are proportional to V ; by requiring the risk premium to be proportional
to V , we guarantee that all of the key instantaneous moments of the investment
opportunity set are of the same order of magnitude.

    Recall from the earlier discussion that the event-risk portfolio problem blends a
standard dynamic problem with a static buy-and-hold problem. Intuitively, this can
be seen from the expression for the optimal portfolio weight given in equation (17). As
shown, the right-hand-side of this expression has three components. The first consists
of the instantaneous risk premium η − µλ divided by the risk aversion parameter γ.
It is easily shown that when λ = 0 and V is not stochastic, the instantaneous risk
premium become η and the optimal portfolio policy is η/γ. Thus, the first term
in (17) is just the generalization of the usual myopic component of the portfolio
demand. The second component is directly related to the correlation coeﬃcient ρ
between instantaneous returns on the risky asset and changes in the volatility V .
When this correlation is nonzero, the investor can hedge his expected utility against
shifts in V by taking a position in the risky asset. Thus, this second term can be
interpreted as the volatility hedging demand for the risky asset. A similar volatility
hedging demand for the risky asset also appears in stochastic-volatility models such
as Liu (1999). Note that in this model, the hedging demand arises not only because
the state variable V impacts the volatility of returns, but also because it drives the
variation in the probability of an event occurring. Thus, investors have a double
incentive to hedge against variation in V through their portfolio holdings of the risky
asset. Finally, the third term in equation (17) is directly related to the first-order
condition for the static buy-and-hold problem from equation (14). Thus, this term
can be interpreted as the event-risk or “illiquidity” hedging term; this term does not
appear in portfolio problems where prices follow continuous sample paths.


                     III. Examples and Numerical Results


    In this section, we illustrate the implications of event-related jumps for portfolio

                                          13
choice through several simple examples.

A. Constant Volatility and Deterministic Jump Size

    In the first example, V is assumed to be constant over time. This implies that
α = β = κ = σ = Y = 0. In addition, we assume that price jumps are deterministic
in size, implying X = µ. In this case, the risky asset follows a simple jump-diﬀusion
process. This complements Merton (1971) who studies asset allocation when the
riskless asset follows a jump-to-ruin process.

    In this example, the model dynamics reduce to

                                                 p
             dSt = (r + ηV0 − µλV0 ) St dt +      V0 St dZ1t + µ St− dNt ,          (19)

                                       dVt = 0.                                     (20)

Substituting in the parameter restrictions and solving gives the following simple ex-
pression for the optimal portfolio weight,


                                  η − µλ µλ
                           φ∗ =         +   (1 + µφ∗ )−γ ,                          (21)
                                     γ    γ
which is easily solved for φ∗ . Assuming that η > 0, it is readily shown that φ∗ > 0.
Note that the optimal portfolio strategy does not depend on time or the investor’s
horizon. This occurs since the instantaneous distribution of returns does not vary
over time; the instantaneous expected return, return variance, and probability of a
jump are constant through time.

    There are several interesting subcases for this example which are worth examin-
ing. For example, consider the subcase where λ = 0, implying that the price follows
a pure diﬀusion. In this situation, the optimal portfolio weight is simply


                                               η
                                       φ∗ =      .                                  (22)
                                               γ

Alternatively, consider the related (but non-nested) case where the price of the risky
asset follows a pure jump process; where the diﬀusion component of the price dynam-
ics is set equal to zero. In this situation, the optimal portfolio weight becomes

                                          14
                                        "µ           ¶− γ1     #
                                    1            η
                               φ∗ =          1−              −1 .                 (23)
                                    µ           µλ

These cases make clear that the portfolio that is optimal when the price process
follows a pure diﬀusion is very diﬀerent from the optimal portfolio when the price
process follows a pure jump process. When the price process follows a jump diﬀusion,
the investor has to choose a portfolio that captures aspects of both of these special
cases. Because of the nonlinearity inherent in the expression for the portfolio weight
in equation (21), however, the optimal portfolio cannot be expressed as a simple linear
combination or portfolio of the optimal portfolios for the two special cases given in
equations (22) and (23).

     Diﬀerentiating φ∗ with respect to the parameters implies the following compar-
ative static results,


                           ∂φ∗           ∂φ∗                 ∂φ∗
                               > 0,          < 0,                < 0,             (24)
                           ∂η            ∂λ                  ∂γ

provided η > 0. Interestingly,


                        ∂φ∗                        ∂φ∗
                            > 0, if µ < 0,             ≤ 0, if µ ≥ 0.             (25)
                        ∂µ                         ∂µ
To illustrate this result, the top graph in Figure 1 plots the optimal portfolio weight
as a function of the value of the jump size µ. As shown, the optimal portfolio weight
is highly sensitive to the size of the jump µ. When the jump is in the downward
direction, the investor takes a smaller position in the risky asset than he would if
jumps did not occur. Surprisingly, however, the investor also takes a smaller position
when the jump is in the upward direction. The rationale for this is related to the
eﬀects of jumps on the variance and skewness of the distribution of terminal wealth.
Holding fixed the risk premium, jumps in either direction increase the variance of the
distribution. On the other hand, jumps also aﬀect the skewness (and other higher
moments) of the return distribution and the investor benefits from positive skewness.
Despite this, the variance eﬀect dominates and the investor takes a smaller position

                                              15
in the risky asset for nonzero values of µ. The skewness eﬀect, however, explains why
the graph of φ∗ against µ is asymmetric.

    To illustrate just how diﬀerent portfolio choice can be in the presence of event
risk, the second graph in Figure 1 plots the optimal portfolio as a function of the risk
aversion parameter γ for various jump sizes µ. When µ = 0 and no jumps occur, the
investor takes an unboundedly large position in the risky asset as γ → 0. In contrast,
when there is any risk of a downward jump, the optimal portfolio weight is bounded
above as γ → 0. This feature is a simple implication of Proposition 1, but serves
to illustrate that the optimal portfolio in the presence of event risk is qualitatively
diﬀerent from the optimal portfolio when event risk is not present.

    This also makes clear that the optimal strategy is not driven purely by the
eﬀects of jumps on return skewness and kurtosis. For example, skewness and kurtosis
eﬀects are also present in models where volatility is stochastic and correlated with
risky asset returns, but jumps do not occur. In these models, however, investors
do not place bounds on their portfolio weights of the type described in Proposition
1. Furthermore, the optimal portfolio in these models does not involve any static
buy-and-hold component. This underscores the point that many of the features of
the optimal portfolio strategy in our framework are uniquely related to the event risk
faced by the investor.

    To provide some specific numerical examples, Table I reports the value of φ∗ for
diﬀerent values of the parameters. In this table, the risk premium for the risky asset is
held fixed at seven percent and the standard deviation of the diﬀusive portion of risky
asset returns is held fixed at 15 percent. As shown, relative to the benchmark where
µ = 0, the optimal portfolio weight can be significantly less even when the probability
of an event occurring is extremely low. For example, even when a negative 90 percent
jump occurs at a 100-year frequency, the portfolio weight is typically much less than
50 percent of what it would be without jumps. Note that this eﬀect is not symmetric;
a positive 90 percent jump at a 100-year frequency has a much smaller eﬀect on the
portfolio weight. Also observe that the eﬀects of jumps on portfolio weights are much
more pronounced for investors with lower levels of risk aversion. This counterintuitive
eﬀect occurs because less-risk-averse investors would prefer to hold more leveraged


                                           16
positions, but cannot because they do not have full control over their portfolio. Thus,
the eﬀects of event risk fall much more heavily on investors with low levels of risk
aversion who would otherwise be more aggressive.

B. Stochastic Volatility and Deterministic Jump Sizes

    In the second example, V is also allowed to follow a jump-diﬀusion process. The
two jump sizes X and Y , however, are assumed to be constants with values µ and κ,
respectively. The jump size µ can be positive or negative. The jump size κ can only
be positive.

    In this example, the model dynamics become

                                                 p
               dSt = (r + ηVt − µλVt ) St dt +    Vt St dZ1t + µ St− dNt ,         (26)
                                                    p
                   dVt = (α − βVt − κλVt ) dt + σ    Vt dZ2t + κ dNt .             (27)

    Applying the results in Proposition 2 to this model gives the following expression
for the optimal portfolio weight


                             η − µλ ρσB   λµ
                      φ∗ =         +    +    (1 + µφ∗ )−γ eκB ,                    (28)
                                γ    γ     γ

which can be solved for φ∗ jointly with the equation for B given in equation (18).

    Because of the dependence on B, the optimal portfolio weight is now explicitly a
function of the investor’s investment horizon. Examining equation (28) indicates that
there are several ways in which the investment horizon aﬀects the optimal portfolio
weight. Specifically, B appears in conjunction with the correlation coeﬃcient ρ re-
flecting that there is a dynamic hedging component to the investor’s demand for the
risky asset. Since V is mean reverting, the horizon over which investment decisions
are made is important. However, dynamically hedging shifts in V is not the only
reason why there is time dependence in the optimal portfolio weight. For example,
when ρ = 0, the risky asset cannot be used to hedge against shifts in the investment
opportunity set arising from variation in V . Despite this, the optimal portfolio weight
still depends on the investor’s horizon through the eκB term in equation (28). Thus,

                                          17
time dependence enters the problem both through the dynamic hedging component
as well as through the static hedging component.

    The top graph in Figure 2 plots the optimal portfolio weight as a function of
the investor’s horizon for various values of the dynamic hedging parameter ρ. In this
case, φ∗ is an increasing function of the horizon for each of the values of ρ plotted.
We note, however, that φ∗ can be a decreasing function of the investor’s horizon when
γ < 1. This graph also illustrates that the optimal portfolio weight converges to a
constant as T → ∞. Furthermore, the dependence of the optimal portfolio weight on
ρ indicates that an important part of the demand for the risky asset comes from its
ability to dynamically hedge the continuous portion of changes in V .

    An important feature of this event-risk model is that both prices and volatility
are allowed to jump. The previous section illustrated that the presence of price
jumps in either direction induces investors to take smaller positions in the risky
asset. Intuitively, one might suspect that introducing jumps in volatility would have
a similar eﬀect on the optimal portfolio weight. Surprisingly, this is not true in
general. This can be seen from the second graph in Figure 2 which plots the optimal
portfolio weight as a function of the size of the volatility jump κ for diﬀerent values
of µ. As shown, the optimal portfolio weight can be an increasing function of κ for
some values of µ.

    This result illustrates the important point that in addition to its ability to dy-
namically hedge against continuous changes in V , the risky asset can also be used
as a static hedge against the eﬀects of jumps in V . This second hedging role is one
that does not occur in traditional portfolio choice models where state variables have
continuous sample paths. The fact that the risky asset can be used to hedge in two
diﬀerent ways, however, makes it evident that the investor faces a dilemma in choos-
ing a portfolio strategy. In particular, the portfolio that hedges against small local
diﬀusion-induced changes in the state variables is not the same as the portfolio that
hedges against large jumps in the state variables. This problem is inherent in the fact
that when there is event risk, the portfolio problem has features of both a dynamic
portfolio problem and an illiquid buy-and-hold problem.

    Finally, if we impose the parameter restrictions ρ = 0 and κ = 0, volatility is

                                          18
still stochastic but the optimal portfolio weight becomes the same as in Section III.A.
where volatility is not stochastic. Thus, continuous stochastic variation in V only
aﬀects the optimal portfolio weight if it is hedgable through a nonzero value of ρ.


                IV. Implications For Optimal Portfolio Choice


    Moving beyond the numerical examples presented in Section III, it is useful to
explore how event risk might aﬀect the optimal portfolio of an investor in a specific
market. To this end, we calibrate the model to be roughly consistent with historical
stock index returns and stock index return volatility in the U.S. To make this process
as straightforward as possible, we focus on the simple stochastic volatility model with
deterministic jump sizes described in section III. Once calibrated to U.S. data, we
explore the key implications of the model for investors.

    In parameterizing this model of event risk, it is important to recognize that the
major financial events addressed by our model are infrequent by their nature. Ideally,
we would like to use a calibration approach that minimizes the eﬀects of the inherent
“Peso problem” on the results. Although there are many ways to do this, we use the
following informal (but hopefully intuitive) approach to allow us to estimate the size
and frequency of events from the longest time series available.10

    We first obtain the monthly return series for U.S. stocks during the 1802 to 1925
period created and described in Schwert (1990). We then append the CRSP monthly
value-weighted index returns for the 1926 to 2000 period to give a time series of re-
turns spanning nearly 200 years. A review of the data shows that there are eight
observations where the stock index dropped by 20 or more percent. These observa-
tions include the beginning of the Civil War in May 1861, the black Friday crash of
October 1929, and the October 1987 stock market crash. Interestingly, four of the
eight observations are clustered in the high-volatility decade of the 1930s, consistent
with the double-jump model. Since these observations are roughly five standard de-
viations below the mean, it is not unreasonable to view these negative returns as
being due to a jump event. A back-of-the-envelope calculation suggests calibrating
the model to allow a −25 percent jump (the average of the eight observations) at


                                          19
an average frequency of about 25 years. To provide a rough estimate of the size of
the volatility jump, we compute the standard deviation of returns for the five-month
window centered at the event month. The average of these standard deviation esti-
mates is just under 50 percent. Given this, we make the simplifying assumption that
when a jump occurs, the volatility of the stock return jumps by an amount equal to
the diﬀerence between 50 percent and its mean value.

    The remaining parameter estimates are obtained from Table 1 of Pan (2002).
Using S&P 500 stock index returns and stock index option prices, Pan estimates
the parameters of several versions of a jump-diﬀusion model. For simplicity, we use
the parameter values Pan estimates for her SV0 model, and adjust them slightly
to be consistent with our estimates of jump sizes and frequencies.11 Specifically, we
use Pan’s estimates of β = 5.3 and ρ = −.57. To obtain estimates of α, η, and
σ, we note that in our model, the expected instantaneous equity premium is αη/β,
the expected instantaneous variance of returns is α(1 + µ2 λ)/β, and the the expected
instantaneous variance of changes in V is α(σ 2 +κ2 λ)/β. Setting these three moments
equal to the corresponding estimates of .1065, .0242, and .3800 from Table 1 of Pan
provides us with three equations which can be solved for the values of α, η, and σ. By
doing this, we guarantee that the calibrated model matches the moments of returns
and volatility estimated by Pan. This approach leads to the following parameter
values for the baseline case where jumps occur with an average frequency of 25 years:
α = .11512, β = 5.3000, σ = .22478, η = 4.90224, ρ = −.57000, µ = −.25000,
κ = .22578, and λ = 1.84156.

    To illustrate the eﬀects that event risk has on the optimal portfolio choice for an
investor where the model is calibrated to historical U.S. returns in this manner, Table
II reports the portfolio weights for various levels of investor risk aversion. To facilitate
comparison, we report the portfolio weights for the case where there are no jumps,
where there are only jumps in the stock index, and the baseline case where there
are jumps in both the stock index and volatility. Note that for the nonbenchmark
cases, we recalibrate the model so that we match the expected instantaneous moments
estimated by Pan (2002) using the procedure described in the previous paragraph.
In each case, the investor has a five-year investment horizon.


                                            20
    Table II shows that the possibility of a 25 percent downward jump in stock prices
has an important eﬀect on the investor’s optimal portfolio, even though this type of
event happens only every 25 years on average. For example, the optimal portfolio
weight for an investor with a risk aversion parameter of two is 2.305 if no jumps
can occur, is 1.929 if only jumps in the stock price can occur, and is 2.010 if both
jumps in stock prices and volatility can occur. Observe that from Proposition 1, the
investor never takes a position in the risky asset greater than four since jumps of −25
percent can occur. Table II shows that the risk of a downward jump always induces
the investor to take a smaller position in the stock market than he would otherwise.

    Table II also makes clear that while jumps in volatility do not have as much
of an eﬀect as jumps in the stock price, they do have an important influence on
the optimal portfolio. Interestingly, jumps in volatility decrease the optimal portfolio
weight when γ < 1, and increase the optimal portfolio weight when γ > 1. Intuitively,
the reason for this is related to the eﬀect of a volatility jump on the distribution of
the investor’s returns. Recall that in this model, the instantaneous Sharpe ratio of
returns is increasing in the volatility V because of the form of the risk premium. Thus,
when an event occurs, the investor suﬀers an immediate loss because of the downward
jump in the stock price, but then faces an improved risk-return tradeoﬀ because the
jump in volatility increases the Sharpe ratio. This pattern induces a type of negative
serial correlation or smoothness into the time series of the investor’s returns which
can be shown to reduce both the first and second moments of the distribution of the
investor’s terminal wealth. As shown by Samuelson (1991), however, investors who
are less risk averse than logarithmic (γ < 1), will reduce their portfolio weight as this
smoothing increases while the opposite is true for investors who are more risk averse
than logarithmic. Thus, an increase in the volatility jump size parameter κ leads
to a decrease in the portfolio weight for γ < 1, and to an increase in the portfolio
weight for γ > 1. Another way of seeing this is to note that for γ > 1, the investor’s
utility is unbounded from below as his wealth approaches zero. Thus, the investor is
particularly averse to a run of successive negative returns. Since a jump in V reduces
the likelihood of a run of negative returns, the investor with γ > 1 is more confident
and takes a larger stock position. In contrast, for γ < 1, the investor’s utility is
bounded from below but unbounded from above. Thus, the investor benefits less

                                           21
from the reduction in variance of the distribution of terminal wealth and reduces his
portfolio weight because of the reduction in the first moment.12

    Another interesting issue to consider is the loss suﬀered by an investor who does
not consider the eﬀects of price and volatility jumps in making portfolio decisions.13
To examine this, we do the following. Assume that there is an investor who believes
that there are no jumps, implying that λ = µ = κ = 0. This investor calibrates
his model to match the moments using the procedure described earlier. Given this
calibration, the investor then follows the portfolio strategy that would be optimal if
λ = µ = κ = 0. Let us denote this strategy φ̂. Now assume that there are actually
jumps in prices and volatility. In this situation, the optimal portfolio weight φ∗
diﬀers from φ̂, and the investor suﬀers a loss by following this strategy. Following a
procedure similar to that used to solve for J(W, V, t), we can solve for the investor’s
utility of wealth function when he follows strategy φ̂. Denote this utility of wealth
function K(W, V, t). Because φ̂ is suboptimal, it is clear that K(W, V, t) < J(W, V, t).
To quantify the loss, we assume that this investor following the suboptimal strategy
starts with W = 1, and solve for the Ŵ such that an investor with W = Ŵ who
followed the optimal strategy would attain the same level of utility. Specifically,
this utility equivalent wealth Ŵ is obtained by solving numerically the equation
J(Ŵ , V, t) = K(1, V, t). Note that the utility equivalent wealth Ŵ is less than or
equal to one since following the suboptimal strategy φ̂ reduces the utility of the
investor’s wealth. Finally, we calculate the loss using this wealth-based metric by
taking the diﬀerence 1 − Ŵ and converting it into percentage terms by multiplying
by 100. We designate this metric the wealth equivalent loss.

    Table II reports the wealth equivalent losses for an investor who does not consider
the eﬀects of jumps. There are several key features shown in Table II. First, when
the suboptimal strategy φ̂ exceeds the bound in Proposition 1, then a jump to ruin
is possible and clearly, K(W, V, t) = −∞. In these cases, it is clear that the wealth
equivalent loss of following the suboptimal strategy is 100 percent; the investor obtains
the same expected utility that he would if he had no wealth at all. Second, Table II
shows that the wealth equivalent loss can be nontrivial for other ranges of the risk
aversion parameter. Specifically, when γ = 2.00, the wealth equivalent loss is 3.2


                                           22
percent when only price jumps can occur, and is 2.0 percent when both price and
volatility jumps can occur. Table II also shows that the wealth equivalent loss is a
decreasing function of γ.

    Although we have calibrated the model to historical U.S. returns, it is impor-
tant to recognize that U.S. returns may not fully reflect the size of potential jump
events. The reason for this is the possibility of a survivorship bias since the U.S.
has experienced historically high returns. This point is also consistent with Jorion
and Goetzmann (1999) who show that many countries have experienced huge market
declines during relatively short periods of time during the past century. In many
cases, major events such as wars or political crises have actually led to stock markets
being closed for years (or even decades). These closures have often resulted in catas-
trophic losses for investors. To reflect this downside risk to financial markets, we also
consider a scenario where stock market jumps of −50 percent and volatility jumps
to 70 percent occur at an average frequency of 100 years. Following the same cali-
bration approach as before implies parameter values for this scenario of α = .11512,
β = 5.3000, σ = .21099, η = 4.90224, ρ = −.57000, µ = −.50000, κ = .46578, and
λ = .46039.

    Table III reports the optimal portfolio weights for this alternative scenario. Even
though the frequency of an event is much less, it has an even larger eﬀect on the
optimal portfolio weight than in Table II. For example, the optimal portfolio weight
for an investor with a risk aversion parameter of two is still 2.305 if no jumps can
occur. If only jumps in the stock price can occur, then the portfolio weight is now
1.395 rather than 1.929. If both jumps in the stock price and volatility can occur, the
optimal portfolio weight is now 1.481 rather than the value of 2.010 given in Table
II. As before, jumps in volatility decrease the optimal portfolio weight for γ < 1, and
vice versa.

    Table III also reports the corresponding wealth equivalent losses. As in Table II,
the wealth equivalent loss can be 100.0 percent when the bound given in Proposition
1 is violated. It is interesting to note, however, that there is a case shown in Table III
where an investor following the suboptimal strategy attains K(W, V, t) = −∞ even
when φ̂ does not violate the bound given Proposition 1. Specifically, when γ = 3.00,


                                           23
an investor who does not consider the eﬀects of volatility jumps has a portfolio weight
of 1.564 (which does not violate the bound) but still has a wealth equivalent loss of
100.0 percent when both price and volatility jumps can occur. Intuitively, this occurs
because the finiteness of the expected utility function can only be guaranteed when
the optimal strategy φ∗ is followed.14 Specifically, when the suboptimal portfolio
weight φ̂ is suﬃciently high (but still less than the bound given in Proposition 1),
the return distribution for the investor’s wealth may be such that the expectation
of his terminal utility equals −∞. For example, consider the case where γ = 2, and
expected utility equals −E[ W1T ]. Even though all positive moments of the distribution
of WT are finite when φ̂ is followed, the expectation E[ W1T ] may fail to exist, implying
K(W, V, t) = −∞. Thus, even when a jump to complete ruin cannot occur, a strategy
may be so suboptimal that the investor has a wealth equivalent loss of 100 percent.15
Another way of seeing this is by considering the case where the stock price jump is
−50 percent. By following a strategy where φ is less than two, ruin can be avoided.
However, imagine that φ̂ is close to two, say 1.99. If a jump occurs, the investor will
clearly lose virtually all of his wealth. After the jump, however, the investor would
rebalance his portfolio to attain φ̂ = 1.99 again. Thus, if another jump occurs, the
investor’s remaining wealth will again be virtually eliminated. The key point is that
even though total ruin does not occur, the resulting distribution of WT has enough
mass in the neighborhood of zero that the expected utility function need not be finite.
When φ is more distant from the bound in Proposition 1, as is the case for φ∗ , this
situation does not arise and expected utility is finite.

    Finally, Table III shows the wealth equivalent losses can be significant for other
parameter values. For example, when only price jumps can occur, an investor with
γ = 3.00 who ignores the eﬀects of jumps has a wealth equivalent loss of 30.5 per-
cent. For larger values of γ, the wealth equivalent losses are smaller, but are still
economically significant.

    The results in Tables II and III are based on two simple calibrations of the model.
Given than there is always uncertainty about the precise values of estimated parame-
ters, however, it is useful to provide some additional information about the sensitivity
of the optimal portfolio weights to the key jump size and frequency parameters. To


                                           24
this end, Table IV reports the optimal portfolio weights for various combinations of
jump frequencies and price jump sizes, while Table V reports the optimal portfolio
weights for various combinations of jump frequencies and volatility jump sizes. For
each set of jump size and frequency parameters in these two tables, the α, η, and
σ parameters are chosen to match the three moments from Table 1 of Pan (2002)
using the same procedure as before. We note that in a few cases involving large but
infrequent jumps, these moments cannot be matched since they imply negative values
for σ; these cases are designated by a dash in Tables IV and V.

     Tables IV and V indicate that the optimal portfolio weight is clearly aﬀected by
both the jump size and frequency parameters. The size of the price jump appears
to have the largest eﬀect on the optimal portfolio weight. The size of the volatility
jump as well as the level of the frequency parameter can also have important eﬀects.
Despite this dependence on the parameter values, however, Table IV and V indicate
that the optimal portfolio weight is generally fairly robust to small perturbations in
the parameter values. This is important since it implies that even if the jump size
and frequency parameters are estimated with some error (provided it is not overly
large) from historical data, the general implications for optimal portfolio choice may
still be qualitatively valid.

     Admittedly, we have focused only on simple calibrations of one of the simplest
versions of the model. Despite this, however, we believe that several important gen-
eral insights about the role that event risk could play in real-world portfolio decisions
emerge from this analysis. Foremost among these is that investors have strong in-
centives to significantly reduce their exposure to the stock market when they believe
that there is event risk. This is true even when the probability of a major downward
jump in stock prices is very small, as in the scenario of a −50 percent jump occurring
every 100 years on average. Certainly, jumps of this magnitude and frequency can-
not be ruled out; it is all too easy to think of extreme situations where a downward
jump of this magnitude could occur during the next century even in the U.S., partic-
ularly in the wake of September 11th, 2001. Our analysis suggests a possible reason
why historical levels of participation in the stock market have been much lower than
standard portfolio choice models would view as optimal.16


                                           25
                                     V. Conclusion


     In this paper, we study the eﬀects of event-related jumps in prices and volatility
on investment strategies. Using the double-jump framework of Duﬃe, Pan, and
Singleton (2000), we take advantage of the aﬃne structure of the model to provide
analytical solutions to the optimal portfolio problem.

     The presence of event risk changes the standard portfolio problem in several
important ways. First, since the investor no longer has complete control over his
wealth, the investor acts as if some part of his portfolio consists of illiquid assets and he
is much less willing to take leveraged or short positions. The optimal portfolio strategy
blends elements of both a standard dynamic hedging strategy and a buy-and-hold or
“illiquidity” hedging strategy. Furthermore, event risk aﬀects investors with low levels
of risk aversion more than it does highly risk-averse investors. These results illustrate
that the implications of event risk for the optimal portfolio strategy are both subtle
and complex. Our analysis suggests that jumps in both prices and volatility have
important eﬀects on optimal portfolios, although our calibrated exercise indicates
that price jumps tend to have a larger eﬀect than do volatility jumps. Finally, our
results suggest that if market participants believe that there is even a remote chance
of a sudden market collapse, their portfolio behavior could be very diﬀerent from that
implied by classical portfolio choice models which abstract from event risk.

     This paper is only a first attempt to systematically study the eﬀect of event risk
on optimal portfolio choice. Along with other studies in the field of asset allocation,
we use a partial equilibrium approach by taking prices as given. Clearly, however,
an equilibrium study would be necessary to provide a complete understanding of the
interaction between price dynamics and investor’s portfolio choices. Nevertheless, we
hope that this partial equilibrium study provides some understanding of the complete
picture.




                                             26
                                        Appendix: Proofs


       Proof of Proposition 1: Let {Wt∗ , 0 ≤ t ≤ T } be the wealth process attained
by an investor who follows the optimal portfolio process φ∗ . We first remark that
WT∗ must be positive almost surely. Otherwise, a nonzero probability of WT∗ ≤ 0 will
result in E[U (WT∗ )] = −∞, which is inferior to investing all of the positive initial
wealth in the riskless asset.

       We next show that for WT∗ to be positive almost surely, Wt∗ must be positive
almost surely for any t < T . To see this, we first condition on the event that there is
no jump between t and T . This implies


                     ÃZ        µ                           ¶               !
                           T
                                                    φ2τ Vτ          p
       WT = Wt exp              r + φτ (η − µλ)Vτ −          dτ + φτ Vτ dZ1 ,      (A1)
                       t                               2


for any portfolio policy φ. Such an event of no jump between t and T has a positive
probability given the assumption that
                                        "  Ã Z                  !#
                                                   T
                               0 < Et   exp −          λVτ dτ        < 1.          (A2)
                                               t


So WT∗ > 0 almost surely implies Wt∗ > 0 almost surely for any t.

       Finally, we show that for Wt∗ > 0 almost surely, the optimal portfolio weight
φ∗ must satisfy equation (7). Suppose equation (7) is not satisfied for some t. Then
there is a positive probability of a jump event between t and t + ∆t for some ∆t > 0.
Conditioning on such a jump event, the time-t wealth is Wt = Wt− (1 + φX), where
Wt− is the wealth before the jump event, and where X is the jump size. By the
definition of XInf and XSup , we have for an arbitrary ² > 0, a positive probability
of X ∈ (XInf , XInf + ²) and a positive probability of X ∈ (XSup − ², XSup ). Thus, if
(7) is not satisfied, there is a positive probability of Wt∗ ≤ 0, which contradicts the
assumption that Wt∗ is the wealth process generated by the optimal portfolio weight
φ∗ .



                                               27
    Proof of Proposition 2: Suppose that the indirect utility function J is of the
conjectured form in equation (11) with state-independent time-varying coeﬃcients
A(t) and B(t) to be determined shortly. Then the first-order condition of the HJB
equation (10) implies

                                  µ                              ¶
                             JW                  JW V        J
                φ∗t   =−           (η − µλ) + ρσ      + λM1
                          W JW W                 JW         W JW
                                                                                  (A3)
                        η − µλ ρσB       λM1
                      =         +     +      ,
                           γ       γ      γ

which is the optimal portfolio weight given in (17). It should be noted that φ∗ is
state independent and a nonlinear function of B.

    We now proceed to derive the ordinary diﬀerential equations for the time-varying
coeﬃcients A(t) and B(t), under which the conjectured form (11) for the indirect
utility function J indeed satisfies the HJB equation (10). For this, we substitute (11)
and (12) into the HJB equation and obtain,


                    γφ∗2 V             σ2 B 2 V
                −          + φ∗ ρσBV +          + (r + φ∗ (η − µλ)V )
                      2                2(1 − γ)
                          B     λV       λV    1
      +(α − βV − κV )        +     M2 −     +     (A0 + B 0 V ) = 0.              (A4)
                         1−γ   1−γ      1−γ   1−γ

The left-hand-side of this expression is an aﬃne function in V . For this expression to
hold for all V , the constant term and the linear coeﬃcient of V on the left-hand-side
must be set equal to zero separately, which leads to the ordinary diﬀerential equation
for B(t) given in (18) and the following ordinary diﬀerential equation for A(t)


                               A0 + αB + (1 − γ)r = 0.                            (A5)




                                          28
                                    FOOTNOTES

    1
        For example, the VIX index of S&P 500 stock index option implied volatilities
increased 313 percent on October 19, 1987, 53 percent on October 27, 1997, and 28
percent on August 27, 1998.
    2
        For example, see the extensive recent study by Eraker, Johannes, and Polson
(2000) of the double-jump model.
    3
        Wu (2000) studies the portfolio choice problem in a model where there are
jumps in stock prices but not volatility, but does not provide a verifiable analytical
solution for the optimal portfolio strategy.
    4
        Although the risk premium could be separated into the two types of risk premia,
the portfolio allocation between the riskless asset and the risky asset in our model
is independent of this breakdown. If options were introduced into the market as a
second risky asset, however, this would no longer be true (see Pan (2002)).
    5
        See Chacko and Viceira (2000) and Longstaﬀ (2001) for solutions to the dynamic
portfolio problem for alternative stochastic volatility models.
    6
        Similar evidence is also presented in Bates (2000), Pan (2002), and others.
    7
        See also Bakshi, Cao, and Chen (1997) and Bates (2000) for empirical evidence
about the importance of jumps in option pricing.
    8
        Imposing buy-and-hold constraints on an otherwise dynamic trading strategy
parallels our jump-induced constraint. Haugh and Lo (2001) show that options can
alleviate some of the cost associated with the buy-and-hold constraint.
    9
        We thank the referee for pointing out the role that options might play in miti-
gating the eﬀects of event risk.
    10
         We note that although it is beyond the scope of this paper, the general double-
jump model could be formally estimated using either the eﬃcient method of moments
(EMM) approach applied by Andersen, Benzoni, and Lund (2001) or the Monte Carlo
Markov chain (MCMC) technique used by Eraker, Johannes, and Polson (2000).
    11
         The advantage of using the parameter estimates for Pan’s SV0 model is that

                                            29
they represent parameter estimates for the stochastic volatility model in the absence
of jumps. This then allows us to calibrate the model for diﬀerent jump sizes using a
particularly simple algorithm. As pointed out by Pan, allowing for jumps significantly
enhances the ability of the stochastic volatility model to capture the properties of the
data.
    12
         Consistent with this intuition, when both stock price and volatility jumps are
positive, the eﬀect of an increase in the volatility jump size parameter κ is reversed.
In particular, the portfolio weight is then an increasing function of κ for γ < 1, and
vice versa.
    13
         We are grateful to the referee for raising this issue.
    14
         Note that in this case, γ = 3, which means that utility is unbounded from
below.
    15
         This feature appears in many other continuous time portfolio choice models
and is not unique to jump diﬀusion models. For other examples, see Liu (1999).
    16
         For example, see Mankiw and Zeldes (1991), Heaton and Lucas (1997), and
Basak and Cuoco (1998).




                                             30
                                       REFERENCES


Aase, Knut K., 1984, Optimum portfolio diversification in a general continuous-time model,
    Stochastic Processes and Their Applications 18, 81-98.

Aase, Knut K., 1986, Ruin problems and myopic portfolio optimization in continuous trad-
    ing, Stochastic Processes and Their Applications 21, 213-227.

Aase, Knut K., and Bernt Øksendal, 1988, Admissible investment strategies in continuous
    trading, Stochastic Processes and Their Applications 30, 291-301.

Andersen, Tobin G., Luca Benzoni, and Jesper Lund, 2001, An empirical investigation of
    continuous-time equity return models, Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Ang, Andrew, and Geert Bekaert, 2000, International asset allocation with time-varying
    correlations, Review of Financial Studies, forthcoming.

Bakshi, Gurdip, Charles Cao, and Zhiwu Chen, 1997, Empirical performance of alernative
    option pricing models, Journal of Finance 52, 2003-2049.

Balduzzi, Pierluigi, and Anthony W. Lynch, 1999, Transaction costs and predictability:
    Some utility cost calculations, Journal of Financial Economics 52, 47-78.

Barberis, Nicholas, 2000, Investing for the long run when returns are predictable, Journal
    of Finance 55, 225-264.

Bardhan, Indrajit, and Xiuli Chao, 1995, Martingale analysis for assets with discontinuous
    returns, Mathematics of Operations Research 20, 243-256.

Basak, Suleyman, and Domenico Cuoco, 1998, An equilibrium model with restricted stock
    participation, Review of Financial Studies 11, 309-341.

Bates, David, 2000, Post-’87 crash fears in S&P 500 futures options, Journal of Econometrics
    94, 181-238.


                                              31
Brennan, Michael, Eduardo Schwartz, and Ronald Lagnado, 1997, Strategic asset allocation,
    Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 21, 1377-1403.

Brennan, Michael, and Yihong Xia, 1998, Resolution of a financial puzzle, Working paper,
    UCLA.

Campbell, John, and Luis Viceira, 1999, Consumption and portfolio decisions when expected
    returns are time varying, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 433-495.

Campbell, John, and Luis Viceira, 2001, Who should buy long-term bonds? American
    Economic Review 91, 99-127.

Chacko, George, and Luis Viceira, 2000, Dynamic consumption and portfolio choice with
    stochastic volatility in incomplete markets, Working paper, Harvard University.

Common, Etienne, 2000, Extreme events and the role of learning in financial markets,
    Working paper, Harvard University.

Das, Sanjiv R., and Raman Uppal, 2001, Systemic risk and international portfolio choice,
    Working paper, Santa Clara University.

Duﬃe, Darrell, Jun Pan, and Kenneth Singleton, 2000, Transform analysis and asset pricing
    for aﬃne jump diﬀusion, Econometrica 68, 1343-1376.

Dybvig, Philip H., and Chi-Fu Huang, 1988, Nonnegative wealth, absence of arbitrage, and
    feasible consumption plans, Review of Financial Studies 1, 377-401.

Eraker, Bjorn, Michael S. Johannes, and Nicholas G. Polson, 2000, The impact of jumps in
    returns and volatility, Working paper, Columbia University.

Harrison, J. Michael, and David M. Kreps, 1979, Martingales and arbitrage in multiperiod
    securities markets, Journal of Economic Theory 20, 381-408.

Haugh, Martin, and Andrew Lo, 2001, Asset allocation and derivatives, Quantitative Fi-
    nance 1, 45-72.

                                             32
Heaton, John, and Deborah Lucas, 1997, Market frictions, savings behavior, and portfolio
    choice, Macroeconomic Dynamics 1, 76-101.

Heston, Steven, 1993, A closed-form solution of options with stochastic volatility with ap-
    plications to bond and currency options, Review of Financial Studies 6, 327-343.

Jeanblanc-Picqué, Monique, and Monique Pontier, 1990, Optimal portfolio for a small in-
    vestor in a market model with discontinuous prices, Applied Mathematics and Optimiza-
    tion 22, 287-310.

Jorion, Philippe, and William N. Goetzmann, 1999, Global stock markets in the Twentieth
    Century, Journal of Finance 54, 953-980.

Kim, Tong S., and Edward Omberg, 1996, Dynamic nonmyopic portfolio behavior, Review
    of Financial Studies 9, 141-161.

Kraus, Alan, and Robert Litzenberger, 1976, Skewness preference and the valuation of risky
    assets, Journal of Finance 31, 1085-1100.

Liu, Jun, 1999, Portfolio selection in stochastic environments, Working paper, UCLA.

Longstaﬀ, Francis A., 2001, Optimal portfolio choice and the valuation of illiquid assets,
    Review of Financial Studies 14, 407-431.

Lynch, Anthony, 2001, Portfolio choice and equity characteristics: Characterizing the hedg-
    ing demand induced by return predictability, Journal of Financial Economics 62, 67-130.

Mankiw, Gregory, and Stephen Zeldes, 1991, The consumption of stockholders and non-
    stockholders, Journal of Financial Economics 29, 97-112.

Merton, Robert C., 1971, Optimum consumption and portfolio rules in a continuous-time
    model, Journal of Economic Theory 3, 373-413.

Merton, Robert C., 1980, On estimating the expected return on the market: An exploratory
    investigation, Journal of Financial Economics 8, 232-361.

                                                33
Pan, Jun, 2002, The jump-risk premia implicit in option prices: Evidence from an integrated
    time-series study, Journal of Financial Economics 63, 3-50.

Samuelson, Paul, 1991, Long-run risk tolerance when equity returns are mean regress-
    ing: Pseudoparadoxes and vindication of “businessman’s risk,” in William C. Brainard,
    William D. Nordhaus, and Harold W. Watts, eds.: Money, Macroeconomics, and Eco-
    nomic Policy (M.I.T. Press, Cambridge, MA).

Schroder, Mark, and Costis Skiadas, 1999, Optimal consumption and portfolio selection
    with stochastic diﬀerential utility, Journal of Economic Theory 89, 68-126.

Schwert, G. William, 1990, Index of United States stock prices from 1802 to 1987, Journal
    of Business 63, 399-426.

Wachter, Jessica, 1999, Risk aversion and allocation to long-term bonds, Working paper,
    New York University.

Wu, Liuren, 2000, Jumps and dynamic portfolio decisions, Working paper, Fordham Uni-
    versity.

Xia, Yihong, 2001, Learning about predictability: The eﬀect of parameter uncertainty on
    dynamic asset allocation, Journal of Finance 56, 205-246.




                                              34
                                                    Table I
        Portfolio Weights with Constant Volatility and Deterministic Price Jump Sizes

This table reports the portfolio weights for the risky asset in the case where the volatility of the asset’s
returns is constant and the percentage size of the jump in the asset’s price is also constant. The risk
premium for the risky asset is held fixed at seven percent and the volatility of diﬀusive returns is held fixed
at 15 percent throughout the table. The frequency of jumps is expressed in years and equals the reciprocal
of the jump intensity.



            Risk                                              Percentage Jump Size
        Aversion         Frequency
       Parameter          of Jumps           −90          −20              0           20           90


              .50                 1          .151        1.795         6.222        2.736         .189
                                  2          .269        2.511         6.222        3.970         .411
                                  5          .508        3.431         6.222        5.161        1.234
                                 10          .721        4.008         6.222        5.662        2.600
                                100         1.091        4.927         6.222        6.163        5.744

             1.00                 1          .078         .970         3.111        1.289         .091
                                  2          .144        1.394         3.111        1.891         .190
                                  5          .290        1.963         3.111        2.516         .529
                                 10          .444        2.333         3.111        2.793        1.111
                                100          .938        2.980         3.111        3.077        2.824

             2.00                 1          .040         .504         1.556         .624         .045
                                  2          .074         .730         1.556         .919         .092
                                  5          .155        1.033         1.556        1.238         .244
                                 10          .247        1.222         1.556        1.384         .503
                                100          .641        1.509         1.556        1.537        1.395

             5.00                 1          .016         .206          .622         .245         .018
                                  2          .030         .300          .622         .361         .036
                                  5          .065         .424          .622         .490         .093
                                 10          .105         .499          .622         .550         .188
                                100          .305         .606          .622         .614         .553
                                             Table II

Portfolio Weight and Wealth Equivalent Loss Comparisons for the Calibrated Model
                  Where Jumps Occur Every 25 Years on Average

This table reports portfolio weights for the stochastic volatility model with deterministic jumps in prices
and volatility. Also reported are the percentage wealth equivalent losses for an investor who ignores
the possibility of event-related jumps. This loss reflects the cost (as a percentage of his wealth) to an
investor who assumes that jumps cannot occur, calibrates the model to match historical moments, and
follows the portfolio strategy he believes is optimal, but is actually suboptimal in cases where jumps can
occur. The average frequency of an event is 25 years. The first column reports the portfolio weights
when the jump sizes are both zero (no jumps). The second column reports the portfolio weights and
wealth equivalent losses when the stock price jump is −25 percent and the volatility jump is zero (stock
jumps only). The third column reports the portfolio weights and wealth equivalent losses for the baseline
case where the stock price jump is −25 percent and the volatility jumps to 50 percent. Each scenario is
calibrated to match the parameter estimates in Table 1 of Pan (2002).



                                                                              Both Stock and
                       No Jumps             Stock Jumps Only                  Volatility Jumps

          Risk                                             Wealth                           Wealth
      Aversion          Portfolio       Portfolio       Equivalent       Portfolio       Equivalent
     Parameter           Weight          Weight              Loss         Weight              Loss


             .50            8.106          3.914             100.0           3.865            100.0

            1.00            4.396          3.163             100.0           3.163            100.0

            2.00            2.305          1.929                3.2          2.010               2.0

            3.00            1.564          1.356                1.3          1.432                .5

            4.00            1.183          1.042                 .7          1.107                .2

            5.00             .952            .845                .5           .901                .1
                                             Table III
Portfolio Weight and Wealth Equivalent Loss Comparisions for the Calibrated Model
                 Where Jumps Occur Every 100 Years on Average

This table reports portfolio weights for the stochastic volatility model with deterministic jumps in prices
and volatility. Also reported are the percentage wealth equivalent losses for an investor who ignores
the possibility of event-related jumps. This loss reflects the cost (as a percentage of his wealth) to an
investor who assumes that jumps cannot occur, calibrates the model to match historical moments, and
follows the portfolio strategy he believes is optimal, but is actually suboptimal in cases where jumps can
occur. The average frequency of an event is 100 years. The first column reports the portfolio weights
when the jump sizes are both zero (no jumps). The second column reports the portfolio weights and
wealth equivalent losses when the stock price jump is −50 percent and the volatility jump is zero (stock
jumps only). The third column reports the portfolio weights and wealth equivalent losses for the baseline
case where the stock price jump is −50 percent and the volatility jumps to 70 percent. Each scenario is
calibrated to match the parameter estimates in Table 1 of Pan (2002).



                                                                              Both Stock and
                       No Jumps             Stock Jumps Only                  Volatility Jumps

          Risk                                              Wealth                          Wealth
      Aversion          Portfolio       Portfolio        Equivalent      Portfolio       Equivalent
     Parameter           Weight          Weight               Loss        Weight              Loss


             .50            8.106          1.993              100.0          1.987            100.0

            1.00            4.396          1.859              100.0          1.859            100.0

            2.00            2.305          1.395              100.0          1.481            100.0

            3.00            1.564          1.059               30.5          1.174            100.0

            4.00            1.183            .844              11.2           .956               5.3

            5.00             .952            .698               6.3           .801               2.2
                                                   Table IV
               Portfolio Weights for the Calibrated Model for Varying Percentage
                              Price Jumps and Jump Frequencies

This table reports portfolio weights for the stochastic volatility model with deterministic jump sizes in prices
and volatility. Each combination of parameters is calibrated to match the parameter estimates in Table 1
of Pan (2002). The frequency of jumps is expressed in years and equals the reciprocal of the jump intensity.
Sets of parameters for which the moments cannot be matched are denoted by a dash.



          Risk                                                   Percentage Price Jump Size
      Aversion        Volatility     Frequency
     Parameter        Jumps to        of Jumps         −10         −20        −30         −40        −50


             .50             25               20      7.772       4.825      3.219       2.398      1.900
                                              30      7.871       4.903      3.272       2.444      1.945
                                              40      7.924       4.938      3.295       2.465      1.965
                                              50      7.958       4.957      3.307       2.476      1.976
                                             100      8.029       4.987      3.326       2.493      1.993

             .50             50               20      7.757       4.752      3.175           -          -
                                              30      7.838       4.855      3.246       2.423      1.925
                                              40      7.892       4.906      3.278       2.452      1.953
                                              50      7.929       4.934      3.295       2.467      1.968
                                             100      8.011       4.979      3.322       2.490      1.991

           2.00              25               20      2.287       2.091      1.687       1.325      1.066
                                              30      2.293       2.149      1.790       1.426      1.153
                                              40      2.296       2.182      1.858       1.496      1.216
                                              50      2.298       2.204      1.908       1.549      1.264
                                             100      2.302       2.251      2.040       1.702      1.403

           2.00              50               20      2.262       2.130      1.764           -          -
                                              30      2.281       2.184      1.859       1.494      1.217
                                              40      2.288       2.211      1.920       1.557      1.270
                                              50      2.292       2.228      1.964       1.605      1.312
                                             100      2.299       2.265      2.081       1.746      1.440

           5.00              25               20       .948        .897       .776        .639       .528
                                              30       .949        .913       .814        .686       .572
                                              40       .950        .922       .839        .719       .605
                                              50       .950        .928       .855        .743       .631
                                             100       .951        .939       .896        .811       .708

           5.00              50               20       .928        .917       .839           -          -
                                              30       .939        .931       .870        .762       .655
                                              40       .943        .937       .885        .784       .674
                                              50       .945        .940       .895        .801       .693
                                             100       .949        .946       .920        .852       .755
                                                   Table V
                      Portfolio Weights for the Calibrated Model for Varying
                           Volatility Jump Sizes and Jump Frequencies

This table reports portfolio weights for the stochastic volatility model with deterministic jump sizes in prices
and volatility. Each combination of parameters is calibrated to match the parameter estimates in Table 1
of Pan (2002). The frequency of jumps is expressed in years and equals the reciprocal of the jump intensity.
Set of parameters for which moments cannot be matched are denoted by a dash.



           Risk                                                          Volatility Jumps to
       Aversion         Percentage         Frequency
      Parameter         Price Jump          of Jumps            20           30          40           50


              .50                -25               20        3.876        3.861       3.841        3.816
                                                   30        3.932        3.924       3.912        3.896
                                                   40        3.958        3.953       3.945        3.934
                                                   50        3.971        3.967       3.962        3.954
                                                  100        3.992        3.991       3.989        3.986

              .50                -50               20        1.905        1.894       1.877            -
                                                   30        1.947        1.942       1.935        1.925
                                                   40        1.966        1.964       1.959        1.953
                                                   50        1.977        1.975       1.972        1.968
                                                  100        1.993        1.993       1.992        1.991

            2.00                 -25               20        1.885        1.911       1.942        1.963
                                                   30        1.976        1.996       2.022        2.044
                                                   40        2.033        2.050       2.071        2.091
                                                   50        2.072        2.087       2.105        2.123
                                                  100        2.167        2.177       2.188        2.199

            2.00                 -50               20        1.054        1.080       1.117            -
                                                   30        1.146        1.163       1.188        1.217
                                                   40        1.209        1.224       1.245        1.270
                                                   50        1.258        1.271       1.289        1.312
                                                  100        1.399        1.409       1.423        1.440

            5.00                 -25               20         .833         .854        .878         .887
                                                   30         .864         .880        .897         .090
                                                   40         .882         .894        .908         .918
                                                   50         .894         .904        .916         .924
                                                  100         .920         .926        .932         .937

            5.00                 -50               20         .515         .546        .596            -
                                                   30         .562         .584        .616         .655
                                                   40         .597         .615        .641         .674
                                                   50         .623         .640        .663         .693
                                                  100         .702         .715        .733         .754
                        2

                                                                                        2 yr Frequency
                   1.5                                                                  5 yr Frequency
Portfolio Weight




                                                                                        10 yr Frequency

                        1


                   0.5


                       0
                       −1       −0.8   −0.6   −0.4   −0.2          0        0.2   0.4    0.6      0.8     1
                                                            Price Jump Size


                       10

                                                                                   Price Jump Size= 0%
                        8                                                          Price Jump Size=−20%
    Portfolio Weight




                                                                                   Price Jump Size=−50%
                        6

                        4

                        2

                        0
                            0    0.5     1     1.5    2        2.5         3      3.5     4       4.5     5
                                                     Risk Aversion Coefficient
                            
                      
                   
                     Æ 
               
Portfolio Weight




                            1.1



                   1.05
                                                                                        Correlation = .5
                                                                                        Correlation = .0
                                                                                        Correlation = −.5
                             1
                                  0   0.5   1     1.5   2        2.5        3     3.5      4         4.5    5
                                                               Horizon


                             2


                            1.5
         Portfolio Weight




                                                                                  Price Jump Size=0%
                                                                                  Price Jump Size=−20%
                             1                                                    Price Jump Size=−50%


                            0.5


                             0
                                  0         0.1         0.2                 0.3           0.4               0.5
                                                         Volatility Jump Sizes
                             
                      
                   Æ 
                    
                      
