NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

R&D, IMPLEMENTATION AND STAGNATION:
A SCHUMPETERIAN THEORY OF CONVERGENCE CLUBS

Peter Howitt
David Mayer-Foulkes

Working Paper 9104
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9104

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002

The authors wish to thank Philippe Aghion, Jess Benhabib and Steve Redding for helpful conversations.
Useful comments were received from seminar participants at the 2001 NBER Summer Institute, Boston
University, the University of Western Ontario, and the Canadian Institute for Advanced Research. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2002 by Peter Howitt and David Mayer-Foulkes. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

R&D, Implementation and Stagnation: A Schumpeterian Theory of Convergence Clubs
Peter Howitt and David Mayer-Foulkes
NBER Working Paper No. 9104
August 2002
JEL No. O0
ABSTRACT
We construct a Schumpeterian growth theory consistent with the divergence in per-capita income
that has occurred between countries since the mid 19th Century, and with the convergence that occurred
between the richest countries during the second half of the 20th Century. The theory assumes that
technological change underwent a transformation late in the 19th Century, associated with modern R&D
labs. Countries sort themselves into three groups. Those in the highest group converge to a steady state
where they do leading edge R&D, while those in the intermediate group converge to a steady state where
they implement technologies developed elsewhere. Countries in both of these groups grow at the same
rate in the long run, as a result of technology transfer, but inequality between them increases during the
transition. Countries in the lowest group grow at a slower rate, with relative incomes that fall
asymptotically to zero. Once modern R&D has been introduced, a country may have only a finite window
of opportunity in which to introduce the institutions that support it.

Peter Howitt
Department of Economics
Brown University
Providence, RI 02906
and NBER
peter_howitt@brown.edu

David Mayer-Foulkes
División de Economía
Centro de Investigación y Docencia Económicas
Carretera México Toluca 3655
01210 México, D.F, México

“The greatest invention of the 19th Century was the invention of the method of invention.” Alfred North Whitehead (1931, p. 98)
“Countries that are technologically backward have a potentiality for generating growth
more rapid than that of more advanced countries, provided their social capabilities are
suﬃciently developed to permit successful exploitation of technologies already employed
by the technological leaders.” Moses Abramovitz (1986, p.225)
“Lack of investment in an area of expertise early on may foreclose the future development of a technical capability in that area.” Wesley Cohen and Daniel Levinthal (1990,
p.128)

1

Introduction

The cross-country distribution of per-capita income has widened dramatically since the 19th Century. Pritchett (1997) infers that the proportional gap in living standards between the richest
and poorest countries grew more than Þve-fold from 1870 to 1990, in what he calls “divergence,
big-time.” According to the tables in Maddison (2001) the proportional gap between the richest
group of countries and the poorest1 grew from 3 in 1820 to 19 in 1998. Quah (1993, 1997) Þnds
evidence of emerging “twin peaks” in the cross-country income distribution continuing well into the
second half of the 20th Century. Kremer et al. (2001) Þnd that a single-peaked distribution may
emerge but only after a prolonged transition. Mayer (2001) Þnds twin peaks in the distribution of
life expectancy using the available data for 1962 to 1997.
A large number of empirical studies2 have shown that the large income diﬀerences that have
emerged are mostly attributable to diﬀerences in productivity rather than to the diﬀerences in
schooling and capital accumulation invoked by neoclassical growth theory. In particular, Feyrer
(2001) Þnds that although the distribution of capital-output ratios is single-peaked, and the distribution of education levels is almost ßat, the distribution of the productivity residual has become
increasingly twin-peaked. These studies strongly suggest that the central factor beneath growing
cross-country income disparities is technology.
There is however a major problem facing any technological explanation of divergence. SpeciÞcally, many studies3 show that a large group of countries have been converging to parallel growth
1
The richest group was Western Europe in 1820 and the “Euopean Oﬀshoots” (Australia, Canada, New Zealand
and the United States) in 1998. The poorest group was Africa in both years.
2
See for example Knight et al. (1993), Islam (1995), Caselli et al. (1996), Klenow and Rodriguez-Clare (1997),
Prescott (1998), Hall and Jones (1999) and Easterly and Levine (2001).
3
For example, Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992), Mankiw et al. (1992) and Evans (1996).

1

paths over the past 50 years or so. The tendency to convergence4 among rich countries is easy
to understand as a manifestation of technology transfer. But what force was opposing technology
transfer so as to produce the technological divergence that took place over the longer period from
the mid 19th Century? And why did that force stop working during the second half of the 20th
Century?
Moreover, this modern convergence group does not include all countries. In particular, the
gap between the leading countries as a whole and the very poorest countries as a whole continued
to widen throughout the second half of the 20th Century. For example, the proportional gap in
per-capita income between Mayer’s (2002) richest and poorest convergence groups grew by a factor
of 2.6 between 1960 and 1995, and the proportional gap between Maddison’s richest and poorest
groups grew by a factor of 1.75 between 1950 and 1998. This raises the further question of why the
forces that brought an end to the divergence among middle-to-high income countries did not also
bring an end to the divergence between very rich and very poor countries.5
Our purpose here is to show how these questions can be addressed by modern Schumpeterian
growth theory. To this end we propose a model of economic growth based on the multi-country
model of Howitt (2000), which in turn is an extension of the Aghion-Howitt (1992, 1998) model
of growth through creative destruction, and which implies a particular form of club-convergence.
SpeciÞcally, in the earlier multi-country model all countries that continue to invest in new technologies eventually grow at the same rate, because they draw ideas from each other, whereas countries
that do not invest in new technologies stagnate, because without making technology investments
of their own they cannot beneÞt from technology transfer.
One problem with the earlier model of Howitt (2000) is that it does not take into account that
diﬀerent countries have used diﬀerent strategies for tapping into the global technological frontier.
Only a small handful of rich countries perform leading-edge R&D. In 1996, for example, 5 countries
accounted for over 80 percent of the world’s formal R&D expenditures, and 11 countries accounted
4

We use the term “convergence” throughout to mean that countries approach parallel long-run growth paths.
For emphasis we sometimes refer to the concept as “parallel convergence.” Although the neoclassical growth model
with instantaneous technology transfer exhibits parallel convergence, nevertheless the concept is not the same as the
more familiar “conditional convergence,” which means (Galor, 1996) that countries with the same characteristics
converge to the same growth path. For example, in the case of multiple steady states of the sort illustrated in Figure
3 below, countries with the same characteristics but diﬀerent initial conditions could converge to diﬀerent growth
paths (an example of club-convergence) but these paths would all be parallel. Conversely, in a model of conditional
convergence, countries with one set of characteristics could all converge to a growth path that was not parallel to
the common asymptotic path of countries with a diﬀerent set of characteristics. Thus parallel convergence does not
imply and is not implied by the usual concept of conditional convergence.
5
(Except for a small number of formerly poor “miracle” countries such as Botswana, China, Mauritius and the
East Asian NICs).

2

for over 95 percent.6 Yet not all of the other countries stagnated relative to the frontier. As
Evenson and Westphal (1995) document, a country cannot keep up with the frontier merely by
copying technologies developed in leading countries, because technological knowledge is often tacit
and circumstantially sensitive. Therefore countries that avoided stagnation without performing
leading edge R&D must have made signiÞcant technology investments to learn, modify, adapt and
implement technologies that were originally developed elsewhere.
These technology investments in follower countries share many features with the R&D activity
that takes place in leading countries, in that they are costly, they build on knowledge developed
elsewhere, their eﬀects are random, and when successful they result in innovations - products or
processes that were previously not feasible in that country. But they are not the same as leadingedge R&D. Instead they are closer to the production process, involve less basic science, generate
fewer spillovers to other countries, and generally contain a smaller element of novelty and a larger
element of dependency on preceding innovations.
Another problem with the earlier model is that although there is considerable evidence for
club-convergence,7 not even those countries at the bottom of the distribution have been completely
stagnant technologically as the earlier model implies. According to Maddison’s (2001) tables, percapita income in the poorest group of countries (Africa) grew by 60 percent from 1950 to 1998.
What is needed to account for the record of very poor countries is a model in which a country
that invests in technological change can have a long-run growth rate that is positive but strictly
less than the rate of growth of the leading countries, despite the fact that technology transfer is
constantly exerting a force towards parallel convergence.
The present model deals with these two problems by taking into account two central features of
technological change not considered by Howitt (2000). First, we distinguish between two types of
technological investment, corresponding to the diﬀerent strategies that countries have for tapping
into the global technology frontier, namely “modern R&D” and “implementation.” The former
(which for brevity we refer to as simply “R&D”) is what goes on in the most technologically
advanced countries, while the latter is the process of assimilation and adaptation that takes place in
less advanced countries. We suppose that both kinds of technology investment are costly, and both
draw on the world’s technology frontier, but R&D draws more heavily on scientiÞc knowledge and
its institutions, and thus requires higher skill levels than implementation. In particular, graduating
6

These calculations are made using data from Global Development Finance & World Development Indicators and
the Penn World Tables 5.6.
7
Baumol (1986), Durlauf and Johnson (1995), and Mayer (2001, 2002).

3

from implementation to R&D requires surpassing a threshold skill level that increases with the
demands of new, ever advancing, leading technologies.
The second central feature we take into account is that a country’s ability to acquire the
skills used intensively in technology investment depends on its level of development, relative to
the global technological frontier from which it draws new ideas. Thus a given time input into
schooling/training will produce few eﬀective skills in a country that is technologically backward,
because learning takes place in an environment where modern technology is relatively unfamiliar,
teachers are not as well versed in modern techniques, classrooms and labs are less up-to-date, and
so forth. Therefore as the world’s technological frontier advances, a country that does not keep
pace will Þnd it increasingly diﬃcult to catch up by absorbing foreign knowledge, because its skill
levels will not be keeping up with the frontier. As a result its technology investments will become
increasingly ineﬀective.8
This erosion of absorptive capacity that takes place when a country falls behind is a central
part of our explanation of long-term divergence. It weakens the force of technology transfer that
is tending to bring about parallel convergence. Followers of Gerschenkron (1952) have argued that
technological backwardness conveys an advantage, because the ability to make use of frontier ideas
raises the potential size of the advance that can be made by investing in technological change.
This advantage will be present in the model to be developed below, but the erosion of absorptive
capacity constitutes a counteracting disadvantage to technological backwardness.
Our central hypothesis is that the activity we call R&D was made possible in the late 19th
Century by the introduction of the modern R&D lab that exploited the growing interconnections
between science and technology, and by the existence of various institutions such as government
research labs and agencies, scientiÞc academies, universities with close ties to industry and commerce, and so forth.9 Before this, all technological change took the form of a pragmatic creativity
that we have loosely characterized as technological implementation.
The introduction of modern R&D was the fundamental driving force behind the emergence of
large income disparities. It worked by creating a fundamental change in the dynamic evolution of
global productivity diﬀerences, resulting in three distinct converge groups as illustrated in Figure
8

See Benhabib and Spiegel (1994) and Griﬃth et al. (2001) for evidence that skills are an important determinant
of a country’s absorptive capacity.
9
Edison’s research lab in Menlo Park, generally considered the Þrst modern “invention factory,” opened in 1876.
Rosenberg and Birdzell (1986, ch.8) provide a brief account of the rise of the modern R&D lab and the increasing
interconnectedness between science and technology, which they argue began around 1875. Mowery and Rosenberg
(1998, ch.2) and Wright (1999) argue that a network of linkages between universities, government agencies and
commercial enterprises played a key role in establishing America’s technological leadership in many Þelds.

4

1. A sketch of our argument goes as follows.
Suppose modern R&D is introduced at time t0 . Until then all countries were on parallel growth
paths, with some level-diﬀerences attributable to diﬀerences in country-speciÞc parameters. Figure
1 depicts the evolution of productivity in three countries, one in each convergence group. Country
A has the “best” parameter values (i.e. those most favorable to growth) and country C the worst.
After t0 only those countries whose productivity level is above some critical value will have a skilled
enough labor force to begin using modern R&D immediately. (In Figure 1 this is only country A.)
Those that do will start growing faster as a result of using the more productive (R&D) method of
technology investment. All others will continue using implementation, and will start to fall further
behind country A.
As the other countries fall further behind, technology transfer will start to pull their growth
rates up, but until their growth rates have caught up with the growth rate of the frontier, the
erosion of absorptive capacity engendered by their increasing technological backwardness will tend
to weaken the force of technology transfer. In countries that are not too far behind to start with,
absorptive capacity will remain strong enough to eventually put them on growth paths parallel
to that of country A, but with a permanently bigger gap in productivity levels, as in the case of
country B; the initial gap that was due to diﬀerent parameter values is now ampliÞed by the fact
that country A has adopted modern R&D while country B has not. But if the country starts too
far behind (as with country C) then the erosion of absorptive capacity will weaken the force of
technology transfer to such an extent that, although the country will continue to grow forever, its
asymptotic growth rate will be strictly less than the common long-run growth rate of countries A
and B.
The above account presumes that all countries with suﬃcient skill levels to engage in R&D
also have the institutions required to support R&D. If this is not the case then, once R&D takes
hold in some leading economies, other economies may have a Þnite window of opportunity in which
to establish the necessary institutions, and therefore to join the leading club. If this window is
missed, absorptive capacity may erode to such an extent that the country will become trapped
in technological implementation or even stagnation, and it will then take more than the right
institutions to rejoin the leaders.
The model is consistent with the dynamical features observed by Feyrer (2001) who notes that
the emergence of “twin peaks” in the distribution of world income is mainly attributable to diverging
rates of total factor productivity growth rather than diverging levels of capital accumulation or

5

education. (We abstract completely from capital accumulation and in our model time spent in
education per person will be the same in each country.) As Feyrer notes, models constructing
development traps based on multiple equilibria in physical capital accumulation (such as Becker
and Barro, 1989; Murphy et al., 1989; Becker et al., 1990; Zilibotti, 1995; and Galor and Weil, 1996)
or in human capital accumulation (such as Azariadis and Drazen, 1990; Tsiddon, 1992; Galor and
Zeira, 1993; Durlauf, 1993, 1996; Benabou, 1996; and Galor and Tsiddon, 1997) are inconsistent
with this observation.
The model is related to those of Basu and Weil (1998) and Acemoglu and Zilibotti (2001), in
which follower countries are slow to adopt the leader’s innovations because the technologies that
are being developed by the leader are not “appropriate” for the factor proportions being used in
production by the followers. In our model the followers are slow to adopt not because the technology
is inappropriate but because adopting requires “tacit” knowledge10 which is less accessible the
further removed is the adopter’s everyday cultural and technological experience and skill level from
that of the innovator. Also, these other models describe steady states with unchanging cross-country
diﬀerences in productivity levels and identical growth rates, whereas we are trying to account for
divergent productivity growth rates.
The model is also related to a long literature, beginning with Gerschenkron (1952), maintaining
that institutional barriers are what prevent a country from catching up with technological leaders. Abramovitz (1986) for example believed that technological backwardness conveys a growth
advantage by opening up the relatively easy path of adoption and imitation, but that “social backwardness” creates an oﬀsetting disadvantage. In our model the values of the various parameters
that determine the steady-state level of a country’s growth path, and the presence or absence of the
institutions necessary for supporting modern R&D, might be considered as deÞning some relevant
components of social backwardness. But in addition we argue that economic backwardness conveys
disadvantages (by eroding absorptive capacity) as well as advantages.
Our approach is similar to that of Nelson and Phelps (1966), who argue that a country’s
productivity growth will be the product of a technology gap (to the world’s technology leader) and
an absorptive capacity term which is a function of domestic skill levels (see their equation (8)). In
our model it is the product of a technology gap and the frequency of domestic innovations, the
latter being dependent on the level of “innovation-eﬀective” skills. (See equation (10) below.)
Parente and Prescott (1994, 1999) focus on legal and regulatory barriers to adopting foreign
10

The importance of tacit knowledge for technological progress and development has been analyzed and documented by Arrow (1969) and Evenson and Westphal (1995).

6

technology. Their model ignores the costs of technology adoption, arising from tacitness and circumstantial sensitivity, that make technology transfer less than automatic even in the absence of
such barriers. It also focuses on steady-state diﬀerences in productivity levels, rather than on divergent productivity-growth rates. We see our model as being complementary with theirs, for one
of the key country-speciÞc parameters in our model determining convergence-group membership
(φ) represents the extent to which the legal/regulatory environment favors the creation/adoption
of new technology. Thus our model suggests that introduction of modern R&D has leveraged the
cross-country productivity diﬀerences due to adoption barriers that Parente and Prescott have
estimated to be quantitatively very large.
Acemoglu et al. (2002) complement our analysis by explicitly modeling one speciÞc mechanism
by which inappropriate institutions can prevent a country from using the best method of R&D.
They focus, as do Parente and Prescott (1999), on monopoly rights, which they argue can be growth
enhancing for a very backward country but can impede the switch from implementation to R&D.
The failure to switch prevents absolute convergence to the leader. However, they do not address
the issue of how large gaps arose, and in their analysis all countries converge to parallel growth
paths whether or not they adopt appropriate institutions.
Our model also gives an alternative explanation for the results obtained by Acemoglu et al.
(2001). In their study, a mortality variable constructed for the colonial era serves as an instrument
for modern institutions, explaining a substantial proportion of modern diﬀerences in income. The
authors argue that early settler mortality was amongst the determinants of the characteristics of
colonial states, ranging from extractive states to “Neo-Europes” (Crosby, 1986), that this status
determined their early institutions, especially with regard to property rights and checks against government power, that the institutions have persisted over time, and that the persistent institutions
continue to aﬀect economic growth.
We provide an alternative interpretation of their results, which does not rely upon an unexplained persistence of institutions. By their reasoning, colonial mortality and early institutions can
be expected to be correlated with the country-speciÞc parameters determining which convergence
group it joined when modern R&D was introduced, speciÞcally the eﬃciency of resource allocation
(the parameter ψ below), and the incentives to save (the parameter τ ) and to innovate (φ). The
long-term character of these eﬀects results not from institutional persistence but from their eﬀects
on human capital and technology dynamics. Our “window of opportunity” result shows that the
economic diﬀerences caused by colonial experience can persist even if the institutions do not.

7

Section 2 below lays out our basic model, under the assumption that there is just one method
for investing in technological change. It uses this model to analyze the determinants of the world
growth rate and of each country’s relative productivity, both in and out of steady state, before the
introduction of modern R&D. Section 3 then shows what happens if we start in the steady state
and introduce modern R&D, assuming that some countries can use the new method but some lack
the necessary skill levels. It shows how countries sort themselves into the three convergence groups
depicted in Figure 1, under the assumption that all countries have in place the institutions that are
needed to support R&D. Section 4 then addresses the question of what happens if these institutions
are not in place in every country, and shows how this can create windows of opportunity. Section
5 contains our concluding remarks.

2

The basic model

Consider a world economy with m diﬀerent countries, connected to each other through a ßow of
technological ideas. For simplicity we ignore all other relationships between countries and assume
they do not exchange products or factors of production with each other. We begin by analyzing
an isolated country, in which there is just one method of technology investment; that is, before the
introduction of modern R&D. There is a unit mass of individuals, each with linear intertemporal
preferences in consumption, and a constant rate of time preference ρ > 0.

2.1

Production

There is a single Þnal output, produced by intermediate products, according to the production
function:
Yt = ψ

Z

1

At (i) G (xt (i)) di

0

where ψ is a country-speciÞc eﬃciency parameter representing the combined eﬀects of the country’s
institutions, policies, geography, and all other factors inßuencing total factor productivity except
for technological knowledge; xt (i) is the country’s input of intermediate product i into producing
Þnal output at t; G is a smooth production kernel with positive but diminishing marginal product;
and At (i) is a country-speciÞc technology parameter reßecting the productivity of intermediate
product i in the country at time t.
Each intermediate product is produced by skills, according to the production function:
xt (i) = StM (i) /At (i)

8

(1)

where StM (i) is the input of skills into manufacturing in sector i at t. Division by At (i) in (1)
indicates that successive vintages of the intermediate product are produced by increasingly skillintensive techniques. Each intermediate product is produced by a local monopolist, who operates
with a price schedule given by the marginal product function pt (i) = ψAt (i) G0 (xt (i)) and a cost
function wt At (i) xt (i) , where wt is the market-determined (and country-speciÞc) price of skills in
terms of the numeraire, Þnal output.
Since each intermediate Þrm’s marginal revenue and marginal cost schedules are proportional
to At (i), and since Þrms diﬀer only in their value of At (i) , they all choose to supply the same
quantity of intermediate product: xt = xt (i) for all i. Thus:
xt (i) = xt = StM /At

(2)

where StM is the total demand for skills in manufacturing and At is the average productivity
parameter across all sectors in the country.11 Substituting from (2) into the proÞt-maximization
condition of each intermediate Þrm yields the demand function for skills in manufacturing:
StM = At se (ωt )

where se is a decreasing function12 of the (country-speciÞc) “eﬃciency-adjusted” price of skills:
ω t ≡ wt /ψ.

Each local monopolist earns a ßow of proÞts proportional to its productivity parameter At (i) ,
namely:
πt (i) = At (i) ψb
π (ω t )

(3)

where the function13 π
b is decreasing in ω t .

2.2

Supply of skills

Each individual acquires skills by spending time in “education,” which we broadly interpret to
include training. Someone who spends the fraction of time et in education at t (and the fraction
1 − et working in either manufacturing or technology investment) attains a skill level:
Ft = At f (et ) ;

f 0 > 0, f 00 ≤ 0, f (0) = 0

R1
From (1), the deÞnition of At and the adding-up condition we have: StM = 0 At (i) xt di = At xt . Equation (2)
follows directly.
¢ 1
¡
12
For example, in the Cobb-Douglas case where G (x) ≡ xα we have se (ω) = ω/α2 α−1 .
1
¢
¡
13
2 α−1
In the Cobb Douglas case of footnote 12 we have π
b (ω) = 1−α
.
α ω ω/α
11

9

where At is again the economy-wide average productivity parameter and f is a production function
representing the technology of skill-acquisition. The level of At matters because of a human-capital
externality; that is, time spent acquiring skills is more valuable in a technologically more advanced
economy where there is more to learn from others.14
To simplify the dynamics we assume that skill acquisition takes place so much faster than
technological progress that we can treat it as being instantaneous. Thus a person who spends
the fraction of time et in education at date t to acquire the skill-level Ft will earn an income
of wt Ft (1 − et ) per unit of time. The person will maximize income by choosing et equal to the
constant:
eb ≡ arg max f (e) (1 − e)

independently of wt and At , and will supply the amount:
bAt
St = σ

of skills per unit of time to the market, where:

2.3

Technological change

σ
b ≡ f (b
e) (1 − eb) .

As in other Schumpeterian growth models, technology investment is targeted at speciÞc intermediate products, results in a random sequence of innovations, and is performed by Þrms that are not
already producing. As in Howitt (2000), we introduce an element of technology transfer by assuming that each innovation creates an improved version of the existing product, with a productivity
parameter that equals the world-wide “leading-edge technology parameter:”
Amax
≡ max {Ajt (i) | i ∈ [0, 1] , j = 1, ..., m}
t
where the j subscript denotes a variable speciÞc to country j. The innovator becomes the new
incumbent producer until replaced by the next innovator in that industry in that country. Note
that this way of introducing technology transfer makes it analogous to and symmetrical with the
intersectoral technology spillovers occurring within a country, for the quality Amax
of an innovation
t
depends on the most advanced technology in any sector of any country.
14
What matters is that skills depend positively on the economy’s technology level, not that this dependency
involves an externality. Thus we could have assumed instead that skill production involves a material input whose
price is independent of ωt . We chose the present alternative for its relative simplicity.

10

The inputs to technology investment are skills and Þnal output. Since the costs and beneÞts
of this investment are the same in each sector, we assume that it is carried out at the same rate
in each sector. The Poisson arrival rate µt of an innovation in any sector (also the economy-wide
continuous ßow of innovations) is determined by a constant-returns production function, which is
more skill-intensive than the production function for Þnal output:
¡ ¢β
µt = λ StR zt1−β /Amax
t

0<β<1

(4)

where StR is the input of skills into technology investment, zt is the material input of the Þnal good
into technology investment, and λ is the productivity of the innovation process. The division by
Amax
takes into account the force of increasing complexity; as technology advances, the resource
t
cost of further advances increases proportionally.
Let Vt be the value (to the innovator) of an innovation at time t. Suppose that technology
investments are subsidized at the proportional rate φ < 1. The country-speciÞc parameter φ is a
proxy for all distortions and policies that impinge directly on the incentive to innovate. It can be
negative, in which case the distortions and policies favoring innovation are outweighed by those
discouraging it.15 Then a Þrm investing in technology at t will maximize its expected proÞt:
¢
¡
µt Vt − (1 − φ) wt StR + zt

subject to (4). This implies the arbitrage condition:16

(1 − φ) ζwtβ = λVt /Amax
t

(5)

where ζ ≡ β −β (1 − β)β−1 .17 It also implies that:
µt = λwt1−β ξStR /Amax
t

(6)

where ξ ≡ (βζ)−1 .

By substituting for StR in (6) from the market-clearing condition for skills:

15

b = At se (ω t ) + StR
At σ

An increase in φ can be thought of as a reduction of the “barriers to adoption” stressed by Parente and Prescott
(1994, 1999), because technology transfer and innovation are all part of the same process in this model.
16
We assume that there is always an equilibrium with a positive skill input to technology investment. (See footnote
23 below for further details). Otherwise (5) would have to be replaced by a pair of complementary Kuhn-Tucker
inequalities.
17
Condition (5) follows from the fact that ζωβ is the unit cost function associated with the production function
¡ R ¢β 1−β
z
.
S

11

we can express the equilibrium rate of innovation as:
µt = λψ1−β µ
e (ω t ) at

(7)

where at ≡ At /Amax
denotes the country’s “normalized” productivity, and where µ
e is an increasing
t

function18 of ω t .

To interpret (7) note Þrst that a higher eﬃciency-adjusted price ω t implies a lower demand for

skills in manufacturing and hence a larger supply to the technology investment sector; it also implies
that material input to technology investment will increase more than in proportion to the now
relatively more expensive skill input, and hence that the rate of innovation will also increase more
than in proportion. Next, a higher normalized productivity at implies that with a given amount
of education each worker engaged in technology investment will be supplying more skills relative
to the world technology frontier and hence will produce innovations at a faster rate. Conversely,
a lower value of at means that the country is technologically more “backward”, and the resulting
decrease in the frequency of innovations implied by (7) is the disadvantage of backwardness referred
to in Section 1 above.

2.4

The price of skills

The value Vt of an innovation is the expected present value of all the proÞts from now until the next
innovation in the same sector, at which time the Þrm will be replaced as the incumbent monopolist
in the sector:19
Vt =

Z

t

∞

e−

Ru
t

(r+µs )ds

Amax
ψb
π (ω u ) du
t

where r is the rate of interest. Diﬀerentiating both sides with respect to t produces the analogue
to the Bellman equations of Aghion and Howitt (1992):
Vú t /Vt − Aú max
/Amax
= r + µt − ψb
π (ω t ) Amax
/Vt .
t
t
t

(8)

Suppose that saving is taxed at the constant marginal rate τ ∈ [0, 1). Then
r=

ρ
.
1−τ

(9)

The country-speciÞc parameter τ is intended to proxy for all those aspects of the regulatory and
institutional environment impinging on the incentive to save, such as security of property rights,
etc.
SpeciÞcally: µ
e (ω t ) ≡ ω1−β
ξ (b
σ − se (ωt )).
t
We assume that the previous incumbent is unable to re-enter once it stops producing. That is why a successful
innovator can ignore potential competition from previous innovators in the same product. Howitt and Aghion (1998,
Appendix) show that the alternative case in which the previous incumbent is free to reenter produces the same
steady-state comparative-statics results in a related closed-economy model.
18
19

12

It follows from (5) and (7) ∼ (9) that the eﬃciency-adjusted price of skills ω t obeys the diﬀerential equation:

· ¸·
¶¸
µ
dω t
ωt
ρ
π
e (ω t )
1−β
=
+ λψ
µ
e (ω t ) at −
dt
β
1−τ
1−φ

where π
e is a decreasing function20 of ωt .

2.5

Technology transfer and absorptive capacity

We have modelled technological innovation and technology transfer as two aspects of the same
technology investment activity, reßecting the fact that every act of innovation builds on previous
ideas.21 SpeciÞcally, each innovation allows the innovator to access a worldwide technological
frontier. Let gt denote the growth rate of this frontier:
gt ≡ Aú max
/Amax
.
t
t
Although gt will be endogenous to the whole model, for now we take it as given.
A country’s average productivity parameter At grows as a result of innovations, each of which
replaces the pre-existing parameter At (i) in a sector by Amax
. Thus the average increase in techt
nology parameters across all innovating sectors at t is the diﬀerence Amax
− At . The rate of increase
t
of the average equals the rate of innovation µt times this average increase:
Aú t = µt (Amax
− At )
t
which together with (7) implies:
¶
µ max
¡
¢ 1−β
Aú t
At − At
µt = a−1
=
µ
e (ω t ) at .
t − 1 λψ
At
At

(10)

The two eﬀects of at on the right-hand side of (10) represent respectively the advantage and

the disadvantage of backwardness as measured (inversely) by at . The advantage is that the further
behind a country is the greater the average size of each innovation, as measured by the average proportional increase

Amax
−At
t
At

≡ a−1
t − 1. This is the factor emphasized by followers of Gerschenkron.

The disadvantage is that the further behind (given the eﬃciency-adjusted price of skills ω t ) the
e (ω t ) at . This results from erosion of absorptive
smaller the frequency of innovations µt = λψ1−β µ

capacity as explained above.

According to (10) there is an overall advantage to backwardness, since the RHS is proportional

to 1 − at . But whether or not this overall advantage is suﬃcient to ensure that a follower country
20
21

SpeciÞcally, π
e (ωt ) ≡

π
b (ω t )
β

ζω t

.

Cohen and Levinthal (1989) and Griﬃth et al. (2001) provide empirical support for this two-sided nature of
technology investment.

13

ends up growing at the same rate as a leader depends on the other factors involved in determining
the follower’s frequency of innovations. In particular it will depend on the equilibrium value of the
eﬃciency-adjusted price of skills ωt in the follower country.
To see this, suppose ω t and gt are both constant. Then (10) and the deÞnitions of at and gt
imply:
aú t /at = (1 − at ) λψ1−β µ
e (ω) − g

so that:

n
o
at → max 0, 1 − g/λψ 1−β µ
e (ω) .

Since µ
e is an increasing function, this implies that when the steady-state value of ω is too small the

country’s growth rate will converge to a value22 strictly less than the world growth rate g, whereas

when ω is large enough the growth rate will converge to g. In the former case, as the country

falls further behind the leader (as at falls), the country’s absorptive capacity becomes too small to
prevent its normalized productivity at from falling to zero despite the increasing size of innovations.
In the latter case absorptive capacity remains high enough that normalized productivity is stabilized
at a strictly positive value.

2.6

The dynamical system

It follows that the evolution of a country’s normalized productivity at and its eﬃciency-adjusted
price of skills ωt are governed by a two-dimensional dynamical system:
dat
dt
dω t
dt

h
i
= at (1 − at ) λψ 1−β µ
e (ω t ) − gt
· ¸·
¶¸
µ
π
e (ω t )
ωt
ρ
1−β
=
+ λψ
µ
e (ω t ) at −
β
1−τ
1−φ

(11)
(12)

These equations, together with an initial condition on a0 , a transversality condition on ω t deriving
from its connection (5) with the value Vt of an innovation, and a given time path for gt determine
a unique time path for (at , ω t ) from 0 to ∞.

The phase diagram for a constant growth rate g > 0 is shown in Figure 2.23 Note that ω t is

a forward-looking jump-variable in this perfect foresight system; that is, ωt is a translation of the
forward-looking expected value of an innovation, using the research arbitrage equation (5). The
22

SpeciÞcally: λψ 1−β µ
e (ω).
The critical value ω of the eﬃciency-adjusted skill price depicted in Figure 2 is the value at which all skills would
be absorbed by the manufacturing sector. It is deÞned by the equation: se (ω) = σ
b . As long as ω remains above ω
then our assumption of an interior solution to the research-arbitrage equation is warranted.
23

14

diagram is constructed for given values of the parameters φ, ψ and τ , so an increase in ω t can be
interpreted as a ceteris paribus increase in the value of an innovation.
The aú = 0 locus shows how steady-state productivity depends upon the price of skills. To
see why it is upward sloping note that, as explained in the previous paragraph, an increase in ω
corresponds to an increase in the value of an innovation, which induces a temporarily faster rate of
innovation, which leads to a higher steady-state level of productivity relative to the global leading
edge Amax
. The ωú = 0 locus shows how the steady-state price of skills depends on productivity.
t
It is downward sloping because the larger is the country’s normalized productivity the greater is
the rate of innovation in any industry (because of the higher level of skills relative to the global
technology frontier), hence the higher the rate of creative destruction and the shorter the expected
duration of incumbency of a monopolist, hence the smaller the expected value of an innovation and
the lower the steady-state demand price for skills in technology investment.
There is a unique steady state, exhibiting the usual saddle-path property. At each date the
country’s GDP equals the sum of labor income and proÞt income:
Yt = ω t St + At ψb
π (ω t ) = At (ω t σ
b + ψb
π (ωt )) .

(13)

Since ω t is constant in the steady state, therefore the long-run growth rate of GDP is the steady
state productivity growth rate:
lim Aú t /At = (1 − a∗ ) λψ1−β µ
e (ω ∗ ) .

t→∞

There are two diﬀerent kinds of steady state, for the reasons discussed in section 2.5 above.
Figure 2a shows the case of an interior steady-state, in which at → a∗ > 0, and the country’s
long-run growth rate equals g. All economies for which there exists such an equilibrium will be on
parallel growth paths in the long run, as a result of technology transfer.
Figure 2b shows the case in which there is long-run growth but at a rate below that of the
global technology frontier, because λψ1−β µ
e (ω ∗ ) < g. Productivity and GDP fall to zero relative to

the countries in an interior equilibrium, because absorptive capacity becomes too low to keep up
with the frontier.

We suppose that before the introduction of modern R&D every country is in an interior steady
state, with a∗ > 0. As illustrated in Figure 1, all countries will be on strictly parallel growth paths,
growing at the same rate g > 0.

15

2.7

Growth of the world economy

As in other innovation-based endogenous growth models, the growth rate gt of the world’s leadingis determined by a spillover process that constitutes part of the
edge technology parameter Amax
t
mechanism of technology transfer (the other part being the use of Amax
by innovators in every count
try). That is, the global technology frontier expands as a result of innovations everywhere, which
produce knowledge that feeds into technology investment in other sectors and in other countries.
SpeciÞcally:
gt =

m
X

σj µjt

j=1

where the spillover coeﬃcients σj are all non-negative.
For simplicity, assume that there is one leading country, country 1, generating all the spillovers.
Then:
gt = σ 1 µ1t .
Using (7) to replace µ1t and substituting into (11) for the leading country shows that its normalized
productivity converges24 asymptotically and monotonically to the steady-state value:
a∗1 =

1
.
1 + σ1

(14)

The leader’s steady-state skill price ω ∗1 is determined by (14) and the other steady-state condition:
1 − φ1 =

ρ
1−τ 1

π
e (ω∗1 )
λψ 1−β
1

+ λψ 1−β
µ
e (ω∗1 ) a∗1
1

(15)

which follows from (12) and is analogous to the steady-state research arbitrage equations analyzed
in Aghion and Howitt (1998). The steady-state growth rate of the global technology frontier is:

2.8

g = σ1 λψ1−β
µ
e (ω ∗1 ) a∗1 .
1

(16)

Comparative statics of the steady state

The steady-state growth rate g of the global technological frontier depends on the leading country’s
parameter values, according to:
Proposition 1 The steady-state global growth rate g is an increasing function of the leading country’s eﬃciency parameter ψ 1 , its innovation-subsidy rate φ1 and the innovation-productivity parameter λ. It is a decreasing function of the leading country’s saving-tax rate τ 1 .
24

SpeÞcally, at must evolve according to:
aú 1t = a1t [1 − a1t (1 + σ 1 )] λψ 1−β
µ
e (ω1t ) .
1

16

Proposition 1 is a fairly standard application of Schumpeterian growth theory to a closed economy. It follows directly from equations (14) ∼ (16). Note that the positive eﬀect of the eﬃciency
parameter ψ 1 depends critically on our assumption that skills are not the only factor of production
in innovation - i.e. that β < 1. That is, although an increase in ψ 1 increases the incentive to
innovate by raising the equilibrium level of proÞt income in the leading economy, it also increases
the cost of innovation by raising the equilibrium price of skills in manufacturing. If skills were the
only input to innovation then the cost and reward would be increased in the same proportion and
so would the equilibrium price of skills, so there would be no change in the equilibrium level of
technology investment in the leading country and the growth rate would remain unchanged.25
For every other country, the steady-state values of a and ω can be derived from the equations:
e (ω)
λψ1−β π
ρ
1−β
µ
e (ω) a
1−τ + λψ
g
a = 1−
λψ1−β µ
e (ω)

1−φ =

(17)
(18)

describing the two stationary loci of Figure 2 above. The country’s steady-state normalized productivity depends on the same country-speciÞc parameters whose values in the leading country
determine the growth rate g, and in the same direction. Thus we have:
Proposition 2 Each non-leading country’s steady-state normalized productivity a∗ is an increasing
function of its eﬃciency parameter ψ, its innovation-subsidy rate φ and the innovation-productivity
parameter λ. It is a decreasing function of its saving-tax rate τ and the growth rate g of the global
technology frontier.
The economic interpretation of these results is straightforward. Starting from a steady state
any parameter change that would have lead to a higher growth rate in a closed economy will raise
the equilibrium rate of innovation, causing the country’s average productivity to grow faster than g
for some period of time. But the resulting decrease in the gap a−1
t −1 will reduce the average size of
innovations, thus bringing the rate of productivity growth back down. (This is just the technology
transfer eﬀect discussed in section 2.5 above, working in reverse.) Eventually productivity growth
will return to its original rate g but with a permanently higher value of a. Also, an increase in the
world growth rate g will Þrst cause the country’s average productivity to fall further behind the
global frontier, until technology transfer stabilizes a at a permanently lower value.
25

The logic of this argument is the same as that of Howitt and Aghion (1998), who show that a subsidy to capital
accumulation will have a positive long-run eﬀect on growth except in the limiting case where β = 1.

17

3

The introduction of modern R&D

The rise of modern economic growth following the Þrst Industrial Revolution was closely associated
with the emergence of the scientiÞc way of thought.26 A new perspective of nature, founded on the
scientiÞc achievements of a new set of institutions, sustaining ever deeper advances of knowledge,
brought about a new era of technological change. From a technological point of view, this movement
culminated in the late 19th Century with the introduction of the modern R&D lab, and the growing
scientiÞc content of technological change.
Accordingly, we assume that until some date t0 productivity advances were based on a pragmatic
creativity occurring close to the production process, with innovation-productivity λ. Thereafter, an
alternative technology for R&D emerged, intimately linked with the scientiÞc revolution and its
institutions, with innovation-productivity λ0 > λ.
To be viable, however, the new technology requires workers with a skill level at least equal to
, which depends upon the global technology frontier. It also requires
some threshold value γAmax
t
a set of supporting institutions, such as research-oriented universities, government R&D agencies
and research labs, and close links between academia, government and commerce. If workers do
not have this threshold level of skills then R&D yielding leading-edge technological innovation
is impossible, although the original process of pragmatic creativity remains. In the presence of
scientiÞc knowledge and advanced technologies this pragmatic process of innovation now takes on
the character of technological implementation.
Other than diﬀerent R&D productivities (λ0 instead of λ) and diﬀerent skill requirements and
institutional requirements, we assume that R&D and implementation work exactly the same way.
In particular, both involve an element of technology transfer because whichever method is used to
make an innovation, the innovation consists of a new intermediate product embodying the leading
edge technology parameter Amax
. Thus in a country satisfying the minimal skill and institutional
t
requirements, the conversion from implementation to R&D can be represented simply by an increase
in the innovation-productivity parameter from λ to λ0 .
We assume throughout this section that all countries have in place the institutions necessary to
support modern R&D.27 Therefore any country for which Ft ≥ γAmax
, or equivalently:
t
at ≥

γ
f (b
e)

(19)

will be able to engage in R&D at date t. We suppose that this is the case for the leader in its initial
26
27

See Jacob (1997).
In section 4 below we examine what happens if some countries are missing these institutions at Þrst.

18

steady-state:
1
γ
>
1 + σ1
f (b
e)
Therefore the leader will go immediately to a new equilibrium, with an unchanged normalized
productivity a1 = 1/ (1 + σ1 ). According to Proposition 1 the growth rate of the global technology
frontier will increase to g0 > g.

3.1

Skill acquisition

Any other country satisfying (19) in the original steady state will also be able to use the method of
R&D. Indeed even if its normalized average productivity falls short of satisfying (19) it might pay
people to acquire enough extra skills so that they can engage in R&D rather than implementation.
SpeciÞcally, deÞne
σc (γ/at ) ≡ max {f (e) (1 − e) |f (e) ≥ γ/at }
and note that by construction:
σc (γ/at ) ≤ σ
b with equality if and only if f (b
e) ≥ γ/at .

(20)

A worker that chooses to supply skills to R&D will supply the amount σc (γ/at ) per unit of time.
Suppose that workers are oﬀered a price wt0 per unit for supplying their skills to R&D or wt
for supplying them elsewhere (to implementation or manufacturing). They will all choose to work
in R&D if they can make strictly more income there than elsewhere; i.e. if wt0 σ c (γ/at ) > wt σ
b. In
equilibrium some skills must be supplied to manufacturing. Therefore:

wt0 /wt ≤ σ
b/σ c (γ/at ) with strict equality if R&D occurs.

(21)

wt0 /wt ≥ 1 if R&D occurs.

(22)

Since anyone who can work in R&D can also work elsewhere:

3.2

R&D or implementation?

The research arbitrage equation (5) for implementation must now be replaced by the Kuhn-Tucker
inequality:
(1 − φ) ζwtβ ≥ λVt /Amax
with strict equality if implementation occurs
t
while the research arbitrage equation for R&D is:
¡ ¢β
.
(1 − φ) ζ wt0 = λ0 Vt /Amax
t
19

(23)

Therefore:
¡
¢1/β
wt0 /wt ≤ λ0 /λ
with strict equality if implementation occurs.

(24)

It follows that there are three distinct regions for the historically given value of at :
e) then no one needs to undertake any extra schooling to be able to work in R&D,
1. If at ≥ γ/f (b
so they will continue to supply the unconstrained income-maximizing ßow of productivityadjusted skills σ
b to the market. Only R&D will take place, because λ0 > λ implies that the

payoﬀ to R&D is strictly higher than the payoﬀ to implementation. There will be a single
price of skills in the economy, satisfying the research arbitrage equation (23) for R&D.28

¡
¢1/β
2. If at < γ/f (b
e) and λ0 /λ
≥σ
b/σc (γ/at ) then only R&D will take place in equilibrium.29

Workers who upgrade their skills levels to γAmax
will earn a skill premium that just compent
sates them for the extra time spent in education. The price of skills in R&D will be given by
the research arbitrage equation (23), while the price of skills in manufacturing will be given
by the arbitrage condition:
wt =

σc (γ/at ) 0
wt
σ
b

(25)

that makes workers indiﬀerent between acquiring the unconstrained income-maximizing skill
level At f (b
e) and working in manufacturing or acquiring the minimal skill level γAmax
to work
t
in R&D.
¡
¢1/β
3. If at < γ/f (b
e) and λ0 /λ
<σ
b/σc (γ/at ) then only implementation will occur in equilib-

rium, there will be a single price wt for skills in the economy, given by the research arbitrage

equation (5), and everyone will continue to supply the unconstrained income-maximizing ßow

of productivity-adjusted skills σ
b to the market. No one will Þnd it worthwhile spending time
to upgrade skills to the minimum level needed for R&D because the increase in the rela¡
¢1/β
tive price (wt0 /wt ) = λ0 /λ
would not compensate for the reduction in available supply

σc (γ/at ) /b
σ implied by the extra time in education.

28
More formally, in this case (20) and (21) imply that wt0 ≤ wt . This, together with (24) and the fact that λ0 > λ
imply that no implemenation can occur. Therefore all technology investment takes the form of innovation, and (22)
implies that wt0 = wt .
29
In the borderline case where the weak inequality holds with strict equality then the equilibrium mix between
implementation and R&D is indeterminate, but it turns out that the overall rate of innovation at that point is
independent of the mix. So with no eﬀect on the system dynamics to be described below, we assume that even in
this borderline case there will be no implementation, just R&D.

20

3.3

The dynamics of a follower country

In region 3 a country will continue to behave after the introduction of modern R&D just the same
way as it did before, but now facing a higher value of the global growth rate. The country’s
dynamics will continue to be governed by (11) and (12), with gt equal to g0 instead of g.
In region 1 a country will behave as before, but with two changes. Not only will it face the
higher global growth rate, but also the price of skills will now obey the new research arbitrage
equation (23) instead of (5). Since the only diﬀerence between these equations is the value of λ,
the country’s dynamics in this region will be the same as in region 3 but with λ replaced by λ0 .
In region 2 the change goes beyond a change in one or two parameters because in this region, as
we saw in the preceding section, there will be a segmented labor market. Let χt be the equilibrium
fraction of people that choose to work in manufacturing. Then the supply of skills to manufacturing
will be χt At σ
b. In equilibrium this supply must equal the demand for skills in manufacturing:
b = se (ω t ) .
χt σ

Thus the supply of skills to R&D from the remaining fraction 1 − χt will be:
µ
¶
σ
b − se (ωt )
R
At σc (γ/at ) .
St = (1 − χt ) At σc (γ/at ) =
σ
b
By analogy to (6) the overall rate of innovation will be:

¡ ¢1−β R max
ξSt /At .
µt = λ0 wt0

Putting these results together with (25) we have:
µt =

µ

σc (γ/at )
σ
b

¶β

λ0 ψ1−β µ
e (ωt ) at .

Thus the country’s dynamics obey:
"
#
¶
µ
σc (γ/at ) β 0 1−β
dat
0
= at (1 − at )
λψ
µ
e (ω t ) − g
dt
σ
b
· ¸"
µ
¶
¶#
µ
ρ
dω t
ωt
σc (γ/at ) β 0 1−β
π
e (ω t )
=
+
at µ
λψ
e (ω t ) −
dt
β
1−τ
σ
b
1−φ
which is the same as in region 1 except for the additional term

21

³

´
σc (γ/at ) β
σ
b

in both equations.

(26)
(27)

3.4

The eﬀects of modern R&D on a follower country

The three regions can be pieced together continuously as shown in Figure 3. The border between
regions 1 and 2 is deÞned by the condition that (19) hold with equality, whereas the border between
regions 2 and 3 is deÞned by the condition that:
¡ 0 ¢1/β
=σ
b/σc (γ/a) .
λ /λ

As before, the ωú = 0 locus is everywhere downward sloping.30 The aú = 0 locus is upward sloping
in regions 1 and 3 but not necessarily in region 2. Thus there is a possibility of multiple steady
states, as depicted in Figure 3, where one implementation steady state and two R&D steady states
exist, all of them with a∗ > 0. Intuitively, a country with low normalized productivity will be unable
to access modern R&D, which will keep its normalized productivity from rising, while one with high
normalized productivity can access the means of keeping it high. Generically, the odd numbered
steady states are well-behaved saddle points and the even numbered ones are unreachable sources.
There are also two possible kinds of non-R&D steady states. In Figure 3 there is an “implementation” steady state with a∗ > 0 and a growth rate equal to the world rate g. Figure 4 shows a case
where there is a unique “stagnation” steady-state, with a∗ = 0, as in Figure 2b above, and a growth
rate strictly less than g. In both of these non-R&D steady states all technology investment takes
the form of implementation rather than R&D. The only diﬀerence between the implementation
steady state and the stagnation steady state is whether or not the countries absorptive capacity
remains strong enough to keep up with the technological frontier.
How the introduction of modern R&D aﬀects a country’s growth path depends on which region
it was in to begin with. From Figure 3 it is clear that if a country’s initial steady state is in region 1,
and there is a steady state in region 1 after the introduction of modern R&D, then the system must
converge to that new steady state, where all technology investment takes the form of R&D. The
qualitative change in such a country’s steady-state normalized productivity a∗ can be analyzed by
changing g to g0 and λ to λ0 in the steady-state equations (17) and (18). As Proposition 2 indicates,
the increase in g tends to reduce a∗ while the increase in λ tends to raise it, so the overall eﬀect on
a∗ is ambiguous. (In region 1, the increase in g shifts the aú = 0 locus to the left without altering
the ωú = 0 locus, while the increase in λ shifts both loci to the right.) In the case of the leader
country, as we have seen, the overall eﬀect is to leave a∗ unchanged. By continuity there will be
almost no eﬀect on a∗ in a country whose parameter values are close to those of the leader.
30

To see that it is downward-sloping in regime 2, note that, by construction, the function σc in equation (27) is
non-increasing.

22

At the other extreme, a country that starts with its initial steady state in region 3 must converge
to a new steady-state in region 3, where all R&D takes the form of implementation. This is because
in region 3 the eﬀect of introducing modern R&D is to shift the aú = 0 curve to the left, with no
change in the ωú = 0 locus. Thus if the initial steady state is in region 3 then there is also a
new steady state in region 3, with smaller a∗ and larger ω ∗ . As Figure 5 indicates, this can be
an interior equilibrium, as in Figure 2a above, where the country continues to grow at the same
rate g 0 as the leader country. But if the economy starts with too small a normalized productivity,
and the increase in g is large enough, then the aú = 0 locus will shift by so much that it no longer
has an interior intersection with the ωú = 0 locus, and the new steady state will be a degenerate
equilibrium with a∗ = 0 and a growth rate strictly less than g0 , as discussed earlier in section 2.6
and illustrated in Figure 2b.
Thus even though all countries are assumed to have started in the same interior steady-state
equilibrium, growing at the common rate g, the rise in world growth instigated by the introduction
of modern R&D will create three groups, in three distinct steady-state equilibria, as illustrated in
Figure 1 above.31 More formally:
Proposition 3 Following the introduction of modern R&D there are three diﬀerent steady states
that a country can converge to:
A) R&D (region 1 or 2): All technology investment takes the form of R&D. The country grows
at the same rate g 0 as the leader. Its normalized productivity a∗ can be greater or less than in
the original steady state. The leader country converges to such a steady state, with an unchanged
normalized productivity a∗1 = 1/ (1 + σ 1 ) .
B) Implementation (region 3, interior): All technology investment takes the form of implementation. The country grows at the same rate g 0 as the leader. Its normalized productivity a∗ is
non-negative but the steady-state productivity gap a∗1 /a∗ between it and the leader country is larger
than before.
C) Stagnation (region 3, corner): All technology investment takes the form of implementation.
The country grows at a rate strictly less than g0 . The productivity gap between it and the leader
country rises without bound.
The three groups referred to in Proposition 3 are deÞned in terms of their average productivity
31

If we had begun with two groups (by assuming that initially there were some countries already in the stagnation
steady state shown in Figure 2b above) then the introduction of modern R&D would still create the same three new
groups. Moreover, the gap between the leader and the stagnating countries would start to widen even faster than
before.

23

parameters At . In terms of income per person (as deÞned by equation (13) above) those countries
in the stagnation group C will have an asymptotic growth rate less than that of the leader, and
those in the implementation group B will have the same asymptotic growth rate as the leader. It
is not automatic however that the steady-state proportional income gap:
Y
ωb
σ + ψb
π (ω)
= (1 + σ) a
Y1
ω1 σ
b + ψ1π
b (ω 1 )

necessarily rises between a country in group B and the leader, because the respective eﬃciencyadjusted skill prices ω and ω1 in the two countries will rise, which could conceivably oﬀset the fall in
a. However, it is easy to show that if the coeﬃcient β on skills in the innovation technology is close
enough to zero (it is exactly zero in Howitt (2000)) then neither ω nor ω1 will be aﬀected much by
the change, so the fall in a implies that this income gap will widen, just like the productivity gap.

3.5

Sorting into convergence groups

One advantage of this model is that not only does it explain how diﬀerent convergence groups might
form but it helps to identify which countries will belong to which group. The discussion immediately
preceding Proposition 3, taken together with Proposition 2, suggests that those countries with
relatively large values ψ and φ and low values of τ will be most likely to be in group A, because
those are most likely to have initial and Þnal steady states in region 1. Likewise, among those
countries whose initial steady state was in region 3 and who therefore will end up in group B or
group C, those with the lowest values of ψ and φ and the highest values of τ will be those who join
group C.
More precisely, take any country and consider what would have happened if its innovationsubsidy rate φ had been larger than it was, both before and after the introduction of modern R&D.
In terms of the phase diagram illustrated in Figures 3 and 4, the eﬀect would have been to shift
the ωú = 0 locus up for all values of a. Hence all the reachable steady states with a > 0 would have
been shifted to the right, and the values of a for which aú > 0 on the equilibrium saddle path would
have been strictly augmented. As a result, starting from any given initial position, the country’s
new steady-state value of a would have been at least as large as it is. Moreover, by Proposition 2,
the country’s initial value (the pre-modern steady-state value) of a would have been larger than it
is, which by itself would also have resulted in at least as large a new steady-state value.
Thus ceteris paribus, the larger is φ the larger (weakly) will be a country’s new steady-state
value of a. It follows that if two countries diﬀer only in their values of φ and the country with the
lower value joins the leading convergence group A then so does the other one; the former must have
24

a new steady state in region 1 or 2 and hence so must the latter. Likewise if the country with the
higher value stagnates, joining group C with a → 0, then so must the other.
The same reasoning is valid if for an increase in φ we substitute an increase in the eﬃciency
parameter ψ or a decrease in the saving tax rate τ , the only diﬀerence being that in the case of
an increase in ψ not only does the ωú = 0 locus shift up, the aú = 0 locus also shifts down. The
reasoning is also valid if we substitute for an increase in φ any combination of these three qualitative
parameter changes. Thus we have:
Proposition 4 Consider any two countries belonging to diﬀerent convergence groups.
1) If one country is converging to an R&D steady state (group A) then:
(a) its eﬃciency parameter ψ is larger than the other’s,
(b) its innovation-subsidy rate φ is larger than the other’s, or
(a) its saving-tax rate τ is smaller than the other’s.
2) If one country is converging to a stagnation steady state (group C) then:
(a) its eﬃciency parameter ψ is smaller than the other’s,
(b) its innovation-subsidy rate φ is smaller than the other’s, or
(a) its saving-tax rate τ is larger than the other’s.
The importance of Proposition 4 is not only that it helps us to identify which country will
belong to which group. In combination with Proposition 2 it also implies that the countries that
converge to an R&D steady state (group A) will tend to be those whose relative productivity was
among the highest to begin with, and that those who converge to stagnation (group C) will tend
to be those whose relative productivity was among the lowest to begin with. This is important
because if there were a substantial cross-over of groups then the gap between the leader and those
in the stagnation group could actually narrow for some time before eventually widening, so the
model would not imply divergence, just multiple steady states.
In fact, most evidence suggests that there is a large positive correlation across countries in
parameters that aﬀect growth positively. Indeed this is one of the main obstacles to drawing
inferences from cross-country growth regressions. If countries were ranked the same in terms of
all three of the parameters then there would be no crossover at all following the introduction of
modern R&D:

25

Corollary to Proposition 4 If the ranking of countries by eﬃciency parameters ψ is the same
as the ranking by innovation-subsidy rates φ, and the inverse of the ranking by saving-tax rates τ ,
then a country that is converging to an R&D steady state (group A) started with a higher average
productivity than one that is not, and a country that is converging to stagnation (group C) started
with a lower average productivity than one that is not.
Intuitively, those countries with the greatest productivity to begin with will be those whose skills
will be suﬃciently advanced to use the new method of R&D, and who will therefore join group A.
Likewise those with the lowest productivity to begin with will be those in which absorptive capacity
is already so low that further erosion caused by an acceleration of the frontier will tip them into
joining group C, while those joining group B will tend to be those whose productivity was initially
in the middle of the distribution - - too low to use the new technique of R&D but high enough that
even after some erosion they will have enough absorptive capacity to keep up with the technological
frontier.

4

Window of opportunity for lagging economies

Suppose that some countries do not have in place the institutions to support modern R&D when
it is introduced. Then there may be only a Þnite period of time –a window of opportunity– for
the country to set up these institutions. After this, the erosion of its absorptive capacity induced
by technological advance in the leading country will trap the lagging country in implementation
or stagnation. This is illustrated in Figure 6, where we show a country whose parameter values
are identical to those of the leading country, and where we assume the existence of three distinct
equilibria as in Figure 3.
So long as the institutions supporting R&D are not put into place in this country, it will follow
a trajectory leading to the implementation steady state. Once R&D becomes possible, a new R&D
steady state appears, at the original level of normalized productivity 1/ (1 + σ1 ). If this happens
at time t0 , the country’s path will be identical to the leading country’s, and it will go immediately
to the new R&D steady state. As long as it happens before the country’s normalized productivity
has fallen below the critical value a deÞned by the new steady state in region 2 (as at at1 in
Figure 6) the decline will be reversed and the economy will go asymptotically to the same new
R&D steady state as the leading country. But if the new institutions are put into place after at has
descended below a (as at at2 in Figure 6), it will continue to follow a path to the new implementation
equilibrium. The example depicted in Figure 6 can be modiÞed so that the steady state in region

26

3 is an stagnation equilibrium as in Figure 2b, without changing the analysis. Thus we have our
“window of opportunity” result:
Proposition 5 An economy may have a Þnite time period during which it can achieve an R&D
steady state by establishing the institutions supporting R&D, and after which it will be trapped in
implementation or stagnation if has not yet established these institutions.

4.1

Present Day Windows of Opportunity

The history of the industrialization and development of several countries, amongst them Denmark,
Sweden, Italy, Japan, Korea, Singapore and Ireland has been characterized by periods of high,
sustained growth sometimes called miracle growth. Other countries, including Argentina, India,
Nigeria, Brazil and Mexico have experienced long periods of sustained economic growth but then
failed to reach the status of full development (see Ugo Pipitone, 1995 for a historical discussion of
the Þrst Þve and last four cases). These diﬀerent phenomena may result from technological windows
of opportunity that open up and then close at various times. We give an explanation of how this
might occur.
The leading edge technological level Amax
represents a mix of technologies. During the history of
t
technological growth there has been a sequence of dominant or even general purpose technologies,
such as the steam engine, electricity, trains, automobiles, telecommunication, plastics, chemical
technologies, information, etc. These have diﬀerent characteristic innovation productivities for
implementation and R&D and diﬀerent human capital requirement for R&D. Thus, the parameters
λ, λ0 and γ may shift over time, reßecting medium- to long-term changes in these productivities and
requirements as the dominant technologies change. For example, technologies requiring for their
implementation a higher level of skills for a larger proportion of the population in eﬀect require a
higher human capital threshold level.
What this means is that the critical values for the existence of a low-technology trap may
change. If implementation becomes relatively easier, the trap may disappear for countries with
better scientiÞc institutions and parameters for growth. To the extent that they increase the world
growth rate gt (of Amax
), however, their success may strengthen the implementation trap for other
t
countries, which will not experience the window of opportunity.
If a country is originally in region 3 (implementation) and opportunity appears to transit to
the higher equilibrium (either because scientiÞc institutions were put into place in time or because
changes in parameters led to the disappearance of the low technology trap), it will Þrst continue

27

implementing and then begin innovating, a well-known pattern in the case of, for example, the Asian
growth miracles. Bloom and Williamson (1998) show how growth in these countries coincided with
a demographic window of opportunity in which a lower dependency ratio increased the saving rate.
Our model provides a reason why not all countries reaching the demographic window of opportunity
will develop: they might not Þnd themselves in a position to reach the high technology steady state.
Similarly, the advent of a new technology for which implementation is more diﬃcult may push
some countries into stagnation, by making implementation unproÞtable. Alternatively, the exhaustion of the easy part of a new technology may close a transition window that may have been open,
by raising the threshold levels necessary for R&D. A whole set of countries could experience a
period of sustained growth followed by a period of low growth.
Although the competition of ideas is enough for miracles in some countries to diminish the
opportunity for miracles in others, trade in the products which are the subject of technological
advance probably strengthens this eﬀect, by discouraging production and innovation in less prepared
countries in precisely those technologies which more prepared countries are using to grow.
According to our model, the emergence of Asia, together with the arrival of the general purpose
information technologies, could be contributing factors for the lost decades of growth in Latin
America, and its consequent permanence in an implementation equilibrium, and for the permanence
of Africa in a stagnation equilibrium. Maloney (2002) has used this framework to compare the
development of Latin America with countries such as Australia, Sweden and Finland, Þnding that
deÞcient human capital accumulation determining technological capabilities may have played a role
in its failure to develop.

5

Conclusions

We model skill acquisition and technological dynamics when technology investment can take the
form of modern R&D or technological implementation. This dichotomy, kept alive by the ever larger
skill-level necessary for R&D, gives rise to three convergence clubs, characterized respectively by
R&D, implementation and stagnation. Applied to the origin of 20th Century growth, the model
explains the simultaneous emergence of large income inequalities between countries. It also implies
that after an initial widening of the distribution the most advanced countries (not just those that
perform leading-edge R&D) should converge to parallel growth paths, in line with the empirical
Þndings of the convergence literature. Technology transfer is powerful enough to bring about this
degree of convergence between the R&D and implementation clubs, but it is not powerful enough

28

to overcome the erosion of absorptive capacity causing divergence between the stagnation club and
others. Once R&D takes oﬀ, the erosion of absorptive capacity in laggard countries implies that
only a Þnite window of opportunity may exist for them to set up the scientiÞc institutional supports
of modern R&D, so as to join the leading countries in development.
It remains to incorporate physical capital accumulation into the analysis, and to see what
diﬀerence the degree of capital mobility makes. Our preliminary analysis suggests that the results
are robust to capital accumulation. It also suggests that capital mobility tends to amplify the
disadvantage of backwardness that is central to our analysis. That is, capital tends to move away
from technologically more backward areas and toward the frontier; through a scale eﬀect this
reduces the incentive to innovate in the laggard country, causing it to fall even further behind the
leader technologically.
The model is consistent with a highly demanding set of facts pertaining to the current distribution of income and factors of production among countries. It also is consistent with the persistence
of relative economic conditions since the colonial era. It explains why economic miracles are possible in modern-day windows of opportunity for development and also why whole sets of countries
may be simultaneously aﬄicted with prolonged periods of slow economic growth when technological
implementation becomes more diﬃcult.
Economic policy aimed at fostering growth should stress technological change and skill acquisition. Facilitating technological implementation, opening knowledge ßows, fostering knowledge
institutions and promoting human capital investment are key factors for increasing productivity.
Once good rates of technological implementation are achieved, well-targeted policies may make it
easier to identify and overcome speciÞc thresholds constituting obstacles for technological change,
thus dissipating low-technology traps. At an average rate of growth of 2%, only 33 countries lagged
less than 50 years behind the U.S. in 1995, while the bottom 73 countries in the World Bank data
base were more than a century behind. Perhaps the appropriate human capital and technological policies can produce not just parallel economic growth and poverty alleviation but economic
miracles.
However, once a country has missed its windows of opportunity, it faces a more diﬃcult task
than before, because creating the conditions for an R&D steady state to exist is no longer suﬃcient
for the steady state to be reached. At this point, a “big push” is needed to reverse the erosion
of absorptive capacity and join the leading convergence club. Whether or not a poor country is
capable of engineering the push on its own remains an important open question.

29

References
Abramovitz, Moses. “Catching Up, Forging Ahead, and Falling Behind.” Journal of Economic
History 46 (June 1986): 385-406.
Acemoglu, Daron, Philippe Aghion, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. “Distance to Frontier, Selection and
Economic Growth.” unpublished, MIT 2002.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson. “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation.” American Economic Review 91 (December 2001):
1369-1401.
Acemoglu, Daron, and Fabrizio Zilibotti. “Productivity Diﬀerences.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 (May 2001): 563-606.
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt. “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruction.” Econometrica, March 1992, 60 (2), pp. 323-51.
Aghion, Philippe and Peter Howitt. Endogenous growth theory. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998.
Arrow, Kenneth J. “ClassiÞcatory Notes on the Production and Transmission of Technological
Knowledge.” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 59 (May 1969): 29-35.
Azariadis and Drazen. “Threshold Externalities in Economic Development.” Quarterly Journal Of
Economics, May 1990, 5 (105), 501-526.
Barro, Robert J., and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. “Convergence.” Journal of Political Economy 100
(April 1992): 223-51.
Basu, Susanto, and David N. Weil. “Appropriate Technology and Growth.” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 113 (November 1998): 1025-54.
Baumol, William. “Productivity Growth, Convergence, and Welfare.” American Economics Review, December, 76, (1986): 1072-1085.
Becker, Gary and Robert J. Barro. “Fertility choice in a model of economic growth.” Econometrica,
1989, 76, 481-501.
Becker, Gary, Kevin Murphy, and Robert Tamura. “Human Capital, Fertility, and Economic
Growth.” Journal of Political Economy, October 1990, 95 (5).
Benabou, Roland. “Equity and Eﬃciency in human capital investment: the local connection.”
Review of Economic Studies, 1996.
Benhabib, Jess, and Mark M. Spiegel. “The Role of Human Capital Economic Development:
Evidence from Cross-Country Data.” Journal of Monetary Economics 34 (October 1994): 14373.
30

Bloom, David, and Williamson, J. “Demographic Transitions and Economic Miracles in Emerging
Asia,” World Bank Economic Review, 1998 , 12(3): 419-55.
Caselli, F., Esquivel, G. and Lefort, F. “Reopening the Convergence Debate: A New Look at CrossCountry Growth Empirics,” Journal of Economic Growth, September 1996, 1 (3), 363-389.
Cohen, Wesley M., and Daniel A. Levinthal. “Innovation and Learning: The Two Faces of R&D.”
Economic Journal 99 (September 1989): 569-96.
Cohen, Wesley M., and Daniel A. Levinthal. “Absorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on Learning
and Innovation.” Administrative Science Quarterly 35 (March 1990): 128-52.
Crosby, Alfred. Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe 900-1900. Cambridge
University Press, New York, NY, 1986.
Durlauf, Steven N. “Nonergodic economic growth.” Review of Economic Studies, 1993, 60, 349-367.
Durlauf, Steven N. “A theory of persistent income inequality.” Journal of Economic Growth, 1996,
1, 75-94.
Durlauf, Steven N., and Paul A. Johnson. “Multiple Regimes and Cross-Country Growth Behavior.” Journal of Applied Econometrics 10 (Oct.-Dec. 1995): 365-84.
Easterly, William, and Ross Levine. “It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and Growth
Models.” World Bank Economic Review 15 (2001): 177- 219.
Evans, Paul. “Using Cross-Country Variances to Evaluate Growth Theories.” Journal of Economic
Dynamics and Control 20 (June-July 1996): 1027-49.
Evenson, Robert E., and Larry E. Westphal. “Technological Change and Technology Strategy.” In
Handbook of Development Economics, edited by T. N. Srinivasan and Jere Behrman, 2209-99.
Handbooks in Economics, v.9. Vol. 3A. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1995.
Feyrer, James. “Convergence by Parts”, November 2001, mimeo.
Galor, Oded. “Convergence? Inferences from Theoretical Models.” Economic Journal 106 (July
1996): 1056-69.
Galor, Oded, and D. Tsiddon. “The distribution of human capital and economic growth.” Journal
of Economic Growth, March 1997, pp. 93-124.
Galor, Oded, and David Weil. “The Gender Gap, Fertility, and Growth.” American Economic
Review, June 1996.
Galor, Oded, and J. Zeira. “Income Distribution and Macroeconomics.” Review of Economic
Studies, 1993, pp. 35-53.
Gerschenkron, Alexander. “Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective.” In The Progress of

31

Underdeveloped Areas, edited by Bert F. Hoselitz. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1952.
Griﬃth, Rachel, Stephen Redding, and John Van Reenen. “Mapping the Two Faces of R&D:
Productivity Growth in a Panel of OECD Industries.” unpublished, August 2001.
Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones. “Why Do Some Countries Produce so Much More Output per
Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February 1999, 114 (1), pp. 83-116.
Howitt, Peter. “Endogenous Growth and Cross-Country Income Diﬀerences.” American Economic
Review 90 (September 2000): 829-46.
Howitt, Peter and Philippe Aghion. “Capital Accumulation and Innovation as Complementary
Factors in Long-Run Growth.” Journal of Economic Growth, June 1998, 3 (2), pp. 111-130.
Islam, Nazrul. “Growth Empirics: A Panel Data Approach.” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
November 1995, 110 (4), pp. 1127-70.
Klenow, Peter J. and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth Economics:
Has it Gone too Far?” in Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, eds., NBER macroeconomics
annual1997. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1997, pp. 73-103.
Jacob, Margaret C. ScientiÞc Culture and the Making of the Industrial West. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1997.
Knight, Malcolm; Loayza, Norman; Villanueva, Delano. “Testing the Neoclassical Theory of Economic Growth: A Panel Data Approach,” IMF Staﬀ Papers, September 1993, 40 (3), 512-41.
Kremer, Michael, Alexei Onatski, and James Stock. “Searching for Prosperity.” Carnegie-Rochester
Conference Series on Public Policy 55 (2001): 275- 303.
Maddison, Angus. The World Economy: A Millennial Perspective. Development Centre Studies.
Paris: OECD, 2001.
Maloney, W.F. “Technology, Growth and Resource Abundance Observations from Latin America”,
World Bank, mimeo, 2002.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David N. Weil. “A Contribution to the Empirics of
Economic Growth.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (May 1992): 407-37.
Mayer, D. “Convergence Clubs in Cross-Country Life Expectancy Dynamics.” Discussion Paper No.
2001/134, World Institute for Development Economics Research, United Nations University,
2001.
Mayer, D. “Divergence Today.” Documento de Trabajo del CIDE, División de Economía, forthcoming, 2002
Mowery, David C., and Nathan Rosenberg. Paths of Innovation: Technological Change in 20th-

32

Century America. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1998.
Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny. “Industrialization and the Big Push.”
Journal of Political Economy 97 (October 1989): 1003-26.
Nelson, Richard, and Edmund S. Phelps. “Investment in Humans, Technological Diﬀusion, and
Economic Growth.” American Economic Review 56 (March 1966): 69-75.
Parente, Stephen L., and Edward C. Prescott. “Technology Adoption and Growth.” Journal of
Political Economy 102 (April 1994): 298-321.
Parente, Stephen L., and Edward C. Prescott. “Monopoly Rights: A Barrier to Riches.” American
Economic Review 89 (December 1999): 1216-33.
Pipitone, Ugo. “La salida del atraso: Un estudio histórico comparativo” Fondo de Cultura Económica,
México, segunda edición, 1995.
Prescott, Edward C. “Needed: A Theory of Total Factor Productivity.” International Economic
Review 39 (August 1998): 525-51.
Pritchett, Lant. “Divergence, Big-Time.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11 (Summer 1997):
3-17.
Quah, Danny T. “Empirical Cross-Section Dynamics in Economic Growth”, European Economic
Review, 1993, 37, pp.426-34.
Quah, Danny T. “Empirics for Growth and Distribution: StratiÞcation, Polarization, and Convergence Clubs”, Journal of Economic Growth,1997, 2, pp.27-59.
Rosenberg, Nathan, and L. E. Birdzell Jr. How the West Grew Rich: The Economic Transformation
of the Industrial World. : Basic Books, 1986.
Tsiddon, D. “A moral hazard trap to growth.” International Economic Growth, 1992, 33, 299-322.
Whitehead. Science and the Modern World. New York: Macmillan, 1931.
Wright, Gavin. “Can A Nation Learn? American Technology as a Network Phenomenon.” In
Learning by Doing in Markets, Firms, and Countries, edited by Naomi R. Lamoreaux, Daniel
M. G. Raﬀ, and Peter Temin, 295-326. Chicago: University of Chicago Press (for NBER), 1999.
Zilibotti, Fabrizio. “A Rostovian Model of Endogenous Growth and Underdevelopment Traps.”
European Economic Review 39 (October 1995): 1569-1602.

33

Productivity
A
B

C

0

t0

time
Figure 1

ω

a& = 0

ω*

ω& = 0

ω

0

a*
Figure 2a Interior steady state with growth rate g.

1

a

a& = 0

ω& = 0

a* = 0

a
Figure 2b Steady state with growth rate ∈(0,g)

Region 3:
Implementation

ω

Region 2:
R&D
with a wage
premium

Region 1:
R&D
with a uniform
wage

a& = 0

ω& = 0
0

a
Figure 3. Modern R&D. A case of multiple steady states.

Region 3:
Implementation

ω

Region 2:
R&D
with a wage
premium

Region 1:
R&D
with a uniform
wage

a& = 0

ω& = 0
0

a
Figure 4. A case of a unique “stagnation” steady state.

New steady
state
New a& = 0

ωa
ωb

Previous
a& = 0
Region 3

0

Previous
steady state

ω& = 0
a

Figure 5: A country that starts in Region 3 must go to an implementation steady state (as
illustrated) or to stagnation (if ωa < ωb).

ω

Region 3:
Implementation

Region 1:
R&D
with a uniform
wage

Region 2:
R&D
with a wage
premium

a& = 0

ω& = 0
•

0

at2

a

a t1

1
1+σ

Initial steady
state

1

a

Figure 6: Windows of opportunity. If the country adopts the institutions
supporting modern R&D before its normalized productivity falls below a, it
can reverse course and move to the R&D steady state. Otherwise it will
become trapped in the implementation (or stagnation) region 3.

