NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TROPICS, GERMS, AND CROPS:
HOW ENDOWMENTS INFLUENCE ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT

William Easterly
Ross Levine

Working Paper 9106
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9106

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002

We received helpful comments from Stan Engerman, an anonymous referee, and seminar participants at the
University of Minnesota and the Carnegie-Rochester Conference on Public Policy. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by William Easterly and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence Economic Development
William Easterly and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 9106
August 2002
JEL No. O1, N1, F43
ABSTRACT
Does economic development depend on geographic endowments like temperate instead of
tropical location, the ecological conditions shaping diseases, or an environment good for grains or certain
cash crops? Or do these endowments of tropics, germs, and crops affect economic development only
through institutions or policies? We test the endowment, institution, and policy views against each other
using cross country evidence. We find evidence that tropics, germs, and crops affect development through
institutions. We find no evidence that tropics, germs, and crops affect country incomes directly other than
through institutions, nor do we find any effect of policies on development once we control for institutions.

William Easterly
Center for Global Development,
Institute for International Economics,
and New York University
New York, NY 10012

Ross Levine
University of Minnesota
Carlson School of Management
321 19th Ave. South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

1
1. Introduction

Burundi today has a per capita income of $200, which is one-third lower than 4 decades
ago. Burundi is poor despite a lush agricultural endowment that has three growing seasons,
abundant rainfall, fertile volcanic soils, and suitability for cash crops such as coffee, tea, cotton,
bananas, palm oil, and rice.1
Burundi has other geographic endowments that place it at a disadvantage, however,
according to some stories of economic development summarized below. It is virtually on the
equator, is landlocked, is far from rich trading partners, and has a disease environment that has
left life expectancy today at only 47 years. During the colonial period, mortality among the
European settlers was a frightful 280 per 1000 per year. The Belgian colonialists thus did not
settle but exploited the colony through forced labor on coffee and other cash crop plantations and
compulsory food crop quotas.2 The Belgians ruled indirectly through Tutsi chiefs, to whom they
spuriously attributed “racial superiority” over the Hutu.3 Even the cash crops that could generate
high export revenue are thought to be adverse for political economy and institutional
development according to some studies.
Three Tutsi military dictators from the same commune in Bururi province have ruled
Burundi for 32 out of the 38 years since independence, which has been marred by massacres of
civilians, recurrent civil war, and as noted, economic decline.4 Institutions have disastrously
failed to protect the citizens’ lives or to establish any resemblance of the rule of law. Ndikumana
(1998) describes how the elite “privatized” the state and enforced their control through violence.
Nkurunziza and Ngaruko (2002) show how the rulers have systematically looted the economy,
using mechanisms such as state subsidies to public enterprises controlled by the rulers, severe
taxation of cash crops, lucrative civil service positions for the ruling clan (the mean government

2
wage puts the civil servant in the richest 6% of the economy), acquiring consumer goods at
controlled prices and reselling them on the black market, and acquiring foreign exchange at the
official rate and reselling it at the much higher black market rate.
Canada today has a per capita income 107 times higher than Burundi’s. Canada is rich
today despite being marginal for much of the colonial period. In the peace negotiations between
Britain and France following the Seven Years War in the 18th century (which Voltaire described
as “fighting over a few acres of snow”), the British seriously debated taking the island of
Guadeloupe instead of Canada as reparations for the war.5
Yet Canada has geographic endowments that some stories of economic development
argue give it advantages. It is far from the tropics, has a long border with a rich trading partner,
has access to the sea, and has a disease environment that gives it a life expectancy of 79 years.
During the colonial period, mortality among European settlers was only one-seventeenth of
Burundi’s. While Canada lacks lucrative cash crops like coffee, cotton, and tea, it is one of the
world’s premier grain producers – and some studies suggest grain endowments are better for
political economy and institutional development than tropical cash crops.
Canada has long been a democracy with the rule of law, has never had a civil war, and
has one of the world’s best ratings on freedom from corruption.6 Canada’s boring rulers have
perpetrated few of the egregious interventions in the economy seen in Burundi.
How much of Canadians’ 107-fold income advantage over Burundians is due to more favorable
geographic endowments? How much is due to better institutions? How much is due to better
policies? Do the alleged geographic advantages of Canada over Burundi directly affect income,
or do they work through institutions or policies?

3
The purpose of this research is to assess empirically different theories of how geography,
institutions, and policy influence economic development.
The geography/endowment hypothesis holds that environment directly influences the
quality of land, labor, and production technologies (Machiavelli, 1519; Montesquieu, 1750). For
example, compared to temperate climates, tropical environments tend to have poor crop yields,
more debilitating diseases, and endowments that cannot effectively employ production
technologies developed in more temperate zones (Kamarck, 1976; Diamond, 1997). Similarly,
particular geographical circumstances – whether a country is landlocked and therefore not open
to trade – will permanently limit the country’s ability to access a large economic market, hinder
its ability to exploit economies of scale, and therefore lower its production efficiency (Sachs and
Warner, 1995; 1997). Resource endowments like minerals or ecological conditions favoring cash
crops may also influence income. According to the geography hypothesis, the environment
shapes economic development directly by influencing the inputs into the production function and
the production function itself (i.e. certain endowments could make production technologically
more difficult).
The institution view holds that the environment’s main impact on economic development
runs through long-lasting institutions. For example, environments where crops are most
effectively produced using large plantations will quickly develop political and legal institutions
that protect the few landholders from the many peasants and may even feature slavery
(Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997; Sokoloff and Engerman, 2000). Even when agriculture recedes
from the economic spotlight, enduring institutions will continue to thwart competition and hence
economic development. Similarly, many countries’ institutions were shaped during colonization,
so that examining colonies is a natural experiment (Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001;

4
2002). European colonialists found different disease environments around the globe. In colonies
with inhospitable germs and climates, the colonial powers established extractive institutions, so
that a few colonialists could exploit natural resources. In colonies with hospitable climates and
germs, colonial powers established settler institutions. According to this view, the institutional
structures created by the colonialists in response to the environment endure even with the end of
colonialism. Thus, the institution view argues that the major impact of the environment on
economic development runs through its long-lasting impact on institutions.7 Technology in this
story is endogenous to the institutions that make adoption of better techniques of production
likely.
Finally, the policy view – which is really a collection of many different approaches -questions the importance of tropics, germs, and crops in shaping economic development today.
This view is embedded in the approach of multilateral development institutions. The policy view
holds that economic policies and institutions reflect current knowledge and political forces.
Thus, changes in either knowledge about which policies and institutions are best for development
or changes in political incentives will produce rapid changes in institutions and economic
policies. In this view, history does not play a large role – any adverse historical legacy can be
quickly reversed. According to the policy view, while tropical environments, disease, and
specific crops may have influenced production and institutions, understanding environmental
forces is not crucial to understanding economic development today.
The purpose of this research is to assess which of these three views of the role of the
environment in economic development enjoys the most empirical support. There may be overlap
and interactions among these theories of economic development. In motivating the analysis,
however, we highlight the distinctions.

5
2. Literature review
A. Geography/Endowment hypothesis
Some studies argue for direct effects of tropics, germs, and crops on development. Many
authors have noted the association between tropical location and underdevelopment, going at
least as far back as Montesquieu (1750). People long ago gave a racist interpretation to the
climate theory of underdevelopment, including Montesquieu, which helps explain why
economists have been reluctant to revive it:
You will find in the climates of the north, peoples with few vices, many virtues,
sincerity and truthfulness. Approach the south, you will think you are leaving
morality itself, the passions become more vivacious and multiply crimes... The
heat can be so excessive that the body is totally without force. The resignation
passes to the spirit and leads people to be without curiosity, nor the desire
for noble enterprise.8
Still guilt by association is not sufficient reason to discard the tropics hypothesis, or to
ignore the strong correlation between latitude and income. Sachs and Warner (1995, 1997)
suggest that tropical location, landlocked location, and commodity dependence directly inhibit
development or growth. Bloom and Sachs (1998) point to Africa’s tropical location as a large
hindrance to development. Bloom and Sachs (1998) and Sachs (2001) argue that tropical location
leads to underdevelopment through mechanisms such as (1) the fragility and low fertility of
tropical soils, (2) high prevalence of crop pests and parasites, (3) excessive plant respiration and
lower rate of net photosynthesis, (4) high evaporation and unstable supply of water, (5) lack of a
dry season, cold temperatures, or long enough summer days for temperate grain crops, 9 (6)
ecological conditions favoring infectious diseases for humans, (7) lack of coal deposits, and (8)
high transport costs.
Landes (1998, p.5) says the tropics inhibit work: “few manage to work at full capacity
when hot and wet.” He quotes a Third World diplomat as saying “in countries like India,

6
Pakistan, Indonesia, Nigeria, and Ghana I have always felt enervated by the slightest physical or
mental exertion, whereas in the UK, France, Germany, or the US I have always felt reinforced
and stimulated by the temperate climate” (p. 15). A related idea with an ancient lineage is that
it’s easy to gather food crops in the tropics (the opposite of the Bloom and Sachs (1988) idea),
which reduces the need to work hard and produce: “fertile countries … are apt to making men
idle and unable to exercise any virtu”(Machiavelli 1519). 10
Diamond (1997) doesn’t stress tropics, but instead suggests that germs and crops directly
affected the technological development of societies in the very long run. First, some peoples
developed some resistance to germs like smallpox and measles that they got from their farm
animals (like Europe), while other peoples lacked farm animals and did not develop this
resistance, with catastrophic results once Europeans arrived (the Americas after Columbus, later
the Pacific islands). Draft animals also conveyed a direct productivity advantage (Eurasia), while
other regions suffered technological disadvantages from the lack of draft animals (Africa, where
germs carried by tsetse flies restricted the distribution of cattle). Second, some regions happened
to have wild plant species that lent themselves to domesticated high-yielding food crops (or
importantly, were on the same landmass and latitude as someone else who developed the crop),
while others had much less promising plant species. Olsson and Hibbs (2000) point out that of
the 56 heaviest-seeded wild grasses on earth, 33 occurred naturally in western Eurasia, while
only 4 grew in sub-Saharan Africa, and only 2 grew in South America. Again, this seems
contrary to the traditional idea that the tropics are naturally abundant in food, but tropical crops
are mainly not grains -- and the Diamond view argues grains are key. Regions with a more
promising endowment of grain species and that developed a resistance to germs, in the Diamond
story, developed a technological lead that was never overcome.

7
B. Institutions hypothesis
Other studies trace the effect of tropics, germs, and crops through institutions. Hall and
Jones (1999) are one example of the “tropics” view of institutions. They use institutional quality
as one component of their “social infrastructure” (which explains productivity), with distance
from the equator (along with European language) as instruments.11 Their reasoning is that
Western Europeans have historically been associated with high quality institutions, and Western
Europeans settled in climates similar to Western Europe. Kaufmann et al. (1999) also use this
reasoning by using percent speaking English and percent speaking a European language as
instruments for their institutional variables, getting a strong effect on per capita income. Hall and
Jones’ other component of social infrastructure reflects government policy -- openness as
measured by Sachs and Warner (1995) – which is also related to Western European influence.
Note that Hall and Jones specify institutions and government policy as perfect substitutes.
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) (AJR) also suggest institutional quality as a
fundamental determinant of economic development, but they have a “germs” theory of
institutions. AJR base their theory on three premises. First, AJR note that Europeans adopted
different types of colonization strategies. At one end of the spectrum, the Europeans settled and
created institutions to support private property and check the power of the State. These “settler
colonies” include the United States, Australia, and New Zealand. At the other end of the
spectrum, Europeans did not aim to settle and instead sought to extract as much from the colony
as possible. In these “extractive states,” Europeans did not create institutions to support private
property rights; rather, they established institutions that empowered the elite to extract gold,
silver, cash crops, etc. (e.g., Congo, Burundi, Ivory Coast, Ghana, Bolivia, Mexico, Peru).

8
Although AJR don’t emphasize it, slavery was a way for Europeans to capture a labor force for
extractive states, such as in the Caribbean and Brazil.
The second component of AJR’s theory holds that the type of colonization strategy was
heavily influenced by the feasibility of settlement. In areas where “germs” created high
mortality among potential settlers, Europeans tended to create extractive states. In areas where
“germs” favored settlement, Europeans tended to form settler colonies. For instance, AJR note
that the Pilgrims decided to settle in the American colonies instead of Guyana partially because
of the high mortality rates in Guyana (similarly, Sokoloff and Engerman (2000) note that a
Puritan colony on Providence Island off the coast of Nicaragua did not last long). Moreover,
Curtin (1964, 1989, 1998) documents that the European press published colonial mortality rates
widely, so that potential settlers had information about colonial “germs.” Thus, according to the
endowment theory, the disease environment shaped colonization strategy and the types of
institutions established by Europeans colonizers.
The final piece of the AJR theory of institutional development stresses that the
institutions created by European colonizers endured after independence. As we discuss below in
greater detail, post-independent regimes tended to resemble pre-independent regimes. Settler
colonies tended to produce post-colonial governments that were more democratic and more
devoted to defending private property rights than extractive colonies. In contrast, since
extractive colonies had already constructed institutions for effectively extracting resources, the
post-colonial elite frequently assumed power and readily exploited the pre-existing extractive
institutions, sometimes making them even more extractive. According to the endowment theory,
differences in endowments shaped initial institutions and these initial institutions have had longlasting repercussions on private property rights protection and other institutions.

9
In a subsequent paper, Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2002) provide further
evidence that it is institutions rather than tropics per se that matters. They point out that among
colonized regions of the world, societies with higher urbanization or population density in 1500
have worse institutions and lower income today. Since urbanization and population density are a
good proxy for income, this suggests a reversal in income ranking between 1500 and today. The
tropics hypothesis would predict persistence in income ranking, since latitude doesn’t change.
AJR (2002) argue that it was the introduction of extractive institutions in high urbanization
places (which turned out to be places with dangerous “germs”), contrasted with the introduction
of “settler institutions” in low urbanization places (which were places with less dangerous
“germs”), that explains the reversal in incomes.
The “crops” hypothesis is due to Engerman and Sokoloff (1997) and Sokoloff and
Engerman (2000) (henceforth ES). ES argue that the land endowments of Latin America lent
themselves to commodities featuring economies of scale and/or the use of slave and indigenous
labor (sugar cane, rice, silver) and thus were historically associated with power concentrated in
the hands of the plantation and mining elite. In contrast, the endowments of North America lent
themselves to commodities grown on family farms (wheat, maize) and thus promoted the growth
of a large middle class in which power was widely distributed.12
Once power was concentrated, the elite in Latin America created institutions that
preserved their hegemony, like a narrow franchise for voting, restricted distribution of public
lands and mineral rights, and low access to schooling. In countries like Mexico, Chile, and Peru
up through the early 20th century, land was redistributed away from indigenous populations
towards a small group of landowners. In Mexico in 1910, 2.4 percent of household heads owned
land (compared to about 75 percent of farmers in the US around the same time).13 The favoritism

10
towards the elite also showed up in Latin American laws regulating establishment of
corporations, financial institutions, patents, and industrial policies. Grants of new charters for
banks and corporations were controlled in favor of insiders in Latin America. Patent fees in the
late 19th century in Argentina, Brazil, British Guiana (today’s Guyana), Mexico, Peru, Uruguay,
and Venezuela were over $400 (Khan and Sokoloff, 2002), which is between 2.5 and 9.5 times
their annual per capita incomes in contemporaneous dollars.
In contrast, North America above the Rio Grande enjoyed a larger middle class with a
less powerful elite so that the United States and Canada created more open, egalitarian
institutions. For instance, these regions adopted earlier a broad franchise for voting, equal
protection before the law, widespread distribution of public lands and mineral rights, cheap
patent fees ($35 in US in the late 19th century), relatively easy entry for new banks and
corporations, and a big government push on schooling.14 The work of ES follows a long history
literature that postulates domination by the elite owners of encomiendas (land grants for
plantations and mines from the crown, accompanied by feudal rights over the indigenous
population) as the “original sin” of Latin American underdevelopment (Chasteen, 2000). 15
ES suggest that the elite in Latin America opposed democracy and other institutions
promoting equality before the law because they were afraid of the poor majority gaining power.
The elite feared in particular that the majority would use power to redistribute income and rents
away from the elite towards the majority. ES note that even when Latin American nations were
nominal democracies, they imposed literacy or wealth requirements for voting that sharply
restricted the franchise well into the 20th century. Through 1940, the US and Canada had
proportions of the population voting that were 5 to 10 times higher than Bolivia, Brazil, Chile,
and Ecuador.

11
Like AJR, ES note that European migration was much larger to North America than to
tropical Latin America. They attribute the difference in part to colonial institutions that
discouraged European immigration in Latin America (because the elite wanted to preserve their
exclusive position), but encouraged it in North America (where abundant land for family farms
made new immigrants less threatening). In short, the ES story goes from particular crop
endowments to the creation of a privileged elite, who in turn created institutions restricting
opportunities to the elite; other crop endowments led to diffuse distribution of power, which
created institutions giving fairly equal opportunities to all. According to ES, the institutional
restriction of opportunities in Latin America was not conducive to a development strategy, like
industrialization, that requires the participation of the majority of society; the generally inclusive
institutions in North America facilitated industrialization.
C. Policy hypothesis
The policy hypothesis is an amalgam of views that stress the importance of major
national policies and de-emphasize the importance of endowments in determining economic
development. The policy view holds that sound macroeconomic policies, openness to
international trade, and the absence of capital account controls will tend to foster long-run
economic success. This perspective is clearly imbedded in the policy recommendations adopted
by major multilateral institutions. Indeed, a motivating factor for creating international financial
institutions is to facilitate the adoption of sound national policies that foster economic
development. According to the policy hypothesis, while tropics, germs, and crops may influence
production technologies and institutions, the adoption of policies that foster low inflation,
openness to international trade, and unchecked international financial flows will promote
economic development.

12
Some economists have taken a notably sophisticated view of the role of policies in
economic development. Frankel and Romer (1999) and Frankel et al (1996) argue that
geography matters for economic development through government policy, specifically trade
openness. They argue that openness per se has a strong causal effect on per capita income,
instrumenting for openness with a country’s natural propensity to trade based on the gravity
model. In the gravity model, predicted trade between two countries goes up with the area and
population size of the trading partner and down with the distance between two countries. Trade
also goes down with higher population size of the home country (more trade takes place within
borders relative to across borders) and goes down if the country is landlocked.16 They construct
“natural openness” by summing up the predicted bilateral trade shares of each country with all
the other countries in the world. According this line of research, geography matters for many
poor developing countries because they are far from markets and thus less likely to realize
benefits from trade.

3. Data and Summary Statistics
To assess different theories regarding the potential mechanisms via which tropics, germs,
and crops influence economic development, we need measures of the underlying endowments
and indicators of the possible institutions via which endowments may influence output. We also
need measures of national policies since the policy hypothesis questions the importance natural
endowments and instead emphasizes the impact of macroeconomic policies on economic
development. This section defines the variables, presents simple graphs, and discusses the
sample of countries on which we focus our investigation. The next section presents the
regression results.

13
A. Endowments
We focus on four different measures of endowments, but experimented with others to
assess the robustness of the results.
SETTLER MORTALITY equals the logarithm of annualized deaths per thousand of
European solders (with each death replaced with a new soldier) during the early 19th century, for
72 former colonies. AJR (2001) compiles data. The raw data come from British, French, and
United States governments during the period 1817-1848 (Curtin, 1989). AJR (2001) argue that
these early 19th century mortality rates among soldiers are good proxies for long run mortality by
comparing it to (i) Curtin (1998), who examines similar data on soldier mortality from disease
during the second half of the nineteenth century and (ii) Gutierrez (1986), who uses Vatican
records to construct estimates of the mortality rates of bishops in Latin America from 1604 to
1876. As in AJR (2001), logarithms are used to diminish the impact of outliers.
Settler mortality exhibits both high cross-country variability and a strong positive
connection with the level of economic development. First, there is enormous variability in the
settler mortality data, ranging from 8.5 annualized deaths per thousand to well over a thousand
deaths per thousand in Gambia, Nigeria, and Mali (recall the rates are computed with
replacement). Second, Table 1 and Figure 1 document the negative relationship between settler
mortality and the logarithm of real per capita GDP in 1995. The correlation is significant at the
one-percent level and illustrates that higher levels of settler mortality are associated with lower
levels of economic development.17
We use settler mortality as an indicator of endowments to assess both the geography and
institutions hypotheses. The geography hypothesis stresses that the disease environment directly
influences productivity. Settler mortality measures the disease environment as European settlers

14
arrived and thereby provides an exogenous indicator of “germs.” The AJR (2001) institution
hypothesis, instead, stresses that (i) initial endowments shape the long-lasting institutions created
by European conquerors and (ii) these long lasting institution continue to shape economic
development today. Settler mortality provides information on whether initial endowments
tended to favor the creation of “extractive colonies” or “settler colonies” as defined above.
LATITUDE equals the absolute value of the latitude of the country. We take the data
from LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999). Countries that are closer to the
equator will tend to have a more tropical climate. Tropical endowments may directly hinder
production (Kamarck, 1976; Crosby, 1986; and Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger, 1998).
Alternatively, tropical endowments represent an inhospitable disease environment for
colonialists, which may foster “extractive” institutions according to the institutions hypothesis
(AJR, 2001; 2002).18
The data indicate a strong positive association between latitude and economic
development. As shown in Table 1 and Figure 2, countries with higher absolute latitude tend to
have higher levels of real per capita GDP.19 Thus, we use latitude as an objective measure of
“tropics.” We experimented with other measures of endowments. In particular the World Bank
global economic indicators produces a zero-one dummy variable of whether the country is
tropical. Using this measure does not change this paper’s conclusions.
CROPS/MINERALS
Our measures of “crops/minerals” are dummies for whether a country produced any of a
given set of leading commodities in 1998-1999. For example, the dummy WHEAT takes on the
value 1 if the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) records the country as producing any
wheat in 1998-1999 and 0 otherwise. We adopt the same convention for mining commodities,

15
with the data on production coming from the World Bureau of Metal Statistics. These dummies
are arguably exogenous since they reflect simply whether the land endowment makes it possible
to produce or mine a particular commodity. Harlan (1992, p. 53-60) discusses the botanical
mechanisms by which different ecological zones are compatible with some types of crops and
not with others. The quantity of wheat produced would endogenously respond to price
incentives, institutions, and other country characteristics, but whether ANY wheat is produced is
more likely to reflect exogenous characteristics like soil and climate. These characteristics have
thus remained constant over time, and hence reflect historical agricultural endowments, which in
turn reflects historical conditions for institutions.
We use the crops/minerals dummy variables to assess the ES hypothesis. ES argue that
certain commodities lent themselves to economies of scale and the use of slave labor. These
types of commodities naturally produced long-lasting extractive institutions that protect the elite
and stymie overall economic development. Other types of commodities, however, lent
themselves to production by middle class family farmers. These types of commodities, then,
tended to produce long-lasting inclusive institutions that foster economic growth. Thus, we use
commodity endowments to test the ES hypothesis.
The crops/minerals dummies are bananas, coffee, copper, maize, millet, oil, rice, rubber,
silver, sugarcane, wheat. We chose the particular list of commodities (from the more than a
hundred possible primary commodities in the data) based on our random priors as to what were
important commodities in many countries’ economic history, either because they were
mentioned by ES or because of our knowledge of country case studies. We did not do any
specification searches to choose the basket of commodities.20
LAND LOCKED

16
Landlocked is simply a dummy value that takes one the value 0 if the country has coastal
territory on the world’s oceans, and 1 otherwise. There are 40 landlocked countries in the world
according to this definition. In our sample of 72 countries (restricted by the SETTLER
MORTALITY variable), ten are landlocked.
NATURAL OPENNESS
We do not feature this endowment variable in our main regressions, but we substitute it
for landlocked as a robustness check (it will turn out the results below are unchanged). Frankel
and Romer (1999) define natural openness as the trade share built up from an equation predicting
bilateral trade with other countries. The bilateral trade equation that we use from Frankel and
Romer includes only purely geographic variables: the home country’s population and area, the
trading partner’s population and area, the distance between the two countries, whether the
countries share a common border, and whether the home country is landlocked. Natural openness
for the home country is the predicted trade share summing up all the predicted bilateral trade
with all potential trading partners. The most “naturally open” countries in the world are Belize,
Malta, and Luxembourg.21 The most “naturally closed” countries are China, the United States,
and Brazil.
B. Institutions
Since theories by AJR (2001) and Engerman and Sokoloff (1997) stress that endowments
influence economic development through their impact on institutional development, we need
measures of institutional development to assess these theories. We focus on Kaufman, Kraay,
and Zoido-Lobaton’s (1999) six measures of institutional development, but confirm our results
using a measure of private property rights protection (Holmes, Johnson, Kirkpatrick, 1997).

17
INSTITUTIONS INDEX equals the average of the six Kaufman, Kraay, and ZoidoLobaton (1999) measures of institutional development, where larger values signify better
institutional development. Although we focus the analysis on the Institutions Index, we confirm
the findings with each of these six underlying measures. These measures are based on an
unobserved components model that aggregates over 300 indicators, ranging from ratings by
country experts to survey results. The underlying measures are defined as follows:
(1) Voice and accountability – the extent to which citizens can choose their government,
political rights, civil liberties, and an independent press
(2) Political stability and absence of violence – a low likelihood that the government will be
overthrown by unconstitutional or violent means
(3) Government effectiveness – quality of public service delivery, competence of civil
servants, and the degree of politicization of the civil service.
(4) Light regulatory burden – relative absence of government controls on goods markets,
government interference in the banking system, excessive bureaucratic controls on
starting new businesses, or excessive regulation of private business and international
trade.
(5) Rule of law – protection of persons and property against violence or theft, independent
and effective judges, contract enforcement
(6) Freedom from graft – absence of the use of public power for private gain, corruption.
The method used to calculate the index gives it approximately a unit normal distribution,
with an increase always meaning better quality institutions.
The institutions index is positively associated with both economic development and
better endowments. First, many rich countries, such as Australia, Canada, New Zealand,

18
Singapore, and the United States, all have institutions index values of greater than 1.0, where the
sample mean is –0.1. Similarly, very poor countries, such as Angola, Burundi, Haiti, Niger,
Nigeria, and Rwanda, all have institutions index values of less than –1.0. More formally, Table
1 and Figure 3 demonstrate the strong positive relationship between the logarithm of GDP per
capita and the institutions index. Second, Table 1 and Figures 4 and 5 show that the institutions
index is positively correlated with latitude and negatively correlated with settler mortality. For
instance, Australia, Canada, New Zealand, Singapore, and the United States all of settler
mortality rates of less than 20 per thousand, and all have institutions indexes greater than 1.0.
Similarly, Angola, Burundi, Haiti, Niger, Nigeria, and Rwanda all have settler mortality rates of
greater than 100 per thousand, and all have institutions indexes of less than –1.
C. Macroeconomic Policies
To measure the macroeconomic environment, we use three indicators of macroeconomic
policies over the last four decades that capture the historical emphasis on openness to trade,
capital, and sound fiscal and monetary policies. We assess whether these macroeconomic policy
indicators explain cross-country variations in economic development after accounting for the
explanatory power of natural resource endowments.
OPENNESS measures the degree to which the country does or does not interfere with
foreign trade. More specifically, it is the fraction of years from 1960 to 1994 that Sachs and
Warner (1995) classified a country as “open”. They define a country as open if (i) nontariff
barriers cover less than 40 percent of trade, (ii) average tariff rates are less than 40 percent, (iii)
the black market premium was less than 20 percent during the 1970s and 1980s, (iv) the
economy is not socialist, and (v) the government does not control major exports through
marketing boards.

19
REAL EXCHANGE RATE OVERVALUATION measures the degree to which the
exchange rate is overvalued on average. We start with the index of overvaluation for 1976-85
that Dollar (1992) calculates. Dollar’s calculation was based on Summers-Heston purchasing
power parity comparisons, measuring the extent of general overvaluation controlling for the level
of income. He found this to be a significant determinant of growth rates (the more overvaluation,
the less growth). We convert this into an annual series by calculating the real exchange rate as
(Domestic CPI)/(Exchange Rate Domestic Currency per Dollar*US CPI). We benchmark this
series for each country by adjusting the level such that the average for 1976-85 equals Dollar’s
calculation. Our overvaluation measure is the average over 1960-1998. An increase in the index
signifies more overvaluation. The index ranges from a minimum of 69 to a maximum of 381,
where 100 signifies no under- or over-valuation. Extreme overvaluation usually reflects a
situation where the government has kept the official exchange rate constant in the face of high
domestic inflation.
INFLATION is the average of the logarithm of the inflation rate over the last four
decades. Inflation is meant to capture the consistency of monetary and fiscal policies in that
large, structural fiscal imbalances may lead to debt monetization and higher inflation rates.
Major international institutions focus on controlling inflation as a mechanism for boosting longrun economic activity.
D. Other Explanatory Variables
To assess the robustness of our results, we include several other potential determinants of
economic development.
ETHNOLINGUISTIC DIVERSITY measures the probability that two randomly selected
individuals from a country are from different ethnolinguistic groups. Some political economy

20
models predict that as ethnolinguistic diversity rises, countries tend to formulate weaker
institutions, weaker public services, and policies that close the economy to foreign interactions
(e.g., Alesina, Easterly, and Baqir, 1999). Recent studies show that in highly ethnically diverse
economies, the group that comes to power tends to implement policies that: (a) expropriate as
many resources as possible from the ethnic losers, (b) restrict the rights of other groups, and (c)
prohibit the growth of industries or sectors that threaten the ruling group (Alesina, Easterly, and
Baqir, 1999; Easterly and Levine, 1997). Thus, ethnolinguistic diversity may directly hinder
economic development and indirectly shape the underlying institutions and policies that
influence economic development.
RELIGION may also influence economic development. Many scholars argue that
religion shapes national views regarding property rights, competition, and the role of the State.
Putnam (1993, p. 107), for instance, contends that the Catholic Church fosters “vertical bonds of
authority” rather than “horizontal bonds of fellowship”. Similarly, Landes (1998) argues that
Catholic and Muslim countries have tended to develop xenophobic cultures and powerful
church/state bonds to maintain control, which hinders institutional and economic development.
To measure religious composition, we use the following variables: CATHOLIC, MUSLIM, and
OTHER RELIGION, which equal the fraction of the population that is Catholic, Muslim, or of
another (non-Protestant) religion. The Protestant share of the population is omitted (and therefore
captured in the regression constant). The data are from LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1999).
FRENCH LEGAL ORIGIN equals one if the country has a French civil law tradition and
zero if the country has a British common law tradition as defined by the origin of each country’s
Commercial/Company law (LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, 1999). As

21
discussed below, the sample only includes former colonies with either French or British legal
origins. We include the legal origin variable in our analyses because there is a growing body of
work which argues that the legal tradition implanted in countries by European colonists has
profoundly shaped national approaches to property rights protection and the degree to which the
State intervenes in the economy. In short, Hayek (1960), LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer,
and Vishny (1998), and Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2002b) argue that the French civil
law was developed to unify the legal system, prevent jurisprudence, and solidify State control of
the courts. In contrast, the British common law evolved to protect private property owners from
the Crown. Thus, this view contends that countries with a French legal origin will tend to place
greater emphasis on the rights of the State versus the rights of individuals. Beck, DemirgucKunt, and Levine (2002a) show that countries with French legal origins tend to have lower levels
of property rights protection than countries with British legal origins after controlling for many
other factors, including natural resource endowments. We include this variable in our analyses
to assess the robustness of our results.
E. Sample
We focus our analysis on a sample of 72 former colonies. Focusing on former colonies
represents a natural experiment for assessing how tropics, germs, and crops influenced
subsequent economic development (AJR, 2002). That is, colonizers arrived and faced different
environmental endowments. We examine whether these endowments directly influences
economic development, or whether these endowments shaped the formation of critical, longlasting institutions that form the foundation of economic development. Furthermore, we have
data on settler mortality only for this sample of 72 former colonies, and as shown graphically

22
above, settler mortality is an informative indicator of future economic and institutional
development.
4. Regression Results
This section evaluates the following four questions. First, do endowments explain crosscountry variations in economic development? Second, do endowments explain cross-country
variations in institutional development? If endowments do not explain economic development,
then there is no support for the geography hypothesis. If endowments do not explain institutional
development, then there is no support for the institutions hypothesis. In fact, we find that
endowments explain both economic development and institutional development. Thus, we
proceed to the next two questions. Third, do endowments explain cross-country variations in
economic development beyond their ability to explain cross-country variations in institutions? If
the answer is no, then this provides evidence for the institutions hypothesis and against the
geography hypothesis. If, however, endowments explain economic development beyond the
institutional development channel, then this provides support for the geography hypothesis.
Finally, after accounting for the impact that endowments have on growth through institutions, do
the macroeconomic policies pursued by countries over the last four decades help explain current
levels of economic development?
A. Do Endowments Explain Economic Development?
Table 2 present ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions, with heteroskedasticityconsistent standard errors, of the logarithm of real per capita GDP in 1995 on the various
endowment indicators. Specifically, we examine settler mortality, latitude, land locked, and the
full assortment of crop and mineral dummy variables discussed in Section 3. We run a very

23
simple regression of the logarithm of per capita GDP on the endowment variables, taken one-ata-time and then in groups. However, we examine the eleven crops/minerals variables
collectively. Furthermore, we also list the results from a multivariate regression that includes the
French legal origin dummy variable, the three religious composition variables (Catholic, Muslim,
and Other Non-Protestant religions), and the ethnolinguistic diversity index. We include these
control variables to assess the independent link between endowments and the level of economic
development.
The results clearly indicate that endowments explain economic development. Each of the
four endowment indicators – settler mortality, latitude, land locked, and the crops/minerals
indicators – significantly explain cross-country variation in the logarithm of GDP per capita.
These findings do not change when controlling for legal origin, religious composition, or
ethnolinguistic diversity. The signs on settler mortality, latitude, and land locked are consistent
with theory. Namely, lower settler mortality, higher latitude, and not being land locked are all
associated higher levels of economic development. When we also try Frankel-Romer natural
openness, we also find it to be significantly associated with economic development with the
predicted sign (not shown). Of the other exogenous control variables, religion and ethnolinguistic
diversity are frequently significant but French legal origin is not.22
When we include all the endowment indicators together, there is clearly some multicollinearity across the endowment variables. Nevertheless, settler mortality and the
crops/minerals variables remain independently linked with economic development even when all
the endowment and control variables are included simultaneously. Note that settler mortality
alone explains almost half of the cross-country variation in GDP per capita. The latitude and
landlocked variables are not actually significant. We don’t want to make too much of this

24
because of the high collinearity between these variables and the other endowment variables.
However, these results do not provide strong support for the idea that tropical location and lack
of access to the sea inhibit development through channels other than through their effect on
human disease and on natural resource endowments.
The sizes of the coefficients suggest that endowments exert an economically big impact
on economic development. For instance, Tanzania had very high rates of settler mortality of 5.6
(i.e., 280 death per thousand, where 280≈exp(5.6)) and has a very low level of per capita GDP of
$182, where the natural log of $182 equals 5.21. The regression coefficient from the second
regression in Table 2 (which controls for legal origin, religion, and ethnic diversity) indicates
that if Tanzania had a disease environment that produced settler mortality rates closer to that
experienced in India of 3.9 respectively (i.e., 49 deaths per thousand), then Tanzania would
enjoy income levels of more than double its current level and even greater than that enjoyed in
India now, e.g., about $415.23
B. Do Endowments Explain Institutional Development?
The Table 3 regressions indicate that endowments help explain cross-country variation in
institutional development. Each of the endowment indicators is significantly associated with the
aggregate institutions index. These relationships hold when controlling for legal origin, religious
composition, and ethnic diversity. As noted earlier, adding all the endowment variables together
induces multicollinearity, such that it is not always possible to identify the independent link
between each endowment indicator and institutional development when controlling for all of the
other endowment indicators. Settler mortality and natural resources (germs and crops) are again
more significant than tropical latitude or lack of coastal access (although only crops remain
independently significant when other exogenous variables are included). Note that when settler

25
mortality and latitude are included together, they jointly explain 45 percent of the cross-country
variation in the institutions index (when not controlling for legal origin, religious composition,
and ethnic diversity).24
The impact is economically substantial. For instance, Chile’s settler mortality rate is 4.23
while Singapore’s is 2.87 (i.e., 69 and 18 deaths per thousand respectively). If Chile had the
disease endowments of Singapore, the results suggest that this would substantially close the gap
between Chile’s level of institutional development (0.87) and Singapore’s (1.44).25 Consistent
with AJR (2001) and Engerman and Sokoloff (1997), endowments importantly shape
institutional development.
We reproduced the analyses in Table 3 for each of the six components of the institutions
index and the index of private property rights used by La Porta et al. (1999). Specifically, we
examine the connections between endowments and (i) voice and accountability, (ii) political
stability and absence of violence, (iii) government effectiveness, (iv) relatively light regulatory
burden, (v) rule of law, (vi) absence of graft, and (vii) the private property rights index. We
confirm the Table 3 results for each of these indicators of institutional development. In
particular, settler mortality, latitude, and crops/minerals are always strongly correlated with
institutional development even when controlling for legal origin, religious composition, and
ethnic diversity (which are themselves significant in many of the regressions).
C. Do Endowments Explain Development Beyond Institutions?
Thus far the regression results indicate that endowments influence both economic and
institutional development. These findings are consistent with both the geography hypothesis,
which stresses that endowments directly influence work effort (Machiavelli, 1519; Montesquieu,
1748; Landes, 1998) and agricultural productivity (Myrdal, 1968; Diamond, 1997; Sachs, 2001)

26
and therefore GDP per capita. The findings are also consistent, however, with the institutions
hypothesis, which stresses that endowments influence the formation of long-lasting institutions –
such as the application of private property rights protection, the operation of the rule of law, the
extent of corruption, and the general degree to which the government produces rules that
facilitate private interactions vis-à-vis the extent to which the government protects a small elite –
that shape economic development (AJR, 2001, 2002; Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997, 2000). We
now conduct regression analyses to distinguish between these two hypotheses.
a. Econometric specification and methods
To distinguish between the geography and institutions hypotheses, we run two-stage least
squares regressions with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors of the following form:
Second Stage:

Logarithm of GDP per capita = α[Institutions Index] + βX + u

First Stage:

Institutions Index

= δ[Endowments]

+ γX + v

X is a set of included exogenous variables, meaning they are exogenous variables that are
included in the second stage regression (i.e. French legal origin, religion, ethnic
fractionalization). In some regressions, X is omitted. The error terms in the first and second
stage regressions are v and u respectively. Endowments are considered excluded exogenous
variables in that they are used as instrumental variables to extract the exogenous component of
the Institutions Index but they are excluded from the second stage regression.
Consider first the case where there are no X variables, then the regression addresses the
question: does the component of the Institutions Index explained by exogenous endowments
explain cross-country differences in the logarithm of GDP per capita? If α is significant, then
this suggests that endowments influence economic development through institutions, which is
consistent with the institutions hypothesis.

27
Continuing with the case where there are no X variables, the test of the overidentifying
restrictions (OIR) addresses a key question: do endowments explain economic development
beyond the ability of endowments to explain institutional development? Specifically, the OIR
test has as its null hypothesis that endowments do not explain u, i.e., endowments do not explain
the logarithm of GDP per capita beyond the ability of endowments to explain institutions. This
produces a Lagrange multiplier test statistic that under the null hypothesis is distributed Chisquared (m), where m is the number of overidentifying restrictions. The number of
overidentifying restrictions equals the number excluded exogenous variables minus the number
of endogenous variables included as regressors in the second stage regression.
For the case where the regressions include, X, i.e., the second-stage includes nonendowment instrumental variables, the OIR test becomes a general specification test of the
validity of instruments. We use these regressions with X to assess the robustness of the findings
when controlling for other potential exogenous determinants of economic development.
Table 4 presents the two-state least squares regression results, with the OIR tests, and the
first-stage F-test’s P-value. The first-stage F-test has as its null hypothesis that the instruments
do not explain any cross-country variation in institutional development. Table 4 presents results
using the Institutions Index, though also we confirm the findings for each of the indicators of
institutional development discussed above. There are three pairs of regressions. The first pair of
regressions uses Settler Mortality and Latitude as instrumental variables (excluded exogenous
variables). In the first of these regressions, no X variables are included.26 The second regression
includes the X-variables i.e., we include legal origin, the three religious composition variables,
and ethnic diversity as included exogenous variables. The second pair of regressions adds Land
Locked to the instrument set. The OIR test now examines whether Settler Mortality, Latitude,

28
and Land Locked explain economic development beyond their ability to account for crosscountry differences in the Institutions Index.27 Finally, the last pair of regressions adds eleven
Crops/Minerals instruments to Settler Mortality, Latitude, and Land Locked. Here we examine
whether endowments – defined very broadly – explains current levels of economic development
beyond their ability to explain institutional development. Again, there are two regressions for
this last pair of regression: a regression with no X-variables included and a regression with Xincluded. Note we include Oil in the second stage. We do this because Oil independently
explains cross-country differences in the logarithm of GDP per capita beyond any impact on
institutions in all of the regressions that we assessed. We recognize this explicitly by including it
in the second stage. The phenomenon of states that are rich solely because they have large oil
reserves is well known.28 We do not, however, believe that this finding importantly
distinguishes between the geography, institutions, or policy hypotheses.
b. Results
The exogenous component of the Institutions Index significantly explains economic
development, which is consistent with the institutions hypothesis. The Institutions Index enters
significantly at the one-percent level in all of the Table 4 regressions. The results are robust to
controlling for legal origin, religious composition, and ethnic diversity. The strong positive
impact of institutional development on economic development is also robust to alterations in the
instrumental variable set. Furthermore, the instrumental variables are valid: they are highly
correlated with the Institutions Index, as illustrated by the P-value of the first-stage F-test, and
the OIR test does not reject the hypothesis that the instruments can be excluded from the second
stage regression.

29
The coefficient on the Institutions Index is remarkably consistent across the various
specifications in Table 4 and economically large. For instance the regression coefficients
indicate that if Mexico exogenously improved its level of institutional development from about
the sample mean (–0.07) to the level in the United States, this would eliminate the huge GDP per
capita gap between the two countries.29 While these experiments are for illustrative purposes
only, they do provide an empirical sense that the impact of institutional development on
economic development is substantial, which supports the institutions hypothesis.
The Table 4 results indicate that endowments do not explain economic development
beyond the ability of endowments to explain institutional development. Specifically, when
considering the regressions that only include endowment indicators – Settler Mortality, Latitude,
Land Locked, and Crops/Minerals – as instrumental variables, the data never reject the
hypothesis that endowments only explain the logarithm of GDP per capita through their ability to
explain institutional development. (Nor do the results change when we use Frankel-Romer
natural openness as an endowment variable.) That is, the OIR-test is never rejected at standard
confidence levels. Even when including the X-variables, we do not reject the OIR-test at the 5
percent level, which means we do not reject the validity of the instruments. As noted above, Oil
helps explain economic development directly: countries that have produced oil have higher
levels of economic development beyond the ability of oil to explain institutional development.
We do not view this as support for the geography hypothesis relative to an interesting alternative
view. The geography hypothesis focuses on the impact of disease and climate on labor
productivity and technological change. We do not believe the proponents of the geography
hypothesis will be comforted by the observation that oil is positively associated with economic

30
development; moreover, we do not believe that proponents of the institutions hypothesis will
view the significance of the Oil dummy as rejecting the institutions hypothesis.
In sum, the Table 4 results provide strong support for the institutions hypothesis but no
evidence for the geography hypothesis. Endowments explain institutions, which in turn explain
economic development. The data fail to reject the hypothesis that endowments only explain
cross-country differences in the level of economic development through the ability of
endowments to explain institutional development.
D. Do Macro-Policies Matter After Accounting for Endowments?
Next, we examine whether major, macroeconomic policies – inflation, trade policies, and
impediments to international transactions as reflected in real exchange rate overvaluation – help
explain current levels of economic development. We do this in two steps. First, we treat the
macroeconomic policy indicators, which are averaged over the last four decades as exogenous.
Simultaneity bias may bias these results toward finding a significant statistical relationship
between policies and economic development if economic success tends to produce better
policies. Second, we treat the macroeconomic policy indicators as endogenous; we use
instrumental variables to control for potential simultaneity bias. Using these two methods, we
assess whether macroeconomic policies explain cross-country differences in economic
development.
The evidence suggests that macroeconomic policies do not help account for economic
development after accounting for the impact of institutions on the level of economic
development. In Table 5, the policy variables are treated as included exogenous variables. The
Institutions Index enters all of the regression significantly. Furthermore, the coefficient size on
the Institutions Index is essentially unchanged from Table 4, which did not include policy

31
indicators. Thus, even after controlling for macroeconomic policies, endowments explain crosscountry differences in economic development through their ability to account for cross-country
differences in institutional development. Furthermore, the data never reject the OIR-test. The
policy indicators never enter the regressions significantly. Inflation, Openness, and Real
Exchange Rate Overvaluation never enter with a P-value below 0.10. Moreover, even when they
are included together, the data do not reject the null hypothesis that the three policies all enter
with coefficients equal to zero, which is shown using the F-test on the three policy variables.
When using instrumental variables for the policy indicators, we again find that
macroeconomic policies do not explain economic development. Specifically, we fail to reject
that hypothesis that macroeconomic policies have zero impact on economic development after
accounting for the impact of endowments and institutions. In Table 6, we add an additional
excluded exogenous variable to the set of instruments. We use ethnolinguistic diversity since
Easterly and Levine (1997) and La Porta et al (1999) find that ethnolinguistic diversity helps
explain cross-country differences in government policies. As noted earlier, the instrumental
variables explain a significant amount of the cross-country variation in the Institutions Index. In
the first-stage regressions for policy, we find that the instruments explain a significant amount of
the cross-country variation in Openness and Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation at the 0.01
significance level. However, the instruments do not do a very good job of explaining crosscountry variation in Inflation, i.e., we fail to find evidence that the instruments explain average
inflation rates over the last four decades at the 0.01 significance level. As shown, the policy
variables never enter significantly. While the exogenous component of the Institutions Index
(i.e., the component defined by endowments) continues to significantly account for international

32
differences in the level of GDP per capita, the macroeconomic policy indicators do not add any
additional explanatory power.
5. Conclusions
In sum, measures of tropics, germs, and crops explain cross-country differences in
economic development through their impact on institutions. To answer some of the questions in
the introduction, if Burundi’s endowments had been like those of Canada, it would have
increased Burundi’s income per capita through institutions by a factor of 38.30 Recalling the 107fold difference between Canada and Burundi’s income, we can say that a variation of 38 times is
explained by our story, while variation by a factor of 2.8 (107/38) is unexplained. (In log terms,
78 percent of the log income difference between Canada and Burundi is explained.)
Consistent with AJR (2001) and ES (1997), tropics, germs, and crops do not explain
economic development beyond their impact on institutions. These findings are consistent with
the institutions hypothesis and inconsistent with the geography hypothesis. Furthermore,
policies do not explain cross-country differences in GDP per capita once one controls for the
impact of endowments on institutions and on to economic development. Thus, the results are
inconsistent with the policy hypothesis but consistent with a view that stresses the role of
endowments in shaping long-lasting and defining institutions.
There is a large literature that relates cross-country differences in per capita growth rates
to economic policies. How do we relate our present findings on income levels to this literature? It
could be that episodes of bad policies are associated with a temporary decrease in income, which
shows up in the growth rate over a limited period, but leave no long run impact on the income
level (Bruno and Easterly, 1998, made this argument for inflation and output).

33
It could also be that bad policies are proxying for poor institutions, in those cases where
they are not included in the growth regression. The policy implication of this latter explanation is
that bad policies are only symptoms of longer-run institutional factors, and correcting the
policies without correcting the institutions will bring little long-run benefit. Bad policies would
be kind of like a high fever from a bacterial infection. Packing the patient in ice would bring
down the fever but does not cure the infection. This kind of story could help explain the
disappointing results in developing countries to the wave of macroeconomic policy reforms in
the 1990s (Hausmann and Rodrik, 2002; Easterly, 2001).
We acknowledge the caveats that one should not put all one’s weight on a failure to reject
a zero coefficient or an exclusion restriction. Nor does the kind of general indicator of
institutional quality we use, while representing a valuable contribution by Kaufmann et al
(1999), provide much actual guidance to officials making real laws and regulations. This kind of
result should be tested and illumined further with detailed historical case studies of institutional
development like those conducted by Engerman and Sokoloff (1997) and coauthors, studies of
the links between colonial experiences and later developments (Mamdani, 1996), and
contemporary case studies like those in Rodrik (2002). These kind of cross-country results are
only a beginning to telling the story of colonial experiences, political conflict and consensus,
institution-building, and economic development for each unique case. Still, we are struck by the
way that endowments and policies have no independent effect once we control for institutions,
contrary to a number of stories, and that institutional quality seems to be a sufficient statistic for
accounting for economic development.

34
References
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J. A., 2001. The colonial origins of comparative
development: an empirical investigation. American Economic Review 91, 1369-1401.
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Robinson, J. A., 2002. Reversal of fortunes: geography and
institutions in the making of the modern world income distribution. Quarterly Journal of
Economics 117, forthcoming
Alesina, A., Baqir, R., Easterly, W., 1999. Public goods and ethnic divisions, Quarterly Journal
of Economics 114, 1243-1284.
Beck, T., Demirguc-Kunt, A., Levine, R., 2002a, Law, endowments, and finance, University of
Minnesota, mimeo.
Beck, T., Demirguc-Kunt, A., Levine, R., 2002b, Law and finance: why does legal origin
matter?, University of Minnesota, mimeo.
Bloom, D.E., Sachs, J.D., 1998. Geography, demography, and economic growth in africa,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2, 207-273.
Bruno, Michael, and Easterly, William, 1998, Inflation Crises and Long-Run Growth, Journal of
Monetary Economics 41, 3-26.
Chasteen, J.C., 2000. Born in Blood and Fire: A Concise History of Latin America. (WW
Norton, New York).
Crosby, A. W., 1986. Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Europe, 900-1900.
(Cambridge University Press, New York, NY).
Curtin, P. D., 1964. The Image of Africa (University of Wisconsin Press, Madison, WI).
Curtin, P. D., 1989. Death by Migration: Europe’s Encounter with the Tropical World in the
Nineteenth Century (Cambridge University Press, New York, NY).
Curtin, P. D., 1998. Disease and Empire: The Health of European Troops in the Conquest of
Africa (Cambridge University Press, New York, NY).
Diamond, J., 1997. Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies (W.W. Norton, New
York, NY).
Dollar, D., 1992. Outward-oriented developing economies really do grow more rapidly: evidence
from 95 LDCs, 1976-1985, Economic Development and Cultural Change 40, 523-544.
Dunn, R.S., 1972. Sugar and Slaves: The Rise of the Planter Class in the English West Indies
1624-1713 (University of North Carolina Press, Chapel Hill, NC).

35

Easterly, W., 2002. Inequality does cause underdevelopment: new evidence from commodity
endowments, middle class share, and other determinants of per capita income, Center for Global
Development Working Paper # 1, January.
Easterly, W., 2001. The lost decades: developing countries’ stagnation in spite of policy reform,
Journal of Economic Growth 6, 135-157.
Easterly, W., Levine, R., 1997. Africa’s growth tragedy: policies and ethnic divisions, Quarterly
Journal of Economics 112, 1203-1250.
Engerman, S., Mariscal, E., Sokoloff, K., 1998. Schooling, suffrage, and the persistence of
inequality in the Americas, 1800-1945. Unpublished working paper. Department of Economics,
UCLA.
Engerman, S., Sokoloff, K., 1997. Factor endowments, institutions, and differential paths of
growth among new world economies, in: Haber, S.H., ed., How Latin America Fell Behind,
(Stanford University Press, Stanford CA) 260-304.
Frankel, J. A., Romer, D., Cyrus, T., 1996. Trade and growth in east asian countries: cause and
effect?, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 5732.
Frankel, J., Romer, D., 1999. Does trade cause growth?, American Economic Review 89, 37999.
Gahama, J., Makoroka, S., Nditije, C., Ntahombaye, P., Sindayizeruka, O., 1999. Burundi, in:
Adebayo Adedeji, ed., Comprehending and Mastering African Conflicts, (Zed Books, London)
80-103.
Gallup, J.L., Sachs, J.D., Mellinger, A., 1999. Geography and economic development, Center for
International Development Working Paper No. 1, Harvard University.
Gutierrez, H.,1986. La mortalite des eveques latino-americains aux XVIIe et XVII siecles,
Annales de Demographie Historique, 29-39.
Hall, R.E., Jones, C.L., 1999. Why do some countries produce so much more output per worker
than others?, Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 83-116.
Harlan, J.R., 1992. Crops and Man (American Society of Agronomy: Madison WI).
Hayek, F., 1960. The Constitution of Liberty (University of Chicago Press, Chicago, IL).
Hausmann, R., Rodrik, D., 2002. Economic development as self-discovery, Harvard University,
Kennedy School of Government, mimeo.

36
Holmes, K.R., Johnson, B.T., Kirkpatrick, M., 1997. 1997 Index of Economic Freedom. The
Heritage Foundation (Dow Jones & Co., Inc., New York, NY).
Huntington, E., 1915, Civilization and Climate (Yale University Press, New Haven, CT).
Huntington, E., 1945, Mainsprings of Civilization (J. Wiley and Sons, New York, NY).
Isham, J., Pritchett, L., Woolcock, M., Busby, G., 2001. The varieties of the rentier experience:
How natural resource endowments and social institutions affect economic growth, Harvard
University, Kennedy School of Government, mimeo.
Kamarck, A. M., 1976. The Tropics and Economic Development (John Hopkins University
Press, Baltimore, MD).
Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A., Zoido-Lobatón, P., 1999b. Governance matters, World Bank Research
Working Paper No. 2196.
Kaufmann, D., Kraay, A., Zoido-Lobatón, P., 1999a. Aggregating Governance Indicators. World
Bank Research Working Paper No. 2195.
Khan, B. Z., Sokoloff, K., 2002. The innovation of patent systems in the nineteenth century: A
comparative perspective, University of California, Los Angeles, mimeo.
Landes, D., 1998. The Wealth and Poverty of Nations (W.W. Norton, New York, NY).
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1999. The quality of government.
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, 222-279.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., Vishny, R.W., 1998. Law and finance, Journal of
Political Economy 106, 1113-1155
Machiavelli, N., 1519, Discourses on Livy (Oxford University Press, New York, NY, 1987.)
Mamdani, M., 1996. Citizen and Subject: Contemporary Africa and the Legacy of Late
Colonialism (Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Mauro, P., 1995. Corruption and growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics 110, 681-712.
McDonald, G.C., Brenneman, L.E., Hibbs, R.V., James, C.A., Vincenti, V., 1969. Area
Handbook for Burundi (US Government Printing Office, Washington DC).
Montesquieu, C. L., 1750. The Spirit of Laws (Cambridge University Press, New York, 1989).
Myrdal, G., 1968. Asian Drama: An Inquiry into the Poverty of Nations (Twentieth Century
Fund, New York, NY).

37
Ndikumana, L., 1998. Institutional failure and ethnic conflicts in burundi, African Studies
Review 41, 29-48.
Nkurunziza, J.D., Ngaruko, F., 2002. Explaining growth in burundi: 1960-2000, Oxford
University mimeo.
North, D., 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance (Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK).
Olson, O., Hibbs, D.A. Jr., 2000. Biogeography and long-run economic development, Göteborg
University Working Papers in Economics No 26.
Putnam, R., 1993. Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy (Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ).
Rodrik, D., 2002. ed. Searching for Growth: Analytical Narratives of Growth (Princeton
University Press: Princeton NJ).
Sachs, J., Warner, A., 1995. Economic reform and the process of global integration, Brookings
Papers on Economic Activity 1, 1-95.
Sachs, J., Warner, A., 1995. Natural resource abundance and economic growth, National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper 5398.
Sachs, J., Warner, A., 1997. Fundamental sources of long-run growth, American Economic
Review Papers and Proceedings 87, 184-188.
Sachs, J., 2001. Tropical underdevelopment, National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 8119.
Sokoloff, K.L., Engerman, S.L., 2000. Institutions, factor endowments, and paths of
development in the new world, Journal of Economic Perspectives 14, 217-32.
Weber, M., 1958. The protestant ethic and the spirit of capitalism (Charles Scribner’s Sons, New
York, NY).
Woolcock, M., Pritchett, L., Isham, J., 2001. The social foundations of poor economic growth in
resource-rich economies, in: Auty, R.M., ed., Resource Abundance and Economic Development
(UNU/WIDER Studies in Economic Development Economics, Oxford University Press, New
York).
Young, C., 1994. The African Colonial State in Comparative Perspective (Yale University
Press, New Haven CT).
Zweigert, K., Kötz, H., 1998. Introduction to Comparative Law (Oxford University Press, New
York, NY).

38

1 Burundi may well have been relatively rich compared to other African countries at some point
in the past because of these endowments, but we lack data on African incomes before 1950 or
1960. Our focus is on the long run outcome, which is clearly relative poverty.
2 Mamdani (1996), pp. 148-149, McDonald et al. (1969), p. 13.
3 The nature of the pre-independence ethnic division between the Hutu and Tutsi, which
undoubtedly was politically explosive after independence, has been hotly debated. The
traditional European view was that the Tutsi were a Nilotic group of tall cattle-herding nomads
who migrated into the region and became feudal lords over the short Bantu agricultural Hutus
(see McDonald et al., 1969). More recent scholars deem this a myth and describe a much more
fluid and complex traditional society. Gahama et al. (1999) describe the Tutsi “feudal
aristocracy” as a racist invention of the Belgians dating from the 1930s. Ndikumana 1998, on the
other hand, describes how the post-independence (Tutsi) governments blamed ethnic divisions
on the Belgians as a device to suppress discussion of real ethnic discrimination.
4 The civil war has been between the Hutus and Tutsis, with other more subtle conflicts between
the Bururi Tutsis and non-Bururi Tutsis and also clashes between the Bayanzi and the Bashingo
clans of Bururi Tutsi. See Nkurunziza and Ngaruko (2002).
5 Sokoloff and Engerman (2000), p. 217.
6 Of course, this reflects the viewpoint of the majority. The indigenous and French Canadian
populations might take a less benevolent view of Canadian history.
7 North’s (1990) classic work treats colonial institutions as exogenously inherited from Europe
and attributes the comparative success of the United States and Canada to the inheritance of
better institutions and cultural norms from England.
8 http://www.geocities.com/ru00ru00/racismhistory/18thcent.html
9 The disadvantages of tropical agriculture was also stressed by a former chief economist of the
World Bank, Kamarck (1976)
10 The quotation is from http://www.geocities.com/ru00ru00/racismhistory/18thcent.html. This
is the backward bending labor supply curve idea, in modern parlance. Of course, bad institutions
could also reduce the supply of effort, and this is only one of several possible mechanisms by
which some authors believe there is a direct effect of tropical location on development.
11 Easterly and Levine (1997) and Mauro (1995) suggested ethnic fractionalization led to poor
institutional outcomes.
12 Easterly (2002) found cross-section evidence compatible with the ES story going from
commodity endowments through inequality to institutions, openness, and human capital.
Woolcock, Isham, and Pritchett (2001) found that institutions are worse in resource-rich than in
resource-poor economies, and that “point-source” and coffee and cocoa resources were
associated with worse institutions compared to “diffuse” resource economies. Isham, Pritchett,
Woolcock, and Busby (2001) find worse institutions in resource-rich relative to research poor
countries.
13 Correspondence with Kenneth Sokoloff.
14 Slavery in the southern United States, and post-Reconstruction restrictions on black civil
rights, is an obvious exception to these statements. ES suggest that the American South is a kind
of middle ground between North America and Latin America, lagging behind North America but
ahead of Latin America (where African slavery in Brazil and the Caribbean covered a larger

39

share of the population than in North America, and where the violation of rights of indigenous
people also covered a larger share of the population than in North America).
15Of course, pre-colonial institutions in the Aztec and Inca empires also featured elite
domination.
16 Bilateral trade also goes up with per capita incomes of the trading partners. Because of
concerns about endogeneity, Frankel and Romer use the factor accumulation of trading partners
to predict per capita income. However, they also have a “pure geography” measure that includes
only the factors mentioned in the text, which is what we use in the empirical work below.
17 These historical mortality rates are correlated with mortality rates today (AJR, 2001), which
are themselves correlated with per capita income today.
18 The literature has given little attention to some of the advantages of tropical location, like
greater biodiversity, tourism potential, less discomfort and need for protection from cold
temperatures, other intangible quality of life aspects, etc.
19 Naturally, there is some cut-off at extremely high latitudes where little settlement is feasible.
20 These are the same commodities that are used in Easterly 2001, who found that commodity
dummies helped explain differences in inequality across countries in a way consistent with the
ES hypothesis.
21 Although Luxembourg is landlocked, it is located next to dense population concentrations in
trading partners. Note that country size is an important determinant of natural openness.
22 The significance of the religion variable varies, but sometimes indicates that the Muslim
religion is associated with less institutional quality and development than other religions,
particularly Protestant and Other religion.
23 Formally, ∆(log GDP per Capita) = -(0.62)*∆(settler mortality). Tanzania’s settler mortality
equals 5.6 and India’s equals 3.9. Thus, ∆(log GDP per Capita) = -(0.62)*∆(-1.7) = 1.05. Since
Tanzania’s log of GDP per capita equals 5.21 (which equals $182), its new level would equal
6.27, which equals $528.
24 Instead of examining eleven individual dummy variables related to crops and minerals, we
also constructed an index, “good crops,” to examine more narrowly the Engerman and Sokoloff
(1997) hypothesis about crops and institutional development using one summary measure. In
particular, the good crops index equals log (1 + zmaize + zwheat)/(1 + zrice + zsugarcane),
where zX equals the share of the land area that is judged to be suitable by FAO for growing crop
X. We construct this index because ES focus on wheat and maize as crops that foster a large
middle class with egalitarian institutions in contrast to rice and sugarcane, which tend to produce
a powerful elite and more closed institutions. We find that this good crops index significantly
and positively explains institutional development, even when controlling for religion, ethnic
diversity, and legal origin. We also find that this good crops index is highly correlated with
settler mortality and latitude and does not enter the institution regression significantly when these
other endowment indicators are simultaneously included. We also find that when we use this
good crops index as an instrumental for institutions we confirm this paper’s findings and the
good crops index does not reject the test of the overidentifying restrictions, which again confirms
this paper’s findings.
25 Specifically, ∆(Institutions Index) = -(0.25)*∆(settler mortality). Chile’s settler mortality
equals 4.23 and Singapore’s is 2.87. Thus, ∆(Institutions Index) = -(0.25)*∆(-1.36) = 0.34.
Since Chile’s institutions index is 0.87, its new level would equal 1.21, while Singapore’s is
1.44.

40

26 Thus, in the OIR test, the Chi-square statistics as 1 degree of freedom because there is one
endogenous variable included as a regressor in the second-stage (Institutions Index) and there are
two excluded exogenous variables (Settler Mortality and Latitude).
27 For this second pair of regressions, the OIR test has two degrees of freedom: three excluded
exogenous variables minus one endogenous regressor in the second state.
28 We mean here oil states that are so abundantly endowed with oil that it increases their
income. There is also a literature on how intermediate levels of oil resources are often
squandered and can lead to vicious competition for rents. We do not address this latter literature.
29 Specifically, ∆(Log GDP per Capita) = (2.1)*∆(Institutions Index) from the second regression
in Table 4. Since Mexico’ Institution Index is –0.07 and the U.S.’s is 1.29, the ∆(Institutions
Index) equals 1.36. Plugging values in yields the following: ∆(Log GDP per Capita) =
(2.1)*∆(1.36) = 2.86. Since Mexico’s log of GDP per Capita is 8.13, its new level would equal
10.99, while the U.S.’s is 10.28.
30 We do this exercise using only settler mortality and latitude as endowments for institutions,
using the regression coefficients discussed above.

Table 1: Correlations and Summary Statistics: Selected Variables
Log(GDP per Capita) is the logarithm of real GDP per Capita in 1995.
The institution index averages the six Kaufman, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton (1999) measures: (i) voice and accountability, (ii) political instability
and violance, (iii) government effectiveness, (iv) regulatory burden, (v) rule of law, and (vi) graft, and (2) one of the three policy variables: inflation,
trade openness, or real exchange rate overvaluation.
Settler mortality is the logarithm of annualized deaths per thousand of European soldiers. Latitude is absolute value of each country's latitude.
Landlock equals one if the country is land locked and zero otherwise.
Inflation equals the average annual inflation rate 1960-1995, Openness equals years that the country has been open to trade, and Real
Exchange Rate Overvaluation equals the average real exchange rate overvaluation, 1960-95.

A. Correlations
Log(GDP per
Capita
Log(GDP per Capita

Institutions
Index

Settler
Mortality

Latitude

Landlock

Inflation

Real Exchange
Rate
Openness Overvaluation

1

Institutions Index

0.79

1

(0.000)
Settler Mortality
Latitude
Landlock
Inflation
Openness
Real Exchange Rate
Overvaluation

-0.68

-0.57

(0.000)

(0.000)

1

0.47

0.48

-0.43

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.000)

-0.38

-0.35

0.31

-0.15

(0.001)

(0.002)

(0.007)

(0.195)

1
1

0.05

-0.16

0.07

-0.05

0.06

(0.718)

(0.196)

(0.571)

(0.682)

(0.626)

1

0.64

0.65

-0.54

0.19

-0.19

-0.07

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.000)

(0.120)

(0.103)

(0.588)

-0.33

-0.33

0.40

-0.17

0.10

0.28

-0.21

(0.007)

(0.007)

(0.001)

(0.185)

(0.429)

(0.021)

(0.082)

B. Summary Statistics

Mean
Median
Maximum
Minimum
Std. Dev.
Skewness
Kurtosis
Observations

1

Log(GDP per
Capita

Institutions
Index

Settler
Mortality

Latitude

7.18
6.99
10.28
4.69
1.42
0.43
2.30

-0.09
-0.17
1.59
-1.33
0.68
0.57
2.90

4.64
4.36
7.99
2.15
1.24
0.18
3.04

0.18
0.15
0.67
0.01
0.13
1.08
4.58

72

72

72

72

Landlock

Inflation

0.14
0.17
0
0.08
1
1.42
0
0.03
0.35
0.23
2.09
3.56
5.36 17.08
72

66

1.00

Real Exchange
Rate
Openness Overvaluation

0.26
0.14
1
0
0.32
1.23
3.39

122.36
112.19
381.94
69.19
47.08
2.73
15.47

70

64

Table 2: Endowments and Economic Development
Dependent Variable: Logarithm of GDP per Capita in 1995
The cross-country regressions are estimated using ordinary least squares with 72 observations. The heteroskedasticity consistent P-values are reported in parentheses. The
constant is omitted from the Table. Settler mortality is the logarithm of annualized deaths per thousand of European soldiers in the early 19th century. Latitude is absolute value of
each country's latitude, scaled between 0 and 1. Land locked equals one if the country does not have access to the sea, and zero otherwise. Crops/Minerals is a series of eleven onezero dummy variables of whether the country has ever had the following crops and minerals: bananas, coffee, copper, maize, millet, oil, rice, rubber, silver, sugarcane, or wheat.
Religion is a series of three variables, the fraction of the population that is Catholic, Muslim, or a religion that is not Catholic, Muslim, or Protestant). For Crops/Minerals and Religion,
the table reports the F-test of joint significance of the individual variables composing these concepts, with the corresponding p-value in parentheses under the F-statistic.
Ethnolinguistic fractionalization is the probability that two randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language.

Control Variables

Endowments
Settler mortality

Latitude

Land Locked

Crops/Minerals
(11 variables)

-0.78
(0.000)
-0.62
(0.000)

Ethnolinguistic
Diversity

2

R

0.46
-0.37
(0.326)
5.25
(0.000)
4.71
(0.000)

-0.54
(0.170)

-0.96
(0.046)

0.55

7.55
(0.000)

-1.08
(0.045)

0.47
0.14

-0.52
(0.201)
12.71
(0.000)
14.20
(0.000)

2.41
(0.033)
2.71
(0.020)
2.38
(0.037)
2.76
(0.019)
2.57
(0.105)
1.59
(0.259)

1.78
(0.159)

0.22

-1.55
(0.000)
-1.07
(0.004)

-0.67
(0.000)
-0.50
(0.001)
-0.61
(0.000)
-0.45
(0.003)
-0.39
(0.003)
-0.30
(0.013)

French Legal
Religion
Origin
(3 variables)

3.63
(0.017)

-1.65
(0.002)

0.40
0.59

-0.40
(0.110)

6.51
(0.001)

-0.78
(0.078)

0.73
0.50

-0.34
(0.342)
-0.71
(0.001)
-0.66
(0.010)
-0.25
(0.362)
-0.40
(0.179)

2.85
(0.044)

-0.67
(0.164)

0.59
0.53

-0.24
(0.503)
2.41
(0.016)
4.03
(0.002)

3.09
(0.033)

-0.59
(0.209)

0.61
0.69

-0.22
(0.386)

5.83
(0.002)

-0.51
(0.164)

0.79

Table 3: Endowments and Institutions: Institution Index
Dependent Variable: Institution Index
The regressions are estimated using OLS, with heteroskedasticity consistent P-values in parentheses, and 72 observations. The constant is not reported. The institution index
averages the six Kaufman, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton (1999) measures: (i) voice and accountability, (ii) political instability and violance, (iii) government effectiveness, (iv) regulatory
burden, (v) rule of law, and (vi) graft. Settler mortality is the logarithm of annualized deaths per thousand of European soldiers in the early 19th century. Latitude is the absolute value
of each country's latitude, scaled between 0 and 1. Land locked equals one if the country does not have access to the sea, and zero otherwise. Crops/Minerals is a series of eleven
one-zero dummy variables of whether the country has ever had the following crops and minerals: bananas, coffee, copper, maize, millet, oil, rice, rubber, silver, sugarcane, or wheat.
Religion is a series of three variables, the fraction of the population that is Catholic, Muslim, or a religion that is not Catholic, Muslim, or Protestant). For Crops/Minerals and Religion,
we report the F-test of joint significance, with the corresponding p-value in parentheses. Ethnolinguistic fractionalization is the probability that two randomly selected individuals do not speak the same language.

Endowments
Settler mortality

Latitude

Control Variables

Land Locked

Crops/Minerals
(11 variables)

-0.34
(0.000)
-0.25
(0.000)

Ethnolinguistic
Diversity

2

R

0.39
-0.31
(0.062)
2.62
(0.000)
2.58
(0.000)

-0.35
(0.028)

-0.46
(0.029)

0.49

4.30
(0.008)

-0.39
(0.101)

0.51
0.08

-0.40
(0.019)
13.89
(0.000)
14.20
(0.000)

1.45
(0.011)
1.90
(0.001)
1.44
(0.013)
1.91
(0.001)
1.21
(0.113)
1.15
(0.101)

0.62
(0.606)

0.24

-0.54
(0.001)
-0.24
(0.252)

-0.28
(0.000)
-0.17
(0.013)
-0.26
(0.000)
-0.16
(0.016)
-0.15
(0.043)
-0.06
(0.351)

French Legal
Religion
Origin
(3 variables)

1.64
(0.190)

-0.78
(0.003)

0.35
0.56

-0.32
(0.007)

5.13
(0.003)

-0.23
(0.311)

0.70
0.45

-0.28
(0.062)
-0.16
(0.330)
-0.07
(0.649)
-0.09
(0.534)
-0.05
(0.732)

2.10
(0.109)

-0.25
(0.246)

0.57
0.45

-0.27
(0.071)
3.95
(0.000)
4.18
(0.000)

2.11
(0.108)

-0.24
(0.268)

0.57
0.64

-0.28
(0.022)

5.00
(0.004)

-0.13
(0.521)

0.73

Table 4: Endowments, Instittuions, and GDP Per Captia: Instrumental Variables
Dependent Variable: Logarithm of GDP per Capita in 1995
Regressions are estimated using two-stage least squares, 72 observations, with heteroskedasticity consistent P-values in parentheses. The constant is unreported.
The endogenous variable in the regression is the institution index, averages the six Kaufman, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton (1999) measures: (i) voice and accountability, (ii) political instability and violance, (iii)
government effectiveness, (iv) regulatory burden, (v) rule of law, and (vi) graft.
The exogenous variables that are included in some of the second stage regressions are as follows. French legal origin is a dummy variable that equals one if the country has a French civil law tradition, and
zero if the country has a British common law tradition. Religion is a series of three variables, the fraction of the population that is Catholic, Muslim, or a religion that is not Catholic, Muslim, or Protestant).
Ethnolinguistic fractionalization is the probability that two randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language. For Religion, the table reports the F-test of joint significance of the
individual variables, with the corresponding p-value in parentheses. Oil, which equals one if the country is an oil producer.
The instrumental variables, i.e., exogenous variables excluded from the second stage regressions, potentially include the following variables. Settler mortality is the logarithm of annualized deaths per thousand
of European soldiers. Latitude is absolute value of each country's latitude. Land locked equals one if the country does not have access to the sea, zero otherwise. Crops/Minerals is a series of ten one-zero
dummy variables of whether the country has ever had the following crops/minerals: bananas, coffee, copper, maize, millet,rice, rubber, silver, sugarcane, or wheat.

Test of
OverIdentifying
Restrictions

Second Stage
Included Exogenous

Endogenous
Institution
Index
2.19
(0.000)
2.10
(0.000)
2.22
(0.000)
2.14
(0.000)
2.19
(0.000)
2.22
(0.000)

First Stage Information

French Legal
Origin

0.23
(0.513)

Religion
Ethnolinguistic
(3 variables)
Diversity

2.55
(0.063)

Oil

-0.13
(0.720)

P-value reported

Instruments

(0.393)

Settler mortality, Latitude

(0.097)
(0.393)

0.24
(0.487)

0.27
(0.388)

2.55
(0.063)

1.79
(0.157)

-0.10
(0.782)

-0.26
(0.431)

(0.000)
Settler mortality, Latitude, Landlocked

(0.066)

1.56
(0.001)
1.47
(0.000)

(0.181)
(0.429)

First-Stage Ftest
(P-value)
(0.000)

(0.000)
(0.000)

Settler mortality, Latitude, Landlocked,
Crops/Minerals (10 variables)

(0.000)
(0.000)

Table 5: Policies, Endowments and Institutions: Policies Treated as Exogenous
Dependent Variable: Logarithm of GDP per Capita in 1995
Regressions are estimated using two-stage least squares, with heteroskedasticity consistent P-values in parentheses. The constant is unreported.
The endogenous variable in the regression is the institution index, averages the six Kaufman, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton (1999) measures: (i) voice and accountability, (ii) political instability and
violance, (iii) government effectiveness, (iv) regulatory burden, (v) rule of law, and (vi) graft.
Three policy variables: Inflation equals the average annual inflation rate 1960-1995, Openness equals years that the country has been open to trade, and Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation equals
the average real exchange rate overvaluation, 1960-95.
The exogenous variables that are included in some of the second stage regressions are as follows. French legal origin is a dummy variable that equals one if the country has a French civil law
tradition, and zero if the country has a British common law tradition. Religion is a series of three variables, the fraction of the population that is Catholic, Muslim, or a religion that is not Catholic,
Muslim, or Protestant). Ethnolinguistic fractionalization is the probability that two randomly selected individuals in a country will not speak the same language. For Religion, the table reports the F-test
of joint significance of the individual variables, with the corresponding p-value in parentheses.
The instrumental variables, i.e., exogenous variables excluded from the second stage regressions are as follows. Settler mortality is the logarithm of annualized deaths per thousand of European
soldiers. Latitude is absolute value of each country's latitude.

Test of
OverIdentifying
Restrictions

Second Stage Results

Obs.

Included Exogenous Variables
Endogenous
Institution Index

Inflation

2.11
(0.000)
2.03
(0.000)
2.20
(0.000)
1.95
(0.000)
2.09
(0.000)
1.95
(0.000)
2.05
(0.000)
1.78
(0.000)

0.50
(0.158)
0.06
(0.883)

Policy Variables
Real Exchange
Openness
Rate
Overvaluation

Other Exogenous Variables
F-test
(3 Policies)

0.23
(0.538)
-0.22
(0.743)
0.22
(0.663)

0.55
(0.129)
0.25
(0.493)

French Legal
Religion
Ethnolinguistic
Origin
(3 variables)
Diversity

-0.11
(0.855)
0.27
(0.582)

0.15
(0.643)
0.00
(0.934)
0.00
(0.225)
0.00
(0.744)
0.00
(0.174)

0.24
(0.556)
1.11
(0.353)
0.66
(0.583)

0.23
(0.545)

2.21
(0.097)

2.59
(0.061)

2.35
(0.082)

2.42
(0.076)

-0.15
(0.705)

-0.15
(0.690)

-0.08
(0.827)

-0.16
(0.676)

P-value reported
(0.495)

66

(0.135)

66

(0.269)

70

(0.097)

70

(0.461)

64

(0.181)

64

(0.384)

64

(0.194)

64

Table 6: Policies, Endowments and Institutions: Policies Treated as Endogenous
Dependent Variable: Logarithm of GDP per Capita in 1995
Regressions are estimated using two-stage least squares, with heteroskedasticity consistent P-values in parentheses. The constant is unreported.
The endogenous variables in the regression are (1) the institution index, which averages the six Kaufman, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton (1999) measures: (i) voice and accountability, (ii)
political instability and violance, (iii) government effectiveness, (iv) regulatory burden, (v) rule of law, and (vi) graft, and (2) one of the three policy variables: inflation, trade openness, or real
exchange rate overvaluation.
Three policy variables: Inflation equals the average annual inflation rate 1960-1995, Openness equals years that the country has been open to trade, and Real Exchange Rate
Overvaluation equals the average real exchange rate overvaluation, 1960-95.
The exogenous variables that are included in some of the second stage regressions are as follows. French legal origin is a dummy variable that equals one if the country has a French civil
law tradition, and zero if the country has a British common law tradition. Religion is a series of three variables, the fraction of the population that is Catholic, Muslim, or a religion that is not
Catholic, Muslim, or Protestant). For Religion, the table reports the F-test of joint significance of the individual variables, with the corresponding p-value in parentheses.
The instrumental variables, i.e., exogenous variables excluded from the second stage regressions, are as follows. Settler mortality is the logarithm of annualized deaths per thousand of
European soldiers. Latitude is absolute value of each country's latitude. Ethnolinguistic Diversity, which is the probability that two randomly selected individual in a country do not speak
the same language.

Test of
OverIdentifying
Restrictions

Second Stage Results
Included Exogenous Variables

Obs.

Included Exogenous Variables

Policy Variables

Institution
Institution Index

Inflation

2.21
(0.000)
1.92
(0.000)
1.83
(0.002)
1.51
(0.007)
2.10
(0.001)
1.42
(0.025)

4.14
(0.231)
-7.10
(0.493)

Openness

Real Exchange
Rate Overvaluation

French Legal
Origin

0.11
(0.831)
1.13
(0.491)
2.24
(0.166)

0.27
(0.418)
0.00
(0.983)
-0.02
(0.318)

0.51
(0.394)

Religion
(3 variables)

1.59
(0.201)

3.97
(0.012)

2.36
(0.081)

P-value reported
(0.677)

66

(0.597)

66

(0.126)

70

(0.627)

70

(0.083)

64

(0.633)

64

Figure 1: Logarithm of GDP per Capita in 1995 vs. Setter Mortality

USA
SGP
HKG
CAN

10.2837
AUS
NZL

BHS

Log_GDP_per_Capita

MLT

ARG
BRB
URY
CHL
BRATTO
CRI
VEN
MEX

MYS
ZAF
MUS
FJI

COL
PER
TUN
PRY
SLV
ECU
DZA
GTM
MAR
EGY
BOL

GUY
SUR

HND
LKA

PAK
IND
BGD

GAB
PAN
BLZ
JAM
DOM
PNG
IDN

COG
CIV

SEN
NIC
HTI
KEN

CMR
AGO
MRT
BEN
CAF
UGA

GIN
GHA

BFA
MDG
RWA
TCD NER
BDI
TZA
SLE

GMB
NGA

MLI

ETH

4.69145
2.14593

7.98617
Settler_Mortality

Figure 2: Logarithm of GDP per Capita in 1995 vs. Latitude
10.2837

USA

SGP

HKG

AUS

CAN
NZL

BHS
MLT
ARG

Log_GDP_per_Capita

BRB
GAB
MYS

BRA
TTO
VENCRI
PAN

COL

BLZ
FJI
SLV
GTM

GUY CIV
SURCMR
LKA

TUN
PRY
DZA

MAR

BOL

HND
GIN SEN
AGO
NIC
GHA
CAF BEN GMB

RWA
BDI TZA

JAM
DOM

EGY

IDN
PNG

KEN
UGA

MUS MEX

PER

ECU
COG

URY
CHL
ZAF

MRT
IND
HTI

PAK
BGD

MLI
NGA BFA
MDG
TCD
NER
SLE

ETH

4.69145
.0111

.6667
Latitude

Figure 3: Logarithm of GDP per Capita in 1995 vs. Institutions Index
USA

10.2837
HKG

SGP
AUS
CAN
NZL

BHS
MLT

ARG

BRB

Log_GDP_per_Capita

URY
GAB

BRA
VEN
COL

PRY
GTM

DZA
COG

AGO
HTI
NGA
RWA NER
BDI
SLE

IDN

ECU
PNG

MEX
PER

MYS
TTO

ZAF
PAN
FJI

MUS

CHL
CRI

BLZ
TUN

JAM
SLV
DOM
MAR
EGY

BOL
GUY
CIV
HND
CMR GIN LKA SUR
SEN
MRT PAK
NIC
GHA IND
BEN
GMB
KEN
BGD
CAF
UGA
MLI
MDG BFA
TCD
TZA
ETH

4.69145
-1.328

1.591
Institutions_Index

Figure 4: Institutions Index vs. Settler Mortality
1.591

NZL
SGP
CAN
USA

AUS

HKG
MLT

CHLBRB
CRI
BHS
URYTTO

MUS

Institutions_Index

MYS

FJI

ARG
TUN
MAR

GUY

ZAF

IND
ETH
SUR
DJI
PAK

BOL
BRA
SLV
MEX
EGY
PER
ECU
VEN
LKA
BGD
COL
HND
GTM
PRY

BLZ

PAN
JAM
DOM

GMB

SEN
PNG
NIC

TZA
BFA
BEN
UGA
CAF
GAB

KENIDN
GNB

CMR
TCD
MRT

HTI

BDI
COG
AGO
RWA

MLI

GHA
CIV
MDG
GIN
TGO
SLE
NER

NGA

DZA
SDN
AFG

ZAR

-1.995
2.14593

7.98617
Settler_Mortality

Figure 5: Institutions Index vs. Latitude

NZL

1.591
SGP

CAN

AUS
USA

HKG
CHL

CRI BRB
MUS

Institutions_Index

TTO

BHS
URY

BLZ

MYS

MLT

ARG
TUN
MAR

GUY

PAN
ZAF
FJI
BOL IND
BRA GMB
SLV
JAM
MLIDOM MEX
ETH
TZAGHA
EGY
CIVPER
SUR
BEN BFA
SEN
ECU
UGA
VEN
LKA
MDG BGD
CAF
COLPNG
NICHND
GTM
GAB
GIN
PRY
PAK
KEN

CMR
IDN

COG BDI
RWA

TCD

SLE
NGA

NER
HTI

AGO
SDN

-1.353

MRT

DZA

.0111

.6667
Latitude

