NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRMS’ DECISIONS WHERE TO INCORPORATE

Lucian Bebchuk
Alma Cohen

Working Paper 9107
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9107

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002

For helpful comments we are grateful to Steve Choi, Jim Cox, David Cutler, Jesse Fried, Rob Daines, Allen
Ferrell, Jill Fisch, Andrew Guzman, Assaf Hamdani, Nicholas Hecker, Caroline Hoxby, Bert Huang,
Christine Jolls, Marcel Kahan, Jason Knott, Josh Lerner, Lynn LoPucki, Geoffrey Miller, Mark Ramsayer,
Larry Ribstein, Roberta Romano, Andrei Shleifer, Rob Sitkoff, Lynn Stout, Guhan Subramanian, Manuel
Trajtenberg, and seminar participants at Harvard, George Mason University, the University of Chicago, the
University of Toronto, and the spring meeting of the NBER corporate finance program. For financial support
we thank the Harvard Law School John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business and the NBER.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Lucian Bebchuk and Alma Cohen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Firms’ Decisions Where to Incorporate
Lucian Bebchuk and Alma Cohen
NBER Working Paper No. 9107
August 2002
JEL No. G30, G38, H70, K22
ABSTRACT
This paper empirically investigates the decisions of publicly traded firms where to incorporate.
We study the features of states that make them attractive to incorporating firms and the characteristics of
firms that determine whether they incorporate in or out of their state of location. We find that states that
offer stronger antitakeover protections are substantially more successful both in retaining in-state firms
and in attracting out-of-state incorporations. We estimate that, compared with adopting no antitakeover
statutes, adopting all standard antitakeover statutes enabled the states that adopted them to more than
double the percentage of local firms that incorporated in-state (from 23% to 49%). Indeed, the
incorporation market has not even penalized the three states that passed two extreme antitakeover statutes
that have been widely viewed as detrimental to shareholders. We also find that there is commonly a big
difference between a state's ability to attract incorporations from firms located in and out of the state, and
we investigate several possible explanations for this home-state advantage. Finally, we find that
Delaware's dominance is greater than has been recognized and can be expected to increase further in the
future. Our findings have significant implications for corporate governance, regulatory competition, and
takeover law.

Lucian Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1557 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu

Alma Cohen
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
acohen@kuznets.harvard.edu

1

Introduction

This paper uses data on firms’ incorporation choices to study the market for
corporate law in the United States. In particular, the paper focuses on the demandside of this market, studying the determinants of firms’ incorporation decisions.
Analyzing these decisions is valuable for understanding the patterns of
incorporation and the outcomes of regulatory competition in the corporate area.
A central feature of the US corporate environment is the presence of regulatory
competition in corporate law. Corporations are free to choose their state of
incorporation, and they are subject to the corporate law of the state in which they
have chosen to incorporate. Whether and to what extent this regulatory competition
works well has long been one of the most hotly debated questions among corporate
law scholars. As European corporations have recently become free to choose their
country of incorporation among the EEC countries, this question has also become
important in Europe.
According to the view that appears to dominate the current thinking of
corporate law academics, state competition produces a “race-toward-the-top” that
benefits shareholders (see Winter (1977, 1989), Easterbrook and Fischel (1991),
Fischel (1982) and Romano (1993a, 1993b, 1998)). On this view, the desire to attract
incorporations induces states to develop and provide corporate arrangements that
enhance shareholder value. An alternative view is more skeptical with respect to the
incentives provided by state competition (see, e.g., Cary (1974), Bebchuk (1992),
Bar-Gill, Barzuza, and Bebchuk (2001)). On this view, competition encourages states
to provide rules that are too favorable to corporate managers and controllers with
respect to corporate issues, such as takeover rules, that have a major effect on the
private benefits of managers and controllers.
In this debate, most scholars have made similar assumptions about the supply
side of the market, namely, that states seek to attract incorporations, but they
differed in their views on the demand side, namely, on what type of rules would
make states more successful in attracting incorporations. Note, however, that the
demand side would be important even if one were to relax the assumption that
states seek to maximize the number of incorporations. Even if some or many states
selected their corporate rules on the basis of considerations other than such
maximization, the demand side would determine the distribution of firms among
whatever choices states would provide.
The debate on state competition has stimulated a large body of empirical
research. This research has largely focused on analyzing how shareholder wealth is
affected by incorporating in Delaware (see Bhagat and Romano (2001), Romano

1

(2001), and Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2002) for surveys of this work). Several
studies have suggested that reincorporations to Delaware are associated with
abnormal returns (see, e.g., Romano (1985), Heron and Lewellen (1998)). In addition,
a recent, influential study by Daines (2001a) suggested that incorporation in
Delaware is correlated with a higher Tobin’s Q. However, Bebchuk, Cohen, and
Ferrell (2002) argue that selection issues make it difficult to infer from existing
studies that a Delaware incorporation has a positive effect on shareholder wealth.
They also point out that, if such an effect did exist, it would not teach us much about
how well state competition works overall; because of the network benefits from
incorporating in the dominant state, doing so would be beneficial even in an
equilibrium in which state competition does not work well.1
In any event, the existing empirical work does not examine some significant
aspects of the incorporation market on which this paper focuses. Whereas prior
work has only examined how the market is divided between Delaware and nonDelaware firms, this paper studies the distribution of incorporations among all
states and thus, in turn, how states other than Delaware differ in their performance
in the market for incorporations. Furthermore, whereas prior work has taken
incorporation decisions as given, we seek to investigate the determinants of these
incorporation decisions.
In particular, we investigate which features of corporate law systems make
them more and less successful in attracting incorporations. We also study how
incorporation choices are influenced by firms’ location and, finding such influence,
we investigate the reasons for its existence. The results we report are for the set of all
non-financial firms; the results for the set of all firms are similar and are reported in
an earlier version of this paper (Bebchuk and Cohen (2002)).
We start by providing a full account of the distribution of incorporations
among states. Putting aside Delaware, states still differ greatly both in their ability to
retain firms headquartered (“located”) in them and in their ability to attract out-ofstate incorporations. For example, whereas Illinois and California retain only 11%
and 22% of the firms located in them respectively, Indiana and Minnesota retain
70% and 75% respectively. As to out-of-state incorporations, 33 states attract less
than 10 out-of-state incorporations each, whereas 7 states attract more than 25 outof-state incorporations each.

Bar-Gill, Barzuza, and Bebchuk (2001) develop a formal model of a race-to-the-bottom
equilibrium in which (i) states are induced to provide rules that provide managers with
excessive private benefits and (ii) incorporation in the dominant state is associated with a higher
shareholder value due to the institutional advantages and network benefits offered by this state.

1

2

We next turn to study the characteristics of firms that influence their decisions
whether to seek out-of-state incorporation. The location of firms has substantial
influence on incorporation decisions: Firms display substantial “home-state
preference” in favor of incorporating in the state in which they are located.2 States
thus enjoy a significant “home-state advantage” in competing for the firms located
in them, and they generally have much greater ability to attract incorporations from
in-state firms than from out-of-state firms. Even states that are hardly able to attract
out-of-state firms (i.e., whose corporate law system is rarely “purchased” by out-ofstate “buyers”) generally succeed in retaining a significant fraction of their in-state
firms. Thus, in contrast to the conventional picture of state competition, states do not
compete on equal footing for all publicly traded firms, and competition is
significantly more imperfect than is conventionally assumed.
We also investigate why firms’ location has such an influence on incorporation
choices and when the home-state advantage is more and less strong. We find that
the home-state bias is weaker, though still significant, among large firms and among
firms that went public more recently. We discuss four factors that can lead firms to
disfavor out-of-state incorporation, and we find evidence consistent with three
stories – ones based on (i) the higher costs of out-of-state incorporations, (ii) the
desire of firms to benefit from local favoritism, and (iii) the influence of local
lawyers. For example, we find that large firms are more likely to remain in-state
when they are located in small states where their clout enables them to obtain some
benefits from local favoritism. The evidence, however, is inconsistent with a story
based on firms’ having no reason to leave states that have adopted the uniform
Model Business Corporation Act; firms located in such states do not exhibit a greater
tendency to remain in-state.
We then turn to examine how states’ corporate law systems affect their
performance in terms of both retaining in-state firms and attracting out-of-state
incorporations. Our focus here is on the effect of states’ antitakeover statutes. As will
be discussed, the dominant view among legal scholars, supported by some
empirical work, is unfavorable to the proliferation of such state statutes. Supporters
of state competition, however, argue that it has not encouraged such proliferation.
They believe that the incorporation market does not reward the amassing of
antitakeover statutes but rather rewards states that are more resistant to pressure by
That location might affect choices was suggested by the observation made in Daines (1999)
that the majority of firms incorporate either in their home state or in Delaware. In a work in
progress, Daines (2002) is conducting a study of firms’ home-state preferences at the time of the
IPO. The results of Daines’ study, which is based on IPO-date data, can be expected to
complement our examination of this issue, which is based on Compustat data on the stock of all
firms existing at the end of 1999.

2

3

local firms’ managers for antitakeover protection. We test this prediction and find it
to be inconsistent with the evidence.
At one end of the spectrum, states with no antitakeover statutes, such as
California, do poorly and retain a relatively small fraction of the companies located
in them. At the other end of the spectrum, states that amass most or all standard
antitakeover statutes are the ones most successful both in retaining in-state firms
and in attracting out-of-state firms. More generally, antitakeover protections are
correlated with success in the incorporation market; adding antitakeover statutes
significantly increases the ability of states to retain their local firms, as well as their
ability to attract out-of-state incorporations.
The effect we identify is not only statistically significant but also large in
magnitude. Controlling for other firm and state characteristics, we estimate that, had
states that currently have all standard antitakeover statutes not adopted them, they
would have lost more than half of the incorporations of local firms they currently
have (going down from 49% of all firms located in these states to 23% of these
firms)). Conversely, adopting all standard antitakeover statutes by states that
currently have no such statutes would have more than doubled the percentage of
local firms retained by them (from 23% to 50%).
We pay special attention to two types of statutes – the “recapture” or
“disgorgement” statute adopted by Pennsylvania and Ohio and the mandatory
staggered boards statute adopted by Massachusetts. These statutes have been
widely criticized as detrimental to shareholder value, and supporters of state
competition have blacklisted them as extreme (see, e.g., Romano (1993), Daines
(2001a)). However, we find that, in contrast to the beliefs of state competition
supporters, the passage of these statutes has not hurt the states adopting them in the
incorporation market.
Thus, the antitakeover protections established by Pennsylvania, Ohio, and
Massachusetts do not reach the level that would start discouraging incorporators. In
contrast to amassing standard antitakeover statutes, however, having extreme
statutes has not increased incorporations in these states. Thus, it might be that the
adoption of such statutes is close to the outer limits of how far a state can go in
providing antitakeover protections without discouraging incorporations. 3

In contemporaneous work, Subramanian (2002) also examines the effects of antitakeover
statutes on the ability of states to retain their local firms. As will be discussed in Section 4, his
conclusions on this issue are consistent with ours with respect to standard antitakeover statutes
but not with respect to extreme statutes. He does not study the effect of states’ antitakeover
statutes on their success in attracting out-of-state incorporations and the overall effect that
migration of firms to out-of-state incorporations has on the level of antitakeover protection.

3

4

Our findings indicate that it is not possible to maintain, as the dominant view
among corporate scholars has done, that (i) state antitakeover statutes largely do not
serve shareholders, and (ii) state competition provides states with strong incentives
to provide rules that are optimal for shareholders. One or both of these two
propositions need to be revised. Whatever position one ultimately adopts, the
identified connection between antitakeover statutes and success in the incorporation
marketplace has significant implications for the debates on state competition, on
takeover law, and on corporate governance in general.
We also find some other features of states that have an effect on how they fare
in the incorporation market. For example, states that have more “liberal” culture,
which might be associated with judicial activism, are less successful in retaining instate companies. States that have adopted the Revised Model Business Corporation
Act (or its predecessor) are not more successful in attracting incorporations either
form local firms or from out-of-state firms. The approach that we put forward can
also be used to identify other features of states that make them attractive for
incorporators.
We end the empirical analysis by analyzing concentration and market structure
in the incorporation market. Recent work by Kamar (1998) and by Kahan and Kamar
(2001) highlighted the importance of understanding the sources and consequences
of Delaware’s dominance in the incorporation market. Studying Delaware’s
dominance in the market, we find that this dominance is stronger than has been
recognized and that it is likely to keep growing. Given the presence of home-state
bias, we argue, it is useful to evaluate Delaware’s market dominance not only by
looking at its share of all incorporations, as had been conventionally done, but also
by looking at its share of out-of-state incorporations. In this respect, we find,
Delaware’s share of the market for out-of-state incorporations is exceedingly high.
We also find that both the fraction of firms that go out-of-state, and Delaware’s
fraction of out-of-state incorporations, have been steadily increasing. Thus, if
Delaware just maintains its performance with respect to firms from recent cohorts,
its share of total incorporations can be expected to continue climbing from current
levels.
Our analysis is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the data and provides
summary statistics about the patterns of incorporations. Section 3 studies firms’
home-state preferences and the factors that pull firms in the direction of in-state
incorporation. Section 4 investigates how states’ corporate law rules, and especially
antitakeover statutes, affect their success in attracting incorporations. Section 5
analyzes the division and structure of the incorporation market and Delaware’s

5

dominance in this market. Section 6 makes concluding remarks and suggests
directions for subsequent empirical work on the subject.

2

Data and Summary Statistics

The data set that we use includes all the publicly traded firms for which there
was data in the Compustat database at the end of 1999 and which have both their
headquarters and their incorporation in the United States.4 Following Daines
(2001a), who argues that financial firms are different in their corporate governance
needs and their incorporation decisions are sometimes influenced by some special
considerations, we excluded all financial firms and were left with 6,530 publicly
traded firms. As already noted, an earlier version of this paper (Bebchuk and Cohen
(2002)) reports results for the set of all firms (both financial and nonfinancial) and
these results are qualitatively quite similar to the ones reported below.
Table 1 displays how firms are distributed among states of location for all
publicly traded firms, for all Fortune 500 firms, and for all firms that went public in
the five-year period 1996-2000. By states of location we shall refer throughout the
paper to the state where the firm’s headquarters are located (which is the only
location data provided by Compustat). We shall refer to the fifty-one jurisdictions in
the US – the fifty states and the District of Columbia – as states.
Not surprisingly, states that have large populations and big economies have
more firms located in them. California, with the biggest population and economy, is
home to the headquarters of 19% of all firms. Its share is especially large (27%)
among firms that went public in the period 1996-2000, presumably because of the
large incidence of Silicon Valley firms going public in these years. New York and
Texas come second and third, each with about 9% of the firms. In an unreported
regression, we find that the number of firms located in a state is highly correlated
with the size of its population.
Table 2 displays the distribution of incorporations among states for all publicly
traded firms, for all Fortune 500 firms, and for all firms going public in the five-year
period 1996-2000. Comparing Table 2 with Table 1 indicates that the distribution of
locations and the distribution of incorporations are quite different. As is well
known, Delaware has by far the largest stake of incorporations: 58% of all firms, 59%
of Fortune 500 firms, and even a higher percentage – 68% – of firms that went public
in the period 1996-2000.

This point in time was the most recent one for which there was data for the great majority of
firms when we did our empirical analysis.

4

6

Although no state even comes close to Delaware in terms of the number of
incorporations, some states do much better than others. Whereas three states have
more than 200 incorporations each, and eight states have between 100 and 200
incorporations each, thirty states have less than 50 incorporations each, with
seventeen states having less than 10 incorporations each.
These two tables do not indicate where the firms located in each state choose to
incorporate, nor where the firms incorporated in each state are located. Table 3
therefore presents a matrix that indicates for each state how the firms located in it
divide their incorporations between this state and all other states. A quite noticeable
feature of Table 3 is the concentration of firms in the boxes along the diagonal,
which contain the numbers of in-state incorporations for each and every state. The
large concentration of firms along this diagonal suggests the possible presence of a
significant home-state advantage. Another noticeable and expected feature of Table
3 is the significant concentration of firms in the various boxes of one vertical column
– that of Delaware; the column clearly indicates that Delaware is able to attract
incorporations from all but one state.
Table 4 presents the total number and percentage of firms incorporated in their
home state – among all firms, firms going public during 1991-1995 and during 19962000, Fortune 500 firms, and Fortune 100 firms. The table indicates that there is a
substantial percentage of in-state incorporation in all groups. The fraction of in-state
incorporations is smaller for firms that are large and for firms that went public in the
90’s. However, even among Fortune 100 firms, and among firms that went public in
the past five years, the fraction of in-state incorporations is significant (about 25% in
each case).
Tables 5 displays how each state fares in the “market for corporate law.” The
table indicates for each state (i) how many of its in-state firms it retains, both in
absolute numbers and as a percentage of all in-state firms; (ii) how many out-ofstate firms it attracts, both in absolute number and as a percentage of all out-of-state
incorporations; and (iii) its net outflow (inflow) of firms. This table indicates that the
large majority of states are net “exporters” of firms. Other than Delaware, which is a
huge “importer,” only Nevada has a significant net inflow of firms (154). The table
also indicates that states vary greatly in how successful they are in the incorporation
marketplace, both in terms of retaining in-state firms and in terms of attracting outof-state firms.

7

3

Home-State Advantage and Its Sources

3.1

The Presence of Home-State Advantage

The literature on state competition has generally viewed the incorporation
choice of publicly traded firms as a “stand-alone” choice, one that depends only on
judgment as to which state’s corporate law system would be best, and that is
independent of the state where the firm is located. US firms incorporated in any
given state may transact on equal footing in any state. Consequently, being
incorporated in any other state is not supposed to affect how a firm’s operations are
going to be taxed or regulated. Similarly, the corporate law of any given state, which
largely affects the relationship between shareholders and managers, applies equally
to all the firms incorporated in that state regardless of where they are located.
For these reasons, the conventional view regards incorporation choices as a
“pure” choice of a legal regime, based only on a comparison of states’ corporate law
systems and a judgment on which of those systems would be best for the firm. And
the corporate law rules that would best fit any given firm might depend on various
features of the firm, its shareholders, or its managers, but there is no good reason to
expect them to depend on the particular location of the firm’s headquarters. On this
view, all states are viewed as “selling” their corporate law system to all publicly
traded firms, and not especially to the firms located in them. If this picture were
indeed accurate, we could expect some states to be more successful than others in
attracting a given type of firm, but we would not expect a state to be more successful
(controlling for firm characteristics) in attracting local firms than out-of-state firms.
This conventional picture was put in doubt by the report of Daines (1999) that
most firms incorporate either in their home state or in Delaware. Our data confirms
the presence of a strong home-state advantage. There is a very heavy concentration
of firms along the boxes of the diagonal of Table 3. Tables 5 indicates that states are
generally much more attractive to their in-state firms than to out-of-state firms. Even
states that do rather poorly with respect to out-of-state firms do succeed in retaining
a significant fraction of their own firms.
For example, as Table 5 displays, California, which does relatively poorly on
both dimensions, still does far better for in-state firms, retaining 22% of them, than
for out-of-state firms, attracting only 0.2% of them – (see Table 5). Altogether,
California is the incorporation choice of 273 firms located in California (out of a total
of 1,254 firms headquartered in California) but only 10 firms located elsewhere (out
of a total of 4,393 incorporated out-of-state). Although California appears unable to
“sell” its corporate law system to any significant number of out-of-state firms, it

8

does have a significant number of incorporations because it starts with a large stock
of local firms with respect to which it has some home-state advantage.
To test systematically the difference in states’ abilities to attract in-state and
out-of-state firms, we ran for each given state that has 10 or more firms located in it
the following logit regression. We regressed a dummy variable that has a value of 1
if a company incorporates in the given state and 0 otherwise on (i) various
characteristics of the firm – specifically, the company’s sales (log), the company’s
Tobin’s Q, the company’s return on assets, the company’s number of employees, the
company’s total equity, and dummy variables reflecting whether the company went
public in 1996-2000, 1991-1995, or before 1990, and (ii) a dummy variable that has a
value of 1 if the company is located in the given state and 0 otherwise. In all the
regressions, being located in the state increased the likelihood of incorporating in
the state at 99% confidence. To illustrate, Table 6 displays one of these regressions,
the one applying to California. The table indicates that the coefficient for being
located in California is positive and large (at 99% confidence). Similar results are
obtained in the other regressions. 5
3.2

Factors Pulling toward Remaining In-state

As noted, if firms were paying attention only to the relative quality of the
corporate law system offered by states, firms’ incorporation decisions would not be
influenced by their location. What explains firms’ giving preference to incorporating
in their home state? Below we will test four other stories that might help explain
why firms are pulled in the direction of remaining in-state:
(i) The Extra Costs Pull: It might be suggested that the presence of home-state
bias emerges from firms’ desire to avoid the extra costs that might be involved in
going outside the state. Incorporation in Delaware involves a franchise tax and filing
fees that are non-negligible, even though not very substantial for most publicly
traded firms. Also, incorporating out-of-state might involve some additional
transaction costs resulting from the need to retain additional law firms or to conduct
legal business at a distance.6
It is worth reminding the reader that by state of location we refer to the state where the firm’s
headquarters are located which is the only location variable on your Compustat. To the extent
that some firms have their main location and their incorporation in a state other than where
they are headquartered, the home-state advantage might be even stronger than suggested by
our results.
6 According to Cumming and MacIntosh (2001), Canadian lawyers whom the authors
interviewed note the extra costs involved in out-of-province incorporation as an important
reason for incorporating in the province of location.
5

9

Because the extra costs of going out of state are unlikely to rise proportionately
with firm size, these costs can be expected to weigh more heavily on smaller firms,
and smaller firms can be thus expected to display stronger tendencies to incorporate
in-state. Note that, because extra costs are likely to be trivial for firms that are very
large, and because home-state bias is still present to some extent for Fortune 500 and
Fortune 100 firms (see Table 4), the extra costs story cannot provide a full
explanation for the observed home-state bias; the question is thus only whether the
extra costs story plays a significant role.
(ii) The Uniformity Story: A complementary story to the extra costs story can be
based on the fact that many states have substantially similar corporate law codes
that are all based on the Revised Model Business Corporation Act (RMBCA) (or its
predecessor, the Model Business Corporation Act).7 The Revised Model Act is a
sample statute, put together by a committee of corporate scholars and practitioners,
that many states have adopted wholesale. For all firms that prefer being subject to
the RBMCA and are headquartered in a state that has adopted the RMBCA, so the
story goes, even a tiny cost of going out-of-state might serve as a tie-breaker and
lead to remaining in their state of headquarters.8 A problem with this story is that,
even among states that have adopted the RMBCA, there is significant variance in the
additional antitakeover statutes (if any) that were adopted. In any event, the
prediction of this story is that firms located in states with the RMBCA will show
stronger tendencies to incorporate in-state.
(iii) The Local Favoritism Story: A third factor that might lead some firms to give
preference to in-state incorporation is the hope of getting favorable treatment. Even
though a state is supposed to treat all firms incorporated in it in the same way
regardless of where they are located, a firm located in a state – especially a large
firm located in a small state – might hope that its stature and clout in the state
would lead judges or public officials to give it a favorable treatment with respect to
some corporate law issues that might arise. Similarly, a firm located in a state might
expect that, if it displays “loyal citizenship” by incorporating in the state, it would
increase its chances of getting favorable treatment from public officials on issues
unrelated to corporate law that might arise in the firm’s dealings with the state.
A testable prediction of the local favoritism story concerns the interaction of
firm size and state size. A large firm located in a small state might have a major
presence (the big fish in a small pond phenomenon) and can have significant clout
For a detailed description and a list of the states adopting the RMBCA, and its close
predecessor the MBCA, see Section of Business Law of the American Bar Association (1999).
8 We are grateful to Frank Easterbrook for suggesting this possible story and for stressing the
importance of controlling for the RMBCA factor.
7

10

that can enable it to get local favoritism (Sitkoff (2002)). In contrast, a firm of a
similar size that is located in a big state will not be able to stand out and thus is
unlikely to be able to obtain local favoritism. Thus, the local favoritism story
predicts that, for large firms of any given size, those located in a small state will
have a greater tendency to remain in-state.9
(iv) The Law Firm Factor: A fourth factor that might pull some firms in the
direction of in-state incorporation is that of agency costs in the market for legal
services. Recent work by Coates (2001) demonstrates that agency problems between
lawyers and owners-managers might influence choices made at the IPO stage. In
particular, it shows that the identity and location of the IPO law firm substantially
affect the antitakeover charter provisions chosen by firms going public. Similarly,
the identity of the law firm involved in a firm’s IPO and/or subsequent corporate
affairs – and, in particular, whether the law firm is located in the firm’s state of
location or elsewhere – might significantly affect the choice of incorporation state.
An in-state law firm might be inclined to keep the firm in-state because such in-state
incorporation would enable the law firm to handle fully the firm’s corporate affairs,
avoiding the inconvenience and fees-sharing involved in having to use counsel from
another state. Furthermore, in-state incorporation would provide the local law firm
with an advantage over out-of-state law firms that might compete for the firm’s
business, as the local law firm would be likely to have greater familiarity with the
home state’s corporate law and better connections in the state (see Carney (1998)).
Finally, before proceeding, it is worth noting another possible story that can be
ruled up-front as inconsistent with the evidence already discussed. On this story,
states tailor their corporate law to fit the type of firms located in them. Different
types of firms have different needs and states might provide a corporate law system
especially fitting for the type of firms most represented in the state. However, The
regressions noted above, such as the one displayed in Table 6 for California, control
for the firm’s industry and for various financial features of it. It is still the case that
firms located outside California are on an order of magnitude less likely to
incorporate in California than firms located on California that are in the same
industry and have the same financial characteristics. Furthermore, under a story in
which different states cater to different niches, one would expect that each of the
state offering a product that is especially good for certain type of firms would attract
a significant number of out-of-state incorporations from firms of this type. However,
Another implication of this story, whose testing is left for future work, is that firms operating
in lines of business which depend more on the state (because their business is either more
affected by the state’s regulation or by transactions with the state) would be more likely to
remain in-state. Yet another implication is that the more concentrated are a company’s actual
operations in its state of headquarters, the more likely the company to incorporate in this state.

9

11

when firms incorporate out-of-state, the great majority of them go the Delaware,
which indicates that the heterogeneity among firms in their corporate law needs
does not play a key role in this market.
3.3.

Empirical Examination

To examine the factors that make firms more likely to remain in-state, we ran
two regressions in which the dependent variable was a dummy variable (In-state)
that has a value of 1 if the firm remains in-state and 0 if it incorporates elsewhere. In
the first regression, which is reported in Table 7, Column 1, the explanatory
variables were only firm characteristics and state dummies used to control for state
fixed effects. The firm characteristics included in this regression were the firm’s sales
(log), the firm’s Tobin’s Q, the firm’s return on assets, the firm’s number of
employees, the firm’s total equity, dummy variables indicating whether the firm
went public in 1991-1995 or in 1996-2000, and industry dummies.
In the second regression, whose results are reported in Column 2 of Table 7, we
replaced the state dummies with various characteristics of the state in which the
firm is located. In particular, we included:
(i) State demographic characteristics -- the size of the state’s population (log),
the number of local firms, and the per capita income;
(ii) An interaction term of the size of the firm (as measured by the log of its
sales) and the size of the state’s population (as measured by the log of the state’s
population);
(iii) The State’s regional location (northeast, south, mid-west, or west);
(iv) A dummy variable indicating whether the state has adopted the RMBCA or
the MBCA; and
(v) Various legal and political characteristics of the state (which will be the
focus of the analysis in Section 4 and which are listed in Table 10 to be discussed
later on).10
The results indicate that larger firms are less likely to remain in-state. The
number of employees variable has in both regressions a coefficient that is negative
and statistically significant (at 95% confidence). In the first regression, where log
sales is included without the interaction term between it and the state size, it also
has a negative and statistically significant coefficient (at 90% confidence). Because
some of the extra transaction costs involved in out-of-state incorporation are fixed or
The regression reported in the second column of Table 7 is the same as the one reported in the
first column of Table 10; each of these tables displays only the variables that are of interest for
the discussion in the relevant Section of the paper.

10

12

at least do not grow proportionately with firm size, these costs have lower weight
for large firms. This finding is thus consistent with the extra costs story. To the
extent that large firms are more likely to use a national law firm, this finding might
also be explained by the local lawyer story.
The results in both regressions also indicate that newer firms are more likely (at
99% confidence) to incorporate out-of-state. Firms going public in recent years
might have been more likely to use out-of-state law firms, as the market for legal
services has become more national. High-tech firms, which were substantially
represented among firms going public in the 90’s, often had significant holdings by
venture capitalists and financial intermediaries connected to legal advisers from
national financial centers. Thus, this finding could point toward the local lawyers
story.
There is one result that is clearly consistent with the local favoritism factor and
does not appear explainable by any of the other stories. As is indicated by the
negative sign of the interaction term in the second regression, large firms are more
likely (at 95% confidence) to incorporate in-state when their home state is small than
when it is large. Large firms are more likely to be able to benefit from local
favoritism in small states, where they can stand out and have significant clout, than
in large states.
In unreported regression, we use both sales and sales to the power of two as
independent variables instead of log(sales). Consistent with the above finding, we
obtain a negative coefficient on sales and a positive coefficient on sales to the power
of two. This indicates that, even though large firms are more likely to incorporate
out of state than small firms, this effect is weakened once we look at very large
firms, which are the ones that have most clout and thus are most likely to benefit
from local favoritism.
Interestingly, the regional location of states appears to make a significant
difference (we use the division into regions used by the US Census). In particular,
firms located in the Northeast are more likely (at 99% confidence) to incorporate
out-of-state. Firms located in the Northeast are more likely to use New York City
lawyers engaged in national practice, and we suspect that such lawyers tend to use
Delaware incorporations. The relevance of regional location might thus be due to
the law firm factor.
Both regressions indicate that adopting the RMBCA (or its close predecessor
the MBCA) does not have a statistically significant effect on a state’s ability to retain
firms. This enables us to reject the story that the presence of a large number of home
state incorporations results from firms located in RMBCA states that prefer an

13

RMBCA statute and use staying at their home state as a tie-breaker among a large
set of states with such a statute.
3.4 Choosing to Incorporate in Delaware
Thus far, we have examined which characteristics make firms more likely to
incorporate out-of-state. It might be of interest to examine in particular which
characteristics make firms more likely to incorporate in Delaware, the dominant
jurisdiction used in out-of-state incorporations.
Table 8 presents the results of a logit regression in which we regressed a
dummy variable that has a value of 1 if the firm incorporated in Delaware and 0
otherwise on the characteristics of firms used in earlier regressions. Not
surprisingly, the factors that make firms more likely to be incorporated in Delaware
are quite similar to those that make firms more likely to be incorporated out-of-state
in general. Firms are more likely to incorporate in Delaware when they are large (at
99% significance) and when they went public during the 90’s (again, at 99%
significance).
Interestingly, we do not find an association between Delaware incorporation
and a higher Tobin’ Q. This association, which is reported by Daines (2001a) to hold
for the 80’s and early 90’s, apparently does not hold in 1999.11
Daines tried to infer from the association he found that Delaware’s law is better
for shareholders. A problem of drawing such an inference even for the years in
which the association existed is the likely presence of a selection effect; the selection
of firms that have Delaware incorporation is far from random. The results reported
in Table 8 indicate that the firm characteristics available from the Compustat
database, which is the data used both by us and by Daines, can explain only a very
small part of the selection of firms that incorporate in Delaware. There are clearly
some omitted variables with respect to firms (such as, for example, the identity of
the firm’s law firm) that have substantial influence on their incorporation choices.
Identifying these omitted variables is an important task for future research. In the
meantime, however, correlations between Delaware incorporation and shareholder

Subramanian (2002, fn 70) reports that his work-in-progress found that the correlation
between Delaware incorporation and a higher Tobin’s Q largely disappears after 1996. Bebchuk,
Cohen, and Ferrell (2002) point out that even during the 1981-1996 period studied by Daines,
the correlation existed only in some years but not in others. They also argue that the fact that the
correlation does not exist in some years, and that it comes and goes, indicates both that the
correlation is not a general and persistent phenomenon and, furthermore, that its existence in
some years is likely to result from a selection effect.

11

14

value cannot be used as a reliable basis for drawing inferences concerning the effect
of Delaware law on shareholder value.12

4

Antitakeover Protection and Incorporation Choices

We have thus far examined what factors other than states’ corporate law
systems affect incorporation choices. We now turn to examine the features of states’
corporate rules that influence these decisions and, in turn, how states fare in the
market for incorporations.
Prior empirical analysis has focused on examining the wealth effects of
incorporating in Delaware versus incorporating elsewhere. Instead of focusing on
differences between Delaware and all other states taken as a group, this paper
unpacks the large group of states other than Delaware. As documented earlier,
states vary considerably in their ability to retain in-state firms and to attract out-ofstate firms. These differences enable us to explore what factors make states more or
less attractive for firms choosing a state of incorporation. To the extent that states
seek to attract incorporations, such an analysis can identify what incentives
competition provides to states. In particular, we will focus on using such an analysis
to investigate how offering antitakeover statutes affects states’ attractiveness in the
incorporation marketplace.
4.1 Antitakeover Protections
One of the most important and hotly debated subjects in corporate law has
been the regulation of hostile takeovers. Unlike the British City Code, which bans all
defensive tactics and facilitates takeover bids, most US states have developed a large
body of antitakeover protections over the last twenty-five years. One primary source
of antitakeover protections has been the adoption of state antitakeover statutes.
Antitakeover protections have also been provided by the development in the
Delaware courts (whose decisions were subsequently followed by courts in other
states) of doctrines that permit managers to engage in defensive tactics and, in
particular, to use poison pills.
The body of academic opinion has largely viewed state takeover law as
providing excessive protections against takeovers. Researchers who generally
support state competition have been among those viewing state antitakeover
statutes as excessive (see, e.g., Easterbrook and Fischel (1991), Romano (1993a,
12

See Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2002) for further discussion of this issue.

15

1993b)). The many scholars who believe that antitakeover statutes do not serve
shareholders find support for their view in the empirical evidence on the effects of
such statutes. The overwhelming majority of the event studies done on the adoption
of state antitakeover statutes found either no price reactions or negative price
reactions.13 Furthermore, researchers have also found evidence that state
antitakeover statutes have operated to increase agency costs.14
While researchers have generally taken the view that the antitakeover
protections developed by state corporate law are largely excessive, they have
differed on the role of state competition in this area. The proliferation of
antitakeover statutes is consistent with the view that state competition provides
adverse incentives with respect to issues, such as the level of antitakeover
protections, that have a substantial effect on the private benefits of managers (see
Bebchuk (1992), Bebchuk and Ferrell (1989, 2001) and Bar-Gill, Barzuza, and
Bebchuk (2001)). However, the proliferation of state antitakeover statutes might
present a problem for those holding the dominant view that state competition is
generally beneficial. Supporters of this view have sought to reconcile it with their
belief that state antitakeover statutes do not serve shareholders by arguing that state
competition does not encourage, and is thus not responsible for, the adoption of
antitakeover statutes (see, e.g., Easterbrook and Fischel (1991), Romano (1993a,
2001)).
On this view, amassing strong antitakeover statutes is likely to decrease rather
than increase the number of incorporations. Most of these statutes were still
adopted, so the argument goes, because the adopting states could not resist the
lobbying or political pressure of some managers concerned about the threat of a
takeover. As Winter (1993, at xi) puts it: “The problem [with antitakeover statutes] is
not that states compete for charters but that too often they do not.” Thus, on this
view, state competition has operated not to encourage the adoption of antitakeover
statutes but rather to discourage and moderate it.
In support of this view, supporters of state competition have argued that
Delaware, the most successful state, has adopted fewer and milder antitakeover
statutes, especially compared with states such as Pennsylvania, Ohio, and
Massachusetts (see, e.g., Romano (2001)). It is far from clear, however, that Delaware
offers less antitakeover protection than most states. Although there are states that
See, e.g., Karpoff and Malatesta (1989). For surveys of these many studies, see Romano
(1993a) and Gartman (2000).
14 Bertrand and Mullinathan (1998) found that the adoption of state antitakeover statutes
resulted in increased extraction of rents through executive compensation. Bertrand and
Mullainathan (1999) found that the adoption of antitakeover statutes reduced managers’
incentives to minimize labor costs.
13

16

have more antitakeover statutes than Delaware, there are also states that have no
antitakeover statutes. Furthermore, unlike other states, Delaware has a very large
and developed body of case law on takeovers, which makes the absence of some
statutes practically irrelevant. For example, because Delaware has a large body of
judge-made law upholding the indefinite use of poison pills, the absence in
Delaware of some state antitakeover statutes, such as a statute endorsing poison
pills, is practically irrelevant.15
In contrast, the adoption of state antitakeover statutes did have practical
significance in other states. No state other than Delaware has a developed case law
on defensive tactics. Indeed, a Lexis search indicates that most states do not have
even a single case on poison pills. In these states, the adoption of pill endorsement
statutes and constituency statutes provided managers with the confidence,
notwithstanding the absence of precedents in these states thus far, that indefinite
use of poison pill would be permitted. In some states (e.g., New Jersey), the
adoption of a pill endorsement statute served to override an earlier case ruling
against the validity of poison pills. The adoption of antitakeover statutes by a state
without a developed takeover case law, especially the adoption of several types of
statutes, might have conveyed a message that the state’s corporate law is committed
to providing substantial protections from takeovers, a message which in Delaware
was in large part supplied by case law.
Thus, in examining the question whether competition rewards stronger
antitakeover protections, little can be learnt from observing that Delaware has fewer
antitakeover statutes than some states – both because other states vary considerably
in this regard and because Delaware’s takeover law is in large part provided by its
developed case law. We therefore propose to approach this question by unpacking
the group of all states other than Delaware and studying the cross-state differences
within this group. The position taken by supporters of state competition implies that
states adopting more antitakeover statutes would not do better, and indeed would
do worse, in the market for incorporations. This prediction will be tested below.

As long as the pill is in place, any additional defense is superfluous, as the pill by itself
completely blocks a bidder from proceeding. And if a bidder overcomes the pill by taking
control of the board in a proxy contest, a control share acquisition statute and fair price statute,
which are generally applicable only to offers the board does not approve, would be irrelevant as
well.

15

17

4.2 Standard Antitakeover Statutes
Table 9, taken from Gartman (2000), indicates the antitakeover statutes that
each state has. The first six columns stand for “standard” types of antitakeover
statutes. We define the following dummy variables:
(1) Control share: equal to 1 if the state has a control share acquisition
statute and to 0 otherwise; 16
(2) Fair price: equal to 1 if the state has a fair price statute and to 0
otherwise; 17
(3) NoFreezeouts (1-3), which is equal to 1 if the state has a business
combination statute that prevents a freezeout for up to three years after a takeover
and to 0 otherwise; 18
(4) NoFreezouts (4-5), which is equal to 1 if the state has a business
combination statute that prevents a freezeout for a period longer than three years
after a takeover (the longest period adopted by some states is 5 years) and to 0
otherwise;
(5) Poison Pill Endorsement, which is equal to 1 if the state has a statute
endorsing the use of a poison pill and to 0 otherwise; 19 and
(6) Constituencies, which is equal to 1 if the state has a statute allowing
managers to take into account interests of non-shareholders in defending against a
takeover and to 0 otherwise. 20
A control share acquisition statute essentially requires a hostile bidder to put its offer to a vote
of the shareholders before proceeding with it. If a bidder does not do so and purchases a large
block of shares, it runs a very serious risk of not being able to vote these shares at all and thus
not be able to gain control despite its large holdings.
17 A fair price statute requires a bidder that succeeds in gaining control and then proceeds with
a second-step freezeout (a transaction removing remaining shareholders) to pay the remaining
minority shareholders the same price as it paid for shares acquired through its bid. This
prevents bidders from using the threat of a second-step freezeout at a low price as a mechanism
for pressuring the shareholders into tendering.
18 Business combination statutes prevent a bidder that gains control from merging the target
with its own assets for a specified period of time (unless certain difficult-to-meet conditions are
satisfied). Such a constraint might make it more difficult for successful bidders to realize gains
from synergy following a takeover and this, by reducing the potential profits from a takeover,
might discourage potential buyers from bidding.
19 Poison pills are warrants or rights issued by the company which are triggered and entitle
their holders to get significant value in the event that any buyer obtains a significant block
without the approval of the board. As long as they are not redeemed, poison pills make a
takeover prohibitively costly. Delaware courts have approved the use of pills in a series of wellknown cases, starting with Moran vs. Household International in 1985. Other states have found
it necessary to ground the use of poison pills in legislation either because of the absence of such
cases or in a few instances to reverse court rulings against poison pills.
16

18

Altogether, control share acquisition statutes were passed in 27 states, fair price
statutes in 27 states, business combination statutes (of both types) in 33 states, pill
endorsement statutes in 25 states, and constituencies statutes in 31 states. Of these
143 statutes, 135 statutes were adopted in the period 1985-1991.21
As noted above, antitakeover statutes are possibly important not only in what
they actually do but also in what they signal. They send an antitakeover message
and signal that the state is likely to provide in the future antitakeover protections
that will be valuable for firms. Therefore, how many statutes have been adopted by
a given state might be important. Adopting the full arsenal of standard antitakeover
statutes sends a clear antitakeover message to state courts and to potential and
existing incorporators. We therefore will use, as an alternative to using dummies for
each of the statutes, an antitakeover protection index (using a similar approach to
that LaPorta et. al. (1998) used to study cross-country differences in shareholder
protection).
Our antitakeover protection index, INDEX, attaches to each state a score from 0
to 5 that is equal to the number of standard antitakeover statutes that it has.
(Because each state can have either a freezeout statute with up to 3 years
moratorium or one with a 4- or 5-year moratorium (but of course not both), the
maximum number of standard antitakeover statutes that a state can adopt is 5.) We
also run a regression in which we seek to avoid imposing linearity on the effects of
any given increase in the index score, and to this end we define five dummy
variables – INDEX1, INDEX2, INDEX3, INDEX4, INDEX5 – each representing the
set of states with the relevant number of statutes.
4.3 Extreme Statutes
In addition to the standard statutes, there are three “notorious” states that
adopted unusual and more restrictive statutes. Pennsylvania and Ohio adopted
statutes that enable the “disgorgement” or “recapture” of all the short-term profits
made by a hostile acquirer, thus discouraging potential hostile bidders.
Massachusetts adopted a statute that mandated a staggered board, which has a

Such statutes are regarded as antitakeover statutes because allowing the managers to take into
account how a takeover would affect, say, employees or debtholders provides managers with
extra reasons for opposing the takeover and makes it more difficult for courts to scrutinize such
decisions.
21 Two statutes were adopted earlier and six statutes were adopted in 1997-99. We ran all our
regressions excluding the six statutes adopted in 97-99 and obtained similar results.
20

19

strong antitakeover force,22 even for firms that did not have a provision to this effect
in their charter.
These two types of statutes and these three states have earned the universal
scorn of commentators. Commentators have generally regarded these statutes as
especially excessive and detrimental to shareholders. Indeed, several event studies
found that the statutes passed by these three states had a substantial negative effect
– higher than the effects found for the passage of other antitakeover statutes – on the
stock value of firms incorporated in these states.23
Supporters of state competition have used these three states to support their
position that state competition rewards moderation in the provision of antitakeover
protections. For example, Daines (2001a) and Romano (1993a, 1993b, 2001) use
Pennsylvania, Ohio, and/or Massachusetts as prime examples for their view that
Delaware’s law is relatively hospitable to takeovers.
Supporters of state competition have also directed some of their empirical work
to these three states. Daines (2001a) reports that firms in these three states have a
lower Tobin’s Q. Note, however, that this finding is at most an indication that the
statutes hurt shareholder wealth, consistent with the findings of the event studies.
This finding however, does not at all indicate that the statutes discouraged
incorporations in these states and hurt the states adopting them in the incorporation
market.
Romano (1993) reports that most Pennsylvania firms opted out of the
Pennsylvania statute, and she views this opting out as an indication that state
competition works well. On her view, the opting out indicates that the adoption of
the statute was not welcome to managers. Such a conclusion, however, cannot be
drawn from this finding. Because the opt-out procedure was rather simple, the
managers of Pennsylvania firms that chose to opt out of the statute were hardly hurt
by its passage. In contrast, the adoption of the statute could have benefited
considerably those managers that did not opt out of it and who obtained
antitakeover protections that they could not have obtained otherwise. Thus,
managers who opted out of the statute were largely indifferent to its adoption, but
Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian (2002) analyze the special antitakeover power of
staggered boards and present evidence that staggered boards indeed have such an effect.
Staggered boards are shown to increase substantially the likelihood that a target receiving a
hostile bid would remain independent.
23 Szewczyk and Tsetsekos (1992), Karpoff and Malatesta (1990), and Swartz (1996) all found
that passage of the Pennsylvania statute was accompanied by a substantial reduction in the
value of Pennsylvania firms. Ryngaert and Netter (1990) reached a similar conclusion with
respect to the passage of the Ohio legislation. Finally, Daines (2001b) obtained similar findings
with respect to the passage of the Massachusetts legislation.
22

20

managers who did not opt out of it might well have viewed its adoption quite
favorably. The substantial incidence of opting out does not therefore imply that the
passage of the statute was viewed by the managers of Pennsylvania firms as a
negative development. In any event, the opting out by firms that remained
incorporated in Pennsylvania in no way indicates that this state has been hurt in the
incorporation market.
Surprisingly, supporters of state competition have not tried to test directly
whether the actions of Pennsylvania, Ohio, and Massachusetts have substantially
hurt these states in the incorporation market. To explore this question, we defined
two additional dummy variables:
(i) Recapture, which is equal to 1 if the state has a statute enabling the recapture
of profits and to 0 otherwise;24 and
(ii) Staggered, which is equal to 1 if the state has a statute imposing staggered
boards and to 0 otherwise.25
Recapture is essentially a dummy variable standing for Pennsylvania or Ohio
and Staggered is essentially a dummy variable standing for Massachusetts.
4.4

What Helps States Retain In-State Firms?

(1) A First Look: Looking at the summary statistics in Table 5, we observe that
states without antitakeover statutes seem to be doing poorly in terms of the fraction
of their local firms that they are able to retain. Whereas 38% of all firms remain instate, most of the states with no antitakeover statutes retain a much lower fraction;
California, for example, retains only 22% of the firms located in it. Observe also that
states that have all the standard antitakeover statutes generally retain a larger-thanaverage fraction of their in-state firms. For example, Indiana and Wisconsin, each of
which offers a “royal flush” set of five standard antitakeover statutes, retain 70%
and 72% respectively of the firms located in them. More generally, the fraction of
local firms that each state retains is correlated with the number of antitakeover
statutes that the state has.
The summary statistics in Table 5 also do not display any apparent strong
adverse effect on the three states adopting extreme statutes. We observe that
Recapture statutes prevent bidders that gained control from making any short-term profits by
requiring that such profits be given to the acquired company.
25 The staggered board statute adopted by Massachusetts changed the default: instead of
allowing a staggered board only if the company opts into such an arrangement, the statute
imposes such an arrangement unless the company opted out of it, and the opting out
requirements were ones that were difficult to obtain for the shareholders of existing
Massachusetts firms.
24

21

Pennsylvania and Ohio, which have the notorious disgorgement statute, retain a
larger-than-average fraction of their local firms, and that the third “misbehaving”
state, Massachusetts, retains a lower-than-average fraction of its local firms.
We ran the following (unreported) regression on the set of all states other than
Delaware with 10 or more firms located in them.26 We regressed the fraction of local
firms that each state succeeds in retaining in-state on the number of standard
antitakeover statutes that the state has, on dummy variables indicating whether the
state has one of the two types of extreme statutes, and on all the demographic and
other characteristics of the state used in the regression reported in Table 7. The
results indicate that increasing the number of antitakeover statutes increases (at 95%
significance) the fraction of local firms that incorporate in-state.
Not to assume that increasing the number of antitakeover statutes has a linear
effect, we also ran the above regression using instead of the number of statutes five
dummy variables indicating whether the state has 1, 2, 3, 4, or 5 antitakeover
statutes respectively. The results indicate that having three, four, or five
antitakeover statutes increases (also at 95% confidence) the fraction of local firms
retained. Compared with having no antitakeover statutes, having all five standard
antitakeover statutes increases the fraction of local firms retained by 0.26, a very
large increase indeed.
(2) Taking Firm Characteristics into Account: The above regressions do not
control for the possibility that states might vary in the characteristics of the firms
located in them. To address this concern, we conducted a test controlling for firm
characteristics. We regressed on the set of all firms a dummy variable that is equal to
1 if the firm incorporates in its home state and to 0 otherwise on:
(i) The antitakeover protections that are offered by the state, as described
below;
(ii) A dummy variable indicating whether the state has adopted the RMBCA/
MBCA;
(iii) The percentage of the voters choosing the Democratic candidate in the 2000
election;
(iv) All the characteristics of firms (including industry dummies) and
demographic and regional characteristics of states examined in Section 3 (see Table
7, second column).
With respect to (i), the antitakeover protection, we used three different
specifications for states’ antitakeover protections. We accordingly ran three
regressions whose results are all reported in Table 10. The regression reported in
Column 1 of Table 10 uses the score of each state in the antitakeover protection
26

Only Arkansas, Montana, and North Dakota have less than 10 firms each.

22

index to stand for the state’s antitakeover protection. The regression reported on
Column 2 also relies on the index but, in order not to impose linearity on the
influence of the index, uses five dummy variables representing the groups of states
with index levels of 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. The regression reported in Column 3 uses
dummy variables for each of the standard antitakeover statutes. All three
regressions use dummy variables for the extreme statutes, the recapture
(disgorgement) statute present in Pennsylvania and Ohio and the staggered boards
statute present in Massachusetts.
All the three regressions control for all the characteristics of firms and
characteristics of states discussed in connection with Table 7. The coefficients of
these characteristics are already reported in Table 7; we therefore do not report them
again in Table 10 in order to focus on the parameters of interest in this section. It is
also worth noting that, for robustness check, we have run the three regressions with
respect only to the firms that went public during 1996-2000, and we obtained similar
results to the ones obtained for the set of all firms that we now turn to discuss.
(3) Standard Antitakeover Statutes: All the regressions reported in Table 10
indicate that standard antitakeover statutes make a state more likely to retain local
firms. The first regression indicates that having a higher score on the antitakeover
index increases the fraction of retained firms (at 99% confidence). The second
regression, which uses dummies for each of the index levels, indicates that having 3
or more statutes is especially helpful for retaining in-state firms (at 99%
significance). The third regression, using separate dummies for different standard
statutes, indicates that the statutes that are most helpful to have (all at 99%
confidence) are a control share acquisition statute, a business combination statute
with a long (4-5 years) moratorium period, and a pill endorsement statute.
Calculating the marginal effects from the logit regressions, we found that the
effect of antitakeover statutes is not only highly significant but also substantial in
magnitude. To provide a sense of the magnitude of the identified effects, we derived
two estimates using the results of the regression on the antitakeover index reported
in Column 1. First, we have derived prediction for the choices that all the firms
located in the 8 states that currently have no antitakeover protection would have
made had their states adopted all five standard antitakeover statutes. This provided
us with an estimate that, if these 8 states had adopted all five antitakeover statutes,
the percentages of these firms that remain in-state would have more than doubled –
increasing from the current level of 23% to 50%.
Conversely, we estimated in the same way what would have happened if the 9
states that currently have five standard antitakeover statutes had not adopted such
statutes. To this end, we used our regression to predict how the change would have

23

affects the choices of all the firms located in these 9 states. This provided us with an
estimate that, without the antitakeover statutes, these 9 states would have lost more
than half of the firms currently located in them, with the percentage of firms’
remaining in-state declining from the current level of 49% of all local firms to 23%.
(4) Extreme Statutes: In all three regressions reported in Table 10, having a
recapture statute has a positive but not statistically significant effect on states’
attractiveness for their in-state firms. Thus, as far as retaining local firms is
concerned, the evidence does not support the belief that adopting a recapture statute
has hurt Pennsylvania and Ohio in the incorporation market. To be sure, some local
firms opted out of the adopted statute according to the findings reported by
Romano (1993b). There is no evidence, however, that the adoption of the statute has
led firms located in Pennsylvania and Ohio to incorporate elsewhere, which is the
critical test for determining success in the market for incorporations.
As to the staggered board statute, the results are mixed. A staggered board
statute helps in retaining firms (at 99% confidence) in two regressions but has a
negative effect (at 90% confidence). The results for both the staggered boards statute
and the recapture statute are the same when the regressions are run only on the
firms that went public during 1996-2000.
Whereas our results that amassing standard antitakeover statutes helps states
attract local firms are generally consistent with those of Subramanian (2002), he
concludes that the recapture and staggered boards statutes have hurt the ability of
the states adopting them to retain firms. However, he uses one dummy variable to
stand for the presence of either a recapture or a staggered board statute, and he
controls only for firm characteristics but not for state characteristics other than their
antitakeover statutes. When we ran the same regressions as he did, we obtained
similar results to his. However, in order to allow for the possibility that the
incorporation market did not treat recapture and staggered boards statutes in the
same way, we used a separate dummy variable for each of these statutes. With this
specification, the recapture statute was no longer found to hurt the states adopting it
even without introducing state characteristics. And once we controlled for state
demographic and regional characteristics, the staggered board statute no longer had
a negative effect on the state adopting it.
We should caution, however, against drawing from our findings any firm
conclusions with respect to the effects of the adoption of extreme statutes. The
dummy for recapture statute is essentially a dummy for Pennsylvania and Ohio,
and the staggered board dummy is essentially a dummy for Massachusetts, and
these three states might have some other special features. It would be fair to say,
however, that the existing evidence does not enable accepting the belief of

24

supporters of state competition that adopting extreme antitakeover statutes is
penalized in the incorporation market.
(5) Liberal Political culture: It is interesting to note that, in all three regressions,
states that are strongly Democratic are less successful (at 99% confidence) in
retaining local firms. For any given set of statutory corporate provisions, judges in
states that are strongly Democratic might be expected to be more willing to
intervene, which might be unattractive to those making incorporation decisions.27
4.5 What Makes States Attractive for Out-of-State Firms?
We now turn to examine what makes states other than Delaware more or less
attractive to out-of-state incorporations. Looking first at the summary statistics in
Table 5, we find that, out of the 10 states with more than 15 out-of-state
incorporations each, 8 states have four or five antitakeover statutes.
To examine this issue more systematically, we ran the regressions reported in
Table 11. In these regressions, the dependent variable is log of (1 + the number of
out-of-state incorporations) for all states other than Delaware.28 For the covariants
we used the same firm characteristics and the same state characteristics (including
the alternative specifications of antitakeover protections) that we used in the earlier
regressions reported in Tables 10.
Starting with state demographic characteristics, a higher per capita income
helps attracting out-of-state incorporations (at 99% confidence in all three
regressions). It might be that, once firms go out-of-state, they prefer a state with a
relatively developed legal infrastructure, whose presence might be correlated with a
higher per capita income.
The ideological leaning toward Democrats does not have any statistically
significant role. It might be that, once a firm goes out-of-state, it will tend to choose a
state with certain clear positions on corporate law issues, and those positions will
make the general ideological leaning of the state less significant.
Turning to antitakeover protection, the results clearly indicate that offering a
stronger antitakeover protection is also helpful in attracting out-of-state
incorporations. The first regression (Column 1) indicates that having a higher score
on the antitakeover index makes a state more attractive (at 99% confidence) to outof-state incorporations. The second regression (Column 2), which uses dummies for
Different observers might interpret this link in different ways. The desire to avoid judicial
intervention might be rooted in shareholder value considerations (a positive interpretation) or
in agency problems (a negative interpretation).
28 Having the dependent variable be equal to the number of out-of-state incorporations yields
similar results.
27

25

each of the score levels, also finds such a link. Finally, the third regression (Column
3) indicates that the statutes most helpful to attracting out-of-state incorporations
are a control share acquisition statute and a pill endorsement statute (at 95%
confidence and 90% confidence respectively); business combinations statutes, which
were the third type of statute that we identified as helpful for retaining in-state
firms, are not statistically significant in attracting out-of-state incorporations.
Finally, as to the two types of extreme statutes, in all three regressions, both a
staggered board statute and a recapture statute do not have a statistically significant
effect on states’ ability to attract out-of-state incorporations. The evidence, again,
does not enable concluding that the incorporation market penalizes states adopting
such statutes.
4.6

The Overall Effects of Corporate Migration
on Antitakeover Protections

We finally turn to examine the overall effect of the migration of firms from their
states of location to states other than Delaware on the takeover rules governing
them. Does this migration overall operate to increase antitakeover protections?
To study this question, let us first look at some summary statistics. Table 12A
displays, for each level of the antitakeover index, (i) how many of the migrating
firms had this index level at the home state that they left, and (ii) how many of the
migrating firms had this index level at their state of incorporation. The table
indicates that most migrating firms either strengthened or retained their level of
antitakeover protections. 60% of the migrating firms moved to a state that have
more antitakeover statutes than the state where they are located. Furthermore,
whereas 23% of the firms move to a state that has the same number of antitakeover
statutes, 87% of these cases are of firms whose state of location already had 4 or 5
statutes.
Table 12B reports results on the distribution of changes caused by migration.
Within the group of firms not located or incorporated in Delaware, the migration of
firms to out-of-state incorporation increases (at 95% confidence) the level of the
antitakeover index that governs these firms. Furthermore, for each of the standard
antitakeover statutes, this migration increases (at 95% confidence) the likelihood
that any given migrating firm will be governed by such a statute. Thus, this
migration operates unambiguously to increase the overall levels of antitakeover
protection enjoyed by these firms or, more accurately, their managers.

26

5

Delaware’s Dominance of the Market

We now turn to explore the incorporation market’s structure and Delaware’s
dominance of it. In most markets where a firm has market power, a major concern is
that this firm would reduce output to raise prices. In contrast, in the market for
corporate law that we study, output reduction is not a problem. However, assessing
the strength of competition is in this market is still quite important for
understanding how it operates and how the dominant player in it makes quality
and price choices.
Let us look back at Table 2, which displays Delaware’s market share. Delaware
has incorporations of 58% of all firms and 59% of the incorporations of Fortune 500
firms. This division of the market represents a substantial market concentration.
Using the Herfindahl index (see Tirole (1988, at 221), Hovenkamp (1999, at 512-16)),
we calculate that its value is 3,435 in the market for incorporations and 3,638 in the
market for incorporations of Fortune 500 firms.29
The above paragraph has considered Delaware’s market share among all
incorporations or Fortune 500 incorporations, which is how Delaware’s dominant
position is commonly measured (see e.g, Gartman (2000)).30 Although the numbers
reported in the preceding paragraph already indicate a large degree of market
concentration, they do not provide the full picture concerning Delaware’s market
power.
To start with, it is useful to consider not only Delaware’s fraction of the total
incorporation market but also its fraction of out-of-state incorporations. As we have
seen, many firms’ choices display a home-state advantage. There is no reason to
think that all of these firms are exactly on the fence – that is, that they prefer to
incorporate in their home state rather than in Delaware by only a very small margin.
A state that marginally improved on Delaware’s product could hope to capture fully
the market for out-of-state incorporations; in contrast, such a state could not hope to
attract those firms that currently prefer in a significant way in-state incorporation
over Delaware incorporation. Thus, in assessing Delaware’s position, it is useful to
consider not only Delaware’s share of all incorporations but also its share of all outof-state incorporations.
According to the 1992 Justice Department guidelines, for example, mergers may be examined
for possible challenge if the post-merger Herfindahl index is above 1000 (see Hovenkamp
(1999), at 516).
30 See also the web site of the Delaware Division of Corporations, www.state.de.us/corp, which
indicates that about 50% of all public corporations and 60% of the Fortune 500 are incorporated
in Delaware.
29

27

Table 13 displays the division of the market for out-of-state incorporations.
Delaware has 85% of total out-of-state incorporations, 83% of the out-of-state
incorporations of Fortune 500 firms, and 90% of the incorporations of firms that
went public in 1996-2000. The concentration of the market for out-of-state
incorporations is very large. We calculate that the Herfindahl index has a value of
7,287 in the market for all out-of-state incorporations and a value of 8,159 in the
market of out-of-state incorporations of firms that went public in recent years.
Furthermore, it is important to examine not only Delaware’s current shares of
total incorporations and total out-of-state incorporations, but also to consider how
these shares have been evolving over time. Table 14 divides all the firms not located
in Delaware (almost all firms) into three groups: those firms that went public before
1991, those that went public during 1991-1995, and those that went public during
1996-2000.
The results of the regressions reported in Table 7 indicate that firms that went
public in the past decade are more likely to be incorporated out-of-state. Consistent
with this result, Column 1 of Table 14 shows that the percentage of firms
incorporating out-of-state is higher for more recent cohorts: this percentage is 50%
for firms that went public before 1991, 59% for firms that went public during 19911995, and 67.5% for firms that went public in 1995-2000.
Column 2 of Table 14 indicates that Delaware captures the lion’s share of outof-state incorporations for firms of different vintages and, furthermore, that its share
has been trending upwards in the past decade. Delaware captures 80% of all of outof-state incorporations by firms that went public before 1991, 88% of all such
incorporations by firms that went public during 1991-1995, and 90% of all such
incorporations by firms that went public during 1996-2000.
Both factors – the higher fraction of out-of-state incorporations in recent cohorts
and Delaware’s higher share of out-of-state incorporations in recent cohorts –
combine to make Delaware’s share of total incorporations higher for firms from
recent cohorts. As Column 3 of Table 14 indicates, Delaware captures only 62% of
the incorporations of firms that went public before 1991, 67% of the incorporations
of firms that went public during 1991-1995, and 75% of the incorporations of firms
that went public during 1996-2000. This implies that, if Delaware simply maintains
with respect to firms going public in the future its performance with recent cohorts,
its total share of incorporations can be expected to climb in the future, as new firms
enter the market and old ones leave it in one way or another.
The very substantial concentration in the market for corporate law does not by
itself imply that Delaware has a market power that it can use to make supracompetitive returns. Even a seller that has a market share close or equal to 1 would

28

have little ability to make supra-competitive profits if the market were perfectly
contestable and any attempt to make such profits could be expected to immediately
trigger a challenge by a new entrant.
In the case of the market for corporate law, however, there are reasons to
believe that the market is far from perfectly contestable. Delaware makes, and has
long made, substantial supra-competitive profits that far exceed the state’s expenses
on the firms incorporated in it (see Kahan and Kamar (2001)). Delaware’s franchise
tax revenues in 2001 are about $600 million, constitute a substantial fraction of the
state’s annual budget, and amount to $3,000 for each household of four.
Furthermore, Delaware derives additional benefits from the substantial profits made
(and taxes paid) by its relatively large legal services sector.
The presence of such supra-competitive returns, and their persistence over
time, indicate the likely presence of some substantial barriers to entry. The
incumbent in this market might obtain advantages from the presence of network
externalities (see Klausner (1995), Kahan and Kamar (1997)), from Delaware’s sunk
investments in legal infrastructure (such as a specialized and effective court system
– see Romano (1985), Black (1990), Fisch (2001)), or from the incumbent’s ability to
match and out-do any serious attempt to unseat it (see Bebchuk and Ferrell (2001)).
Bar-Gill, Barzuza, and Bebchuk (2001) develop of formal model of some of the
factors that might provide Delaware with market power and enable it to make
supra-competitive returns. Bebchuk and Hamdani (2002) attempt to provide a full
analysis of these factors.
As already emphasized, Delaware’s market power and dominance does not
give rise to the traditional concerns associated with monopoly power in other
markets, that is, the deadweight loss due to output reduction. Rather, it is relevant
for a better analysis of Delaware’s behavior and its choices with respect to the
design and pricing of its product. Researchers have already examined how
Delaware’s dominance might lead it to make its law more unpredictable and
litigation-intensive (Kamar (1998), Kahan and Kamar (2001)), to engage in pricediscrimination (Kahan and Kamar (2001)), and to seek to discourage challenges to its
dominance by charging firms less than the value to them of Delaware’s network and
institutional advantages (Bar-Gill, Barzuza, and Bebchuk (2001)). The analysis in this
section suggests that more work in this direction would be worthwhile.

6

Concluding Remarks

This paper has taken a different approach to the empirical study of state
competition than prior work. Whereas prior work has focused on the wealth effects

29

of Delaware incorporation, taking incorporation decisions as exogenous, this paper
has focused on investigating the factors that influence and explain incorporation
decisions. Furthermore, whereas prior work has largely put all states other than
Delaware in one group, this paper has used cross-state differences to identify what
makes states more and less successful in attracting incorporations.
The evidence indicates that a significant home-state advantage is at work in the
market for corporate law. In contrast to the conventional picture of state
competition, firms’ incorporation choices are not solely based on comparing states’
corporate law systems but are significantly influenced by the firm’s location. States
are substantially more successful in “selling” their corporate laws to firms located in
them than to firms headquartered elsewhere. This home-state advantage is
especially strong with respect to smaller and older firms, a pattern consistent with
several explanations for the presence of such advantage. The evidence is consistent,
we have found, with firms induced to remain in-state by the desire to save costs, by
the hope to benefit from local favoritism, or by the influence of local counsel. The
evidence is inconsistent, however, with the possibility that the home-state
advantage is a product of the widespread adoption of the RMBCA or of states’
tailoring their corporate law system to the type of firms located in them.
Although all states have some success in retaining firms located in them, and
although none of the other states comes even close to Delaware in terms of
attracting out-of-state incorporations, states greatly differ in how they fare in the
incorporation market. We have used cross-state differences to study the legal and
other features of states that make them attractive to incorporating firms. Among
other things, we have found that states that have a heavily Democratic electorate,
and thus are more likely to have activist judges, are less successful in attracting
firms. States that have adopted the Revised Model Business Corporations Act or its
predecessor are not more successful in attracting incorporations. Demographic
characteristics and location of the state also play a role.
Addressing the long-standing debate on whether state competition has
encouraged the proliferation of antitakeover statutes, we have found that amassing
antitakeover statutes makes states more successful in the incorporation market -both in retaining in-state firms and in attracting out-of-state incorporations. States
that offer all or most of the standard antitakeover statutes do especially well, and
states that offer no such statutes do especially poorly. Our estimates of the identified
effect of antitakeover statutes indicate that it is quite large in magnitude.
Indeed, in contrast to the beliefs of supporters of state competition, the
evidence does not indicate that the incorporation market has penalized even those
three states that passed statutes universally regarded as detrimental to shareholders.

30

These statutes thus did not bring the states adopting them to the point where
antitakeover protections drive away firms. Because these statutes did not help the
adopting states attract more firms, however, this point might not be far away from
the one reached by these states.
Our findings on antitakeover protection and state competition call for
reconsidering a widely held view that is both negative on antitakeover statutes and
positive on state competition. Those who hold this view should revisit at least one of
the elements of their position. At this stage, researchers that held this view can
reasonably take different positions on how it should be revised in light of our
findings.31 What is important, however, is that the established link between state
antitakeover statutes and incorporations be taken into account in subsequent
analysis of state competition and takeover law.
Delaware’s market dominance, we have shown, is even greater than has been
previously recognized. The fraction of firms going out of state has been steadily
increasing, and Delaware’s dominance of the market for out-of-state incorporations
has also been increasing. Both factors have made Delaware’s share of total
incorporations among recent corporate cohorts substantially greater than in the pool
of all incorporations. Thus, even if Delaware merely maintains for future cohorts its
performance for recent cohorts, Delaware’s share of total incorporations is expected
to increase substantially over time. The levels of concentration in the market for
corporate law, combined with the substantial profits consistently made by
Delaware, suggest that the market is best analyzed as one with a monopoly seller
and significant barriers to entry. Subsequent work on the market for corporate law
should investigate how these features of the market affect the decisions of the
dominant player and other market participants.
Our analysis can provide both basis and questions for subsequent empirical
work. Much more work can be done on the factors that pull firms to remain in-state.
Also, our approach for studying how incorporation choices are affected by crossstate differences can be used with respect to other features of corporate law that
vary across states. Future work could examine how incorporation choices are
Our own view is that some state antitakeover statutes are likely beneficial or neutral. Control
share acquisition statutes, for example, can address the problem of pressure to tender and
facilitate undistorted shareholder choice (Bebchuk and Hart (2001), Bebchuk (2002)). However,
poison pills can produce excessive protection from takeovers when they are coupled with
staggered boards (Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian (2002)). As a result, the wide latitude
granted to managers to use poison pills by poison pill endorsement statutes and stakeholder
statutes is likely to produce excessive protection in many cases. Thus, our view is that, although
some antitakeover statutes are beneficial or neutral, others are not, and that the incorporation
market provides states with excessive incentives to restrict takeovers.

31

31

affected by elements of corporate law other than those on which we have focused.
Such work could help complete the picture with respect to the determinants of
firms’ incorporation decisions and, in turn, with respect to the incentives that state
competition provides.
Finally, whereas our work has taken as given the existing differences in
takeover law among states, it would be worthwhile to investigate what explains
these differences – an inquiry of the supply side of the market. Given that amassing
antitakeover statutes helps attract incorporations, why don’t all states amass such
statutes? The reason, at least in part, is presumably that not all states focus on the
goal of maximizing the number of incorporations.32 Although the conventional
assumption in the literature on state competition is that all states are guided by this
goal, the findings of this paper indicate that this is clearly not the case; after all,
many states do not take some easy steps (i.e., adopt more antitakeover statutes) that
would likely increase the number of incorporations these states attract. Exploring
what makes some states focus on attracting incorporations but not others, as well as
what differences among states produce their varied decisions on antitakeover
statutes, is an important question for future research.

Some states (especially large states) might not care about how many firms incorporate in
them, and some states might have preferences about the substantive content of its corporate law
and not only in how this law would affect incorporations. (New York or California, for example,
might have among their citizens a significant fraction of the shareholders of many public firms.)
Cumming and MacIntosh (2001) suggest that, in the Canadian market for corporate law, the
behavior of provinces is inconsistent with the view that they seek to maximize the number of
(or revenues from) incorporations.

32

32

References
Bar-Gill, Oren, Michal Barzuza and Lucian Bebchuk (2001), “The Market for Corporate
Law,”
Working
Paper,
Harvard
Law
School,
available
on
www.papers.ssrn.com/abstract=275452.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye (1992), “Federalism and the Corporation: The Desirable Limits
on State Competition in Corporate Law,” 105 Harvard Law Review 1435-1510.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye (2002), “The Case Against Veto Power in Corporate
Takeovers,” 69 University of Chicago Law Review _ (2002), available on
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=314703 .
Bebchuk, Lucian, John Coates IV, and Guhan Subramanian (2002), “The Special
Antitakeover Power of Staggered Boards: Theory, Evidence, and Policy,” 54
Stanford
Law
Review
_
(2002),
available
on
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=304388.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, and Alma Cohen, “Firms’ Decisions where to Incorporate,”
Discussion Paper No. 351, February 2002, Harvard Olin Center, available on
www.law.harvard.edu/ programs/olin_center.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell (2002), “Does the Evidence
Favor State Competition in Corporate Law?” 90 California Law Review _ (2002),
available on www.papers.ssrn.com/abstract=303417.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Allen Ferrell (1999), “Federalism and Corporate Law: The
Race to Protect Managers from Takeovers,” 99 Columbia Law Review 1168-1199.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Allen Ferrell (2001), “A New Approach to Takeover Law
and Regulatory Competition,” 87 Virginia Law Review 111-164.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Assaf Hamdani (2002), “Vigorous Race or Leisurely Walk:
Reconsidering the Debate on State Competition in Corporate Law” Yale Law
Journal (forthcoming).
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Oliver Hart (2001), “Takeover Bids vs. Proxy Fights in
Contests for Corporate Control,” NBER Working Paper No. 8633, available on
http://papers.ssrn.com/ abstract=290584.
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan (1999), “Executive Compensation and
Incentives: The Impact of Takeover Legislation,” NBER Working Paper No. 6830.
R-1

Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan (1999), “Is There Discretion in Wage
Setting? A Test Using Takeover Legislation,” 30 Rand Journal of Economics 535-554.
Bhagat, Snajai and Roberta Romano (2001), “Event Studies and the Law: Part II –
Empirical Studies of Corporate Law,” Yale ICF working paper no. 00-33.
Black, Bernard S. (1990), “Is Corporate Law Trivial? - A Political and Economic
Analysis,” 84 Northwestern University Law Review 542-597.
Bradely, Michael, and Cindy A. Schipani (1989), “The Relevance of the Duty of Care
Standard in Corporate Governance,” 75 Iowa Law Review 1-82.
Carney, William (1998), “ The Production of Corporate Law,” 71 Southern California
Law Review 715-780.
Cary, William (1974), “Federalism and Corporate Law: Reflections upon Delaware,” 83
Yale Law Journal 663 - 701.
Coates, John (2001), “Explaining Variation in Takeover Defenses,” 89 California Law
Review 1301-1422.
Cumming, Douglas J. and Jeffrey G. MacIntosh (2000), “The Role of Interjurisdictional
Competition in Shaping Canadian Corporate Law,” 20 International Review of Law
and Economics 141- 186.
Cumming, Douglas J. and Jeffrey G. MacIntosh (2001), “The Rationale Underlying
Reincorporation and Implications for Canadian Corporations,” mimeo, University
of Alberta and the University of Toronto.
Daines, Robert (1999), “Does Delaware Law Improve Firm Value?” Working Paper
CLB-99- 011, New York University, available on SSRN.
Daines, Robert (2001a), “Does Delaware Law Improve Firm Value?” 40 Journal of
Financial Economics 525-558.
Daines, Robert (2001b), “Do Staggered Boards Affect Firm Value? Massachusetts and
the Market for Corporate Control,” mimeo, NYU Law School.
Daines, Robert (2002), “How Firms Choose Corporate Law Rules: Some Evidence on
Law, Lawyers, and the Market for IPO charters, Work in Progress, New York
University.

R-2

Easterbrook, Frank H. and Daniel R. Fischel (1991), The Economic Structure of Corporate
Law.
Fisch, Jill (2000), “The Peculiar Role of the Delaware Courts in the Competition for
Corporate Charters,” 68 University of Cincinnati Law Review 1061-1100.
Fischel, Daniel R. (1982), “The ‘Race to the Bottom’ Revisited: Reflections on Recent
Developments in Delaware’s Corporation Law,” 76 Northwestern University Law
Review 913-945.
Gartman, Grant A. (2000), State Antitakeover Laws (Investor Responsibility Research
Center, Washington D.C).
Heron, Randall and Wilbur Lewellen (1998), “An Empirical Analysis of the
Reincorporation Decision, 33 Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 549-568.
Hovenkamp, Herbert (1999), Federal Antitrust Policy.
Kahan, Marcel and Michael Klausner (1997), “Standardization and Innovation in
Corporate Contracting (or ‘The Economics of Boilerplate’),” 83 Virginia Law Review
713-770.
Kahan, Marcel and Ehud Kamar (2001), “Price Discrimination in the Market for
Corporate Law,” 86 Cornell Law Review 1205-1256.
Kamar, Ehud (1998), “A Regulatory Competition Theory of Indeterminacy in
Corporate Law,” 98 Columbia Law Review 1908-1959.
Karpoff, Jonathan and Paul Malatesta (1989), “ The Wealth Effects of SecondGeneration State Takeover Legislation,” 25 Journal of Financial Economics 291-322.
Karpoff, Jonathan and Paul Malatesta (1990), “Pennsylvania Law: State Antitakeover
Laws and Stock Prices,” 46 Financial Analyst Journal.
Klausner, Michael (1995), “Corporations, Corporate Law, and Networks of Contracts,”
81 Virginia Law Review 757-852.
LaPorta et al. (1998), “Law and Finance,” 106 Journal of Political Economy 1113-1155.
Macey, Jonathan R. and Geoffrey P. Miller (1987), “Toward an Interest-Group Theory
of Delaware Corporate Law,” 65 Texas Law Review 469-523.
Romano, Roberta (1985), “Law as a Product: Some Pieces of the Incorporation Puzzle,”
1 Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 225-283.
R-3

Romano, Roberta (1993a), The Genius of American Corporate Law.
Romano, Roberta (1993b), “Competition for Corporate Charters and the Lesson of
Takeover Statutes,” 61 Fordham Law Review 843-864.
Romano, Roberta (1998), “Empowering Investors: A Market Approach to Securities
Regulation,” 107 Yale Law Journal 2359-2430.
Romano, Roberta (2001), “The Need for Competition in International Securities
Regulation,” 2 Theoretical Inquiries in Law 387.
Section of Business Law of the American Bar Association (1999), Model Business
Corporation Act Annotated.
Sitkoff, Robert (2002), “Corporate political Speech, Political Extortion, and the
Competition for Corporate Charters, University of Chicago Law Review
(forthcoming).
Swartz, L. Mick (1996), “The 1990 Pennsylvania Antitakeover Law: Should Firms Opt
Out of Antitakeover Legislation?” 11 Journal of Accounting, Auditing, and Finance
223-245.
Subramanian, Guhan (2002), “The Influence of Antitakeover Statutes on Incorporation
Choice: Evidence on the ‘Race’ Debate and Antitakeover Overreaching,” Harvard
Business School Working Paper, forthcoming University of Pennsylvania Law
Review.
Szewczyk, Samuel H. and George P. Tsetsekos (1992), “State Intervention in the Market
for Corporate Control: The Case of Pennsylvania Senate Bill 1310,” 31 Journal of
Financial Economics 3-23.
Tirole, Jean (1988), The Theory of Industrial Organization.
Winter, Ralph K. (1977), “State Law, Shareholder Protection, and the Theory of the
Corporation,” 6 Journal of Legal Studies 251-292.
Winter, Ralph K. (1989), “The ‘Race for the Top’ Revisited: A Comment on Eisenberg,”
89 Columbia Law Review 1526-1529.
Winter, Ralph K. (1993), “Foreword,” in Roberta Romano, The Genius of American
Corporate Law.

R-4

TABLE 1
The Distribution of Firms’ Locations among States
All publicly traded
firms
Number of
firms
located in
state
State
Percentage
CA
1,254
19.20%
TX
586
8.97%
NY
576
8.82%
MA
360
5.51%
FL
328
5.02%
NJ
311
4.76%
PA
248
3.80%
IL
241
3.69%
MN
212
3.25%
CO
201
3.08%
OH
192
2.94%
GA
178
2.73%
VA
154
2.36%
CT
147
2.25%
WA
131
2.01%
MI
104
1.59%
MD
101
1.55%
MO
101
1.55%
NC
98
1.50%
AZ
91
1.39%
TN
81
1.24%
WI
72
1.10%
OR
70
1.07%
UT
70
1.07%
NV
63
0.96%
Other
560
8.58%
Total
6,530
100%

Fortune 500
firms
Number of
firms
located in
state
Percentage
State
CA
41
11.08%
TX
36
9.73%
NY
32
8.65%
IL
31
8.38%
PA
22
5.95%
OH
21
5.68%
NJ
18
4.86%
MI
14
3.78%
MO
14
3.78%
VA
13
3.51%
FL
12
3.24%
GA
12
3.24%
MN
10
2.70%
CT
9
2.43%
NC
8
2.16%
WA
8
2.16%
MA
7
1.89%
MD
5
1.35%
TN
5
1.35%
WI
5
1.35%
AL
4
1.08%
AR
4
1.08%
AZ
4
1.08%
CO
4
1.08%
DE
4
1.08%
Other
27
7.30%
Total
370
100%

A-1

Firms going
public during 1996-2000
Number of
firms
located in
state
State
Percentage
CA
549
27.31%
TX
172
8.56%
NY
165
8.21%
MA
137
6.82%
FL
113
5.62%
CO
67
3.33%
NJ
66
3.28%
GA
62
3.08%
PA
60
2.99%
IL
56
2.79%
WA
55
2.74%
VA
51
2.54%
MN
48
2.39%
CT
44
2.19%
MD
40
1.99%
NC
29
1.44%
OH
29
1.44%
AZ
27
1.34%
MI
23
1.14%
MO
23
1.14%
TN
21
1.04%
UT
17
0.85%
NV
15
0.75%
LA
13
0.65%
OR
13
0.65%
Other
115
5.72%
Total
2,010
100%

TABLE 2
The Distribution of Incorporations among States
All publicly traded
firms
Number of
firms
incorporate
in state Percentage
State
DE
3,771
57.75%
CA
283
4.33%
NY
226
3.46%
NV
217
3.32%
MN
178
2.73%
FL
165
2.53%
TX
147
2.25%
CO
132
2.02%
PA
124
1.90%
MA
118
1.81%
OH
112
1.72%
NJ
111
1.70%
GA
83
1.27%
WA
79
1.21%
VA
74
1.13%
MI
60
0.92%
WI
57
0.87%
MD
54
0.83%
OR
54
0.83%
UT
52
0.80%
IN
50
0.77%
NC
46
0.70%
TN
39
0.60%
MO
36
0.55%
IL
32
0.49%
Other
230
3.52%
Total
6,530
100%

Herfindahl index = 3435

Fortune 500
firms
Number of
firms
incorporate
in state Percentage
State
DE
220
59.46%
NY
22
5.95%
OH
13
3.51%
PA
12
3.24%
NJ
11
2.97%
VA
9
2.43%
MD
8
2.16%
FL
7
1.89%
IN
6
1.62%
CA
5
1.35%
GA
5
1.35%
MI
5
1.35%
NC
5
1.35%
NV
5
1.35%
MN
4
1.08%
MO
4
1.08%
TX
4
1.08%
WA
4
1.08%
WI
4
1.08%
IL
3
0.81%
KS
3
0.81%
KY
2
0.54%
MA
2
0.54%
OR
2
0.54%
HI
1
0.27%
Other
4
1.08%
Total
370
100%

Herfindahl index = 3638

A-2

Firms going
public during 1996-2000
Number of
firms
incorporate
in state Percentage
State
DE
1,364
67.86%
CA
90
4.48%
NV
72
3.58%
FL
58
2.89%
TX
45
2.24%
CO
37
1.84%
MN
36
1.79%
WA
34
1.69%
GA
30
1.49%
MA
27
1.34%
NY
22
1.09%
PA
22
1.09%
OH
19
0.95%
MD
16
0.80%
VA
15
0.75%
NJ
13
0.65%
MI
12
0.60%
TN
12
0.60%
OR
11
0.55%
UT
11
0.55%
NC
10
0.50%
WI
9
0.45%
LA
7
0.35%
MO
7
0.35%
IN
6
0.30%
Other
25
1.24%
Total
2,010
100%

Herfindahl index = 4673

TABLE 3
Location and Incorporation

A-3

TABLE 4
In-State and Out-of-State Incorporations
Number of
Percentage of
Number of
Total Number
of
In-state
Total
Out-of-state Percentage of Total
Incorporations Incorporations Incorporations
Incorporations Incorporations
All firms

2137

32.7%

4393

67.3%

6530

Went public Pre-91

1213

37.3%

2036

62.7%

3249

Went public 91-95

417

32.8%

854

67.2%

1271

Went public 96-00

507

25.2%

1503

74.8%

2010

Fortune 500

110

29.7%

260

70.3%

370

Fortune 100

18

25.3%

53

74.7%

71

A-4

TABLE 5
Migration and Emigration in the “Market for Corporate Law”
Number of firms
Number of Number of firms
located and As percentage of all located elsewhere As percentage of
firms
located in incorporated in firms located in this but incorporate in all out-of state
state
state
state
incorporations Net outflow
State
state
AK
2
1
50.00%
2
0.03%
-1
AL
29
3
10.34%
2
0.03%
24
AR
20
3
15.00%
0
0.00%
17
AZ
91
21
23.08%
0
0.00%
70
CA
1,254
273
21.77%
10
0.19%
971
CO
201
74
36.82%
58
0.92%
69
CT
147
17
11.56%
3
0.05%
127
DC
25
2
8.00%
0
0.00%
23
DE
27
27
100.00%
3,744
57.57%
-3744
FL
328
137
41.77%
28
0.45%
163
GA
178
71
39.89%
12
0.19%
95
HI
13
6
46.15%
2
0.03%
5
IA
25
10
40.00%
4
0.06%
11
ID
15
2
13.33%
1
0.02%
12
IL
241
27
11.20%
5
0.08%
209
IN
56
39
69.64%
11
0.17%
6
KS
35
11
31.43%
8
0.12%
16
KY
29
7
24.14%
2
0.03%
20
LA
45
18
40.00%
4
0.06%
23
MA
360
108
30.00%
10
0.16%
242
MD
101
25
24.75%
29
0.45%
47
ME
10
4
40.00%
0
0.00%
6
MI
104
58
55.77%
2
0.03%
44
MN
212
158
74.53%
20
0.32%
34
MO
101
26
25.74%
10
0.16%
65
MS
14
4
28.57%
8
0.12%
2
MT
6
6
100.00%
0
0.00%
0
NC
98
38
38.78%
0
0.00%
60
ND
4
0
0.00%
0
0.00%
4
NE
18
4
22.22%
3
0.05%
11
NH
28
3
10.71%
0
0.00%
25
NJ
311
80
25.72%
31
0.50%
200
NM
9
4
44.44%
3
0.05%
2
NV
63
45
71.43%
172
2.66%
-154
NY
576
141
24.48%
85
1.43%
350
OH
192
105
54.69%
7
0.11%
80
OK
61
22
36.07%
5
0.08%
34
OR
70
50
71.43%
4
0.06%
16
PA
248
98
39.52%
26
0.41%
124
RI
24
6
25.00%
1
0.02%
17
SC
30
9
30.00%
1
0.02%
20
SD
7
4
57.14%
0
0.00%
3
TN
81
33
40.74%
6
0.09%
42
TX
586
139
23.72%
8
0.13%
439
UT
70
32
45.71%
20
0.31%
18
VA
154
56
36.36%
18
0.28%
80
VT
11
4
36.36%
0
0.00%
7
WA
131
68
51.91%
11
0.17%
52
WI
72
52
72.22%
5
0.08%
15
WV
8
3
37.50%
0
0.00%
5
WY
9
3
33.33%
12
0.18%
-6
Total
6530
2137
4393
Average
38.10%
1.33%

A-5

TABLE 6
Attractiveness of California Incorporation: In-State vs. Out-of-State Firms
Logit regression:
Dependent variable:
Located in California
log (sales)
Tobin's Q
Return to assets
Number of employees
Total equity
Went public in 1991-1995
Went public in 1996-2000
Constant

Incorporated in
California
4.96 (0.34)***
-0.04 (0.04)
-0.001 (0.002)
0.014 (0.02)
-0.10 (0.04)***
0.0002 (0.0001)**
-0.02 (0.18)
-0.70 (0.18)***
-5.69 (0.36)***

Incorporated in
California
5.47 (0.40)***
-0.11 (0.05)**
-0.001 (0.002)
0.02 (0.02)
-0.13 (0.05)***
0.0003 (0.0001)**
0.05 (0.20)
-0.69 (0.2)***

2-digit industry dummy

NO

YES

Number of observations
Adjusted R2

5382
0.4027

4651
0.4405

*, **, *** Significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence interval, respectively.

A-6

TABLE 7
Factors Inducing Firms to Remain In-State
Logit regression:
Dependent variable:
In-state dummy
1
Firm characteristics:
log(Sales)
Tobin-Q
Return on assets
Number of employees
Going public between 9195
Going public between 9600

2

-0.025 (0.015)*
-1.0e-04 (7.0e-04)
-0.0006 (0.007)
-0.004 (0.002)**
-0.26 (0.08)***

0.37 (0.24)
0.0003 (0.0007)
-0.001 (0.007)
-0.004 (0.002)**
-0.26 (0.08)***

-0.52 (0.08)***

-0.52 (0.08)***

State Demographic
Characteristics:
log(Population)
Number of firms located
Per capita income

0.18 (0.13)
-3.0e-04 (3.0e-04)
-1.8e-06 (1.7e-05)

Interaction:
log(Sales)*log(Population)

-0.03 (0.015)**

State region:
Northeast
South
West

-0.58 (0.13)***
-0.36 (0.12)***
0.31 (0.14)**

Uniformity of laws:
RMBCA

-0.05 (0.10)

Legal & Political State
Characteristics:
(see Table 10 column 1)

YES

State Dummy
2-digit industry dummy

YES
YES

YES

Number of observations
Pseudo R2

5315
0.1219

5325
0.0777

*, **, *** Significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence interval, respectively.

A-7

TABLE 8
Which Firms Migrate to Delaware?
Logit regression
Dependent variable:

In-Delaware
Dummy
coef.
0.11***

Log(sales)

(0.014)

Tobin-Q

-2.0e-05

Return on assets

-7.0e-04

(0.0007)
(0.007)

Number of employees

0.0004

Going public between 91-95

0.43***

Going public between 96-00

0.72***

(0.001)
(0.08)
(0.08)

State dummies
2-digit SIC dummies

YES
YES

Number of observations
Pseudo R2

5340
0.1092

*, **, *** Significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence interval, respectively.

A-8

TABLE 9
Standard Antitakeover Statutes

Number of
State
Statutes
Alaska
0
Alabama
0
Arkansas
0
Arizona
4
California
0
Colorado
1
Connecticut
3
DC
0
Delaware
1
Florida
4
Georgia
4
Hawaii
3
Iowa
3
Idaho
5
Illinois
4
Indiana
5
Kansas
2
Kentucky
4
Louisiana
3
Massachusetts
4
Maryland
5
Maine
1
Michigan
3
Minnesota
4
Missouri
4
Mississippi
3
Montana
0
North Carolina
3
North Dakota
1
Nebraska
2
New Hampshire
0
New Jersey
4
New Mexico
1
Nevada
5
New York
4
Ohio
5
Oklahoma
2
Oregon
4
Pennsylvania
5
Rohde Island
4
South Carolina
3
South Dakota
5
Tennessee
5
Texas
1
Utah
2
Virginia
4
Vermont
1
Washington
3
Wisconsin
5
West Virginia
0
Wyoming
3
Average/total
2.7

Control
Share
0
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
1
0
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
1
0
1
1
1
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
1
27

No
Freezeouts
Poison Pill
(years
Fair Price prohibited) Endorsement Constituencies
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
3
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
5
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
1
0
1
1
1
5
1
1
0
0
1
1
0
3
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
3
1
1
1
5
1
1
0
3
0
0
1
5
1
1
1
0
0
1
0
5
1
1
1
5
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
5
0
0
1
4
0
1
1
5
0
1
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
0
0
0
0
1
0
5
0
0
0
0
0
0
1
5
1
1
0
0
0
1
1
3
1
1
1
5
1
1
1
3
1
1
0
3
0
0
0
3
1
1
1
5
1
1
1
5
1
1
1
2
0
0
1
4
1
1
1
5
1
1
0
3
0
0
0
0
1
0
1
3
1
0
0
0
0
1
1
5
1
0
1
3
1
1
0
0
0
0
0
3
0
1
27
33
25
31

A-9

TABLE 10
What Makes States Attractive for In-State Firms?
Logit regression:
Dependent variable:
In-state dummy
1
Standard Antitakeover statutes:
Control share
Fair Price
No freezeouts (1-3 years)
No freezeouts (4-5 years)
Poison Pill Endorsement
Constituencies
Index
Index1
Index2
Index3
Index4
Index5

2

3
0.85 (0.11)***
-0.24 (0.17)
-0.04 (0.10)
0.74 (0.13)***
0.50 (0.10)***
-0.04 (0.11)

0.26 (0.04)***
0.42 (0.24)*
0.41 (0.31)
1.26 (0.26)***
1.23 (0.22)***
1.65 (0.26)***

Extreme statutes:
Staggered board
Recapture

0.49 (0.15***
0.16 (0.16)

0.5 (0.16)***
0.08 (0.22)

-0.47 (0.27)*
0.04 (0.18)

RMBCA

-0.05 (0.10)

-0.07 (0.12)

0.05 (0.10)

-2.36 (0.86)***

-3.06 (1.25)***

-2.64 (0.99)***

Firms characteristics (see Table
7)

YES

YES

YES

State Demographic and legal
characteristics (see Table 7)

YES

YES

YES

2-digit industry dummy
Number of observations

YES
5325

YES
5323

YES
5323

0.0777

0.0791

0.0904

“Liberal” political culture:
Percentage of Democrats

Pseudo R2

*, **, *** Significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence interval, respectively.

A-10

TABLE 11
What Makes States Attractive for Out-of-State Incorporations?
OLS regression:
Dependent variable: log of
(1+number of out-of-state
incorporation)
1
State statutes:
Control share
Fair Price
No Freezeouts (1-3 years)
No Freeze outs (4-5 years)
Poison Pill Endorsement
Constituencies
Index
Index1
Index2
Index3
Index4
Index5

2

3
0.95 (0.4)**
-0.17 (0.51
-0.01 (0.44)
0.38 (0.51)
0.70 (0.37)*
0.33 (0.42)

0.33 (0.09)***
0.99 (0.57)*
1.87 (0.67)***
1.14 (0.50)**
1.68 (0.48)***
1.87 (0.55)***

Extreme statutes:
Staggered board
Recapture

-0.21 (1.15)
-0.03 (0.85)

-0.155 (1.16)
0.16 (0.93)

-0.03 (1.4)
0.58 (0.95)

RMBCA

-0.53 (0.32)*

-0.66 (0.37)

-0.34 (0.36)

“Liberal” political culture:
Percentage of democrats

-5.72 (2.14)**

-4.26 (2.30)*

-3.42 (2.47)

7.1e-08 (1.0e-7)
-0.001 (0.003)
1.8e-04 (5.4e-05)***

-8.8e-08 (1.0e-07)
-0.005 (0.003)
1.8e-04 (5.5e-05)***

-1.1e-07 (1.2e-07)
0.004 (0.003)
1.6e-04 (6.5e-05)**

0.09 (0.52)
0.64 (0.40)
0.80 (0.45)*

0.06 (0.54)
0.75 (0.41)*
0.98 (0.47)**

0.30 (0.62)
0.98 (0.47)**
0.45 (0.50)

50
0.4453

50
0.4483

50
0.4666

State Demographic
characteristics:
Population
Located
Per capita income
State region:
Northeast
South
West
Number of observations
Adjusted R2

*, **, *** Significant at 10%, 5%, and 1% confidence interval, respectively.

A-11

TABLE 12A
Antitakeover Index Governing Firms Before and After Migration
Index of
Incorporation
Index of
Headquarters state
state
0
0

1

2

3

4

5

Total

1

2

3

4

5

Total

1

14

8

6

22

46

97

1.03%

14.43%

8.25%

6.19%

22.68%

47.42%

100%

6

13

10

13

22

41

105

5.71%

12.38%

9.52%

12.38%

20.95%

39.05%

100%

0

9

2

0

6

13

30

0%

30.00%

6.67%

0%

20.00%

43.33%

100%

1

7

2

3

33

19

65

1.54%

10.77%

3.08%

4.62%

50.77%

29.23%

100%

3

18

13

21

106

115

276

1.09%

6.52%

4.71%

7.61%

38.41%

41.67%

100%

3

8

1

4

37

23

76

3.95%

10.53%

1.32%

5.26%

34.82%

30.26%

100%

14

69

36

47

226

257

649

2.16%

10.63%

5.55%

7.24%

34.82%

39.6%

100%

A-12

TABLE 12B
The Effects of Corporate Migration on Antitakeover Protection
Number of observations: 649
Before
2.84

After
3.81

Increase
0.97

95% conf. interval
0.8-1.13

0.41

0.63

0.22

0.16-0.28

Fair Price

0.59

0.77

0.18

0.13-0.22

No freezeouts

0.69

0.79

0.10

0.05-0.014

Poison Pill
Endorsement
Stakeholders

0.56

0.86

0.29

0.25-0.35

0.58

0.76

0.18

0.13-0.23

Antitakeover
Index
Control Share

A-13

TABLE 13
The Division of the Market for Out-of-State Incorporations
All publicly
traded firms
Number of
firms located
As
elsewhere percentage of
but
all out-ofincorporated
state
in state incorporation
State
DE
3,744
85.23%
NV
172
3.92%
NY
85
1.93%
CO
58
1.32%
NJ
31
0.71%
MD
29
0.66%
FL
28
0.64%
PA
26
0.59%
MN
20
0.46%
UT
20
0.46%
VA
18
0.41%
GA
12
0.27%
WY
12
0.27%
IN
11
0.25%
WA
11
0.25%
CA
10
0.23%
MA
10
0.23%
MO
10
0.23%
KS
8
0.18%
NC
8
0.18%
TX
8
0.18%
OH
7
0.16%
TN
6
0.14%
Other
49
1.12%
Total
4,393
100%

Herfindahl index = 7287

Fortune 500

Number of
firms
located
As
elsewhere percentage of
but
all out-ofincorporate
state
State d in state incorporation
DE
216
83.08%
NY
9
3.46%
NV
5
1.92%
MD
4
1.54%
NJ
4
1.54%
IN
3
1.15%
KS
3
1.15%
PA
3
1.15%
NC
2
0.77%
OH
2
0.77%
VA
2
0.77%
FL
1
0.38%
GA
1
0.38%
HI
1
0.38%
KY
1
0.38%
MA
1
0.38%
TN
1
0.38%
UT
1
0.38%
Total
260
100%

Herfindahl index = 6929

A-14

Firms going public
during 1996-2000

As
Number of
firms located percentage of
elsewhere but all out-ofincorporated
state
in state
State
incorporation
DE
1,356
90.22%
NV
61
4.06%
CO
18
1.20%
FL
11
0.73%
MD
6
0.40%
UT
6
0.40%
NY
5
0.33%
PA
4
0.27%
TX
4
0.27%
GA
3
0.20%
KS
3
0.20%
MN
3
0.20%
NC
3
0.20%
WA
3
0.20%
IN
2
0.13%
NJ
2
0.13%
OR
2
0.13%
TN
2
0.13%
CA
1
0.07%
IL
1
0.07%
LA
1
0.07%
MI
1
0.07%
MO
1
0.07%
Other
4
0.27%
Total
1,503
100%

Herfindahl index = 8159

TABLE 14
Delaware’s Market Shares Over Time
Fraction of
Firms Going
Years firms went public Out-of-state

Delaware's
Fraction of
Delaware's
Out-of-state
Fraction of all
Incorporations Incorporations

Pre 1991

62.6%

80.4%

50.4%

1991 – 1995

67.2%

87.9%

59.1%

1996 – 2000

74.8%

90.2%

67.5%

A-15

