                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                        ENTREPRENEURSHIP


                                            Edward P. Lazear


                                          Working Paper 9109
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9109


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2002




Comments from Anat Admati, Uschi Backes-Gellner, Lanier Benkard, Kenneth Judd, David Kreps, Paul
Oyer, Korok Ray, John Roberts, Steven Tadelis, Robert Wilson, Justin Wolfers, and Jeffery Zwiebel are
gratefully acknowledged. Able research assistance was provided by Eugene Kwok and Zeynep Emre. The
views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


© 2002 by Edward P. Lazear. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Entrepreneurship
Edward P. Lazear
NBER Working Paper No. 9109
August 2002
JEL No. J4


                                              ABSTRACT

        The theory proposed below is that entrepreneurs are jacks-of-all-trades who may not excel in any
one skill, but are competent in many. A coherent model of the choice to become an entrepreneur is
presented. The primary implication is that individuals with balanced skills should be more likely than
others to become entrepreneurs. The model provides implications for the proportion of entrepreneurs by
occupation, by income and yields a number of predictions for the distribution of income by
entrepreneurial status. Using a data set of Stanford alumni, the predictions are tested and found to hold.
In particular, by far the most important determinant of entrepreneurship is having background in a large
number of different roles. Further, income distribution predictions, e.g., that there are a disproportionate
number of entrepreneurs in the upper tail of the distribution, are borne out.




Edward P. Lazear
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
lazear_edward@gsb.stanford.edu
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




        The entrepreneur is the single most important player in a modern economy. Choosing to be

an entrepreneur requires an understanding of a variety of business areas. An entrepreneur must

possess the ability to combine talents and manage those of others. Why do some choose to become

entrepreneurs and what characteristics create successful ones? What implications does this aspect

of occupational choice have for income distribution and for the distribution of talents across

occupations? To this point, most of the work on entrepreneurship has been strictly empirical,1 but

it is useful to have theory to guide the empirics and to assist in interpretation of the results.2

        It is tempting to argue that the most talented people become entrepreneurs because they have

the skills required to engage in creative activity. Perhaps so, but this flies in the face of some facts.

The man who opens up a small dry-cleaning shop with two employees might be termed an

entrepreneur and the half-million-dollar-per-year executive whose suit he cleans is someone else’s

employee. But it would be difficult to find a sensible measure of ability by which the typical dry-

cleaner would dominate the average executive.


        1
            See for example Evans and Leighton (1989).
        2
         The theoretical papers on the subject rarely speak to the issue of occupational choice or
resulting income distribution which are central to this paper. For example, Otani (1996)
examines the theoretical relation of firm size to entrepreneurial ability. Perhaps the closest to
this paper in terms of discussing specialization (although from a very different point of view) is
Holmes and Schmitz (1990) where it is argued that certain agents specialize in entrepreneurial
skills. This differs from the approach here, where entrepreneurial skills are implicitly defined to
be a cross section of all possible skills. De Meza and Southey (1996) build a model where new
entrants are excessively optimistic.

                                                    1
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




        Perhaps the situation is the reverse. As necessity is the mother of invention, maybe

entrepreneurs are created when a worker has no alternatives. Rather than coming from the top of the

ability distribution, they are what is left over.3 This argument also flies in the face of some facts.

Any ability measure that classifies John D. Rockefeller, Andrew Carnegie, or more recently Larry

Ellison and Bill Gates near the bottom of the distribution probably needs to be redone.

        The idea explored below is that entrepreneurs differ from specialists in that entrepreneurs

have a comparative disadvantage in a single skill, but have more balanced talents that span a number

of different skills. Specialists can work for others who have the talent to spot and combine a variety

of skills, but an entrepreneur must possess that talent. Although entrepreneurs can hire others, the

entrepreneur must be sufficiently well-versed in a variety of fields to judge the quality of applicants.

        To make this vivid, imagine two individuals who are entering the labor market. When they

applied to undergraduate school, they both obtained total scores of 1200 on their SATs. One

individual received a 800 on the quantitative part and a 400 on the verbal part. The other obtained

a 600 on each of the two parts. The theory developed below suggests that the figure 600/600

individual is more likely to become the entrepreneur than the 800/400 individual.

        What is an entrepreneur? There are a number of possible definitions. In keeping with the

empirical analysis to be performed below, an entrepreneur is defined for this study as someone who

responds affirmatively to the question “I am among those who initially established the business.”



        3
        Landier (2002) argues that the part of the ability distribution from which entrepreneurs
are drawn may differ across countries and provides a multiple equilibrium approach in an
information framework to discuss the differences.

                                                    2
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




Such individuals, even if they leave the business early, are usually responsible for the conception of

the basic product, hiring the initial team, and obtaining at least some early financing. Other

definitions are possible. For example, CEOs who “reinvent” a company might also consider

themselves entrepreneurs. Conceptually, the model is consistent with including this latter group in

the collection of entrepreneurs, but they will be excluded (with one exception) in the empirical

analysis. The definition, both at the theoretical and empirical level, is quite distinct from “self-

employed.” A self-employed person need not have any other employees and the kinds and

combinations of skills that are necessary for real entrepreneurship are less important for, say, a self-

employed handyman who works alone.

        The model presented below is one of occupational choice, where an individual can decide

whether to become an entrepreneur, which makes use of a variety of skills, or to specialize, which

makes use of one. The model is tested, using data on graduates from the Stanford Graduate School

of Business. The data combines information on post-graduate work experience and incomes with

courses taken and grades obtained when the individuals were attending Stanford GSB.

        The primary theoretical predictions are:

        1. Individuals with more “balance” are more likely to become entrepreneurs.

        2. Occupations where the substantive skill and business skills are closer should see a larger

supply of entrepreneurs. E.g., insurance and business are closer than sports and business so a higher

proportion of insurance agents than sports figures should be entrepreneurs.

        3. Entrepreneurship should be an increasing proportion of the income bracket in question.

        4. The supply of entrepreneurs is smaller for production processes that require a higher

                                                    3
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




number of independent skills.

        5.    The upper tail of the income distribution is fatter for entrepreneurs than it is for

specialists. Entrepreneurs are predicted to be the highest income individuals in society, but the

bottom of the income distribution should have both entrepreneurs and specialists.

        6.    Symmetric underlying ability distributions result in positively skewed income

distributions.

        7. Individuals who become entrepreneurs should have a more balanced human capital

investment strategy on average than those who become specialists.

        The predictions are tested empirically using data on Stanford alumni and are borne out.

Specifically,

        1. The most important determinant of becoming an entrepreneur is the number of prior roles

(not employers) held. Entrepreneurs are people who are multi-skilled either because of their

endowment or because they acquire skills that they lack.

        2. Entrepreneurs are disproportionately those who did not take a specialized course load

when they were MBA students. Those who become entrepreneurs tended to take a more field-

dispersed set of courses.

        3. Income distributions have fatter upper tails for entrepreneurs than for specialists, although

the bottom is similar.

        4. The proportion of individuals who are entrepreneurs increases with the income bracket

examined.



                                                    4
Edward P. Lazear                              Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




                                  A Model of Occupational Choice

         Initially, let there be only two skills, denoted x1 and x2. An individual can be a specialist, in

which case, he receives income



(1) Specialist income = max[x1, x2]



Entrepreneurs, on the other hand, must be good at many things. Even if they do not do the job

themselves, they must know enough about a field to hire specialists intelligently. To capture the

jack-of-all-trades aspect of entrepreneurship, let



(2) Entrepreneur income = 8 min [x1, x2]



where 8 is a parameter that is determined in part by technology and in part by market equilibrium

that establishes the value of an entrepreneur. The value of 8, which is called the market value of

entrepreneurial talent, will be derived below. For now, it is sufficient to think of it as a constant that

is given by nature, but in reality it is the product of a technology parameter and a market determined

price.

         The initial issue is occupational choice. Who decides to become an entrepreneur and who

decides to become a specialist? The decision is straightforward. Think of individuals as being

endowed with a pair (x1 , x2 ). The joint density on x1 and x2 is given by g(x1, x2). Then the

                                                     5
Edward P. Lazear                            Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




individual chooses to become an entrepreneur if and only if



(3)     8 min [x1, x2] > max [x1, x2]



        Creativity and willingness to take risk are two factors that are often mentioned as affecting

the decision to become an entrepreneur.4 Creativity is suppressed in this model because it is

unobservable. Formally, more creative individuals can be thought of as those with larger values of

8. They have higher market values entrepreneurial talent because a given amount of raw skill

translates into more entrepreneurial output. Risk preference is simply ignored in this model where

everything other than endowment of x1 and x2 is deterministic.5



Who Becomes an Entrepreneur?

        Let us first explore some of the implications of eq. (3) for the decision to become an

entrepreneur. First, it is easiest to see this graphically. A given individual is endowed with x1 and

x2, shown as a point in figure 1. For all points below the 45o line, x1 > x2 so that a specialist whose

endowment lies below the 45o line would always choose to specialize in x1 and would have income


        4
         Kihlstrom and Laffont (1979) were the first to argue that entrepreneurs tend to be less
risk-averse than others in society. Iyigun and Owen (1998) suggest that entrepreneurship is risky
and risk-averse agents are less likely to go into entrepreneurship in a developed economy where a
larger selection of safer (insured) jobs exists.
        5
        Becker and Murphy (1992) uses a similar notion of specialization. Becker and Mulligan
(2002) apply a technology somewhat like the one in this paper to discuss the difference between
market (specialized) and household (generalized) work.

                                                   6
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                          January, 2002




given by x1; x2 is irrelevant to this specialist. In order for that individual to prefer to be an

entrepreneur to being a specialist, it is necessary that



        8 min [x1,x2] > max [x1,x2] ,



which here requires that



        8 x2 > x 1

because min [x1,x2] = x2 and max [x1,x2]= x1.

        Thus, for individuals for points below the 45o line, the condition for entrepreneurship is



(4)                x 2 > x1 / 8   .




                                                    7
Edward P. Lazear                           Entrepreneurship                           January, 2002




This is shown as the shaded area on the diagram between the lines x1=x2 and x2= x1/8. The area

below the line x2 = x1 /8 corresponds to points where the individual specializes and receives income

x 1.

        Above the 45o line, the converse is true. Here, x2>x1 so the specialist receives income x2.

In these cases, the condition for entrepreneurship, that



        8 min [x1,x2] > max [x1,x2]



becomes

        8 x1 > x 2

so an individual for whom x2 exceeds x1 becomes an entrepreneur when



                                                  8
Edward P. Lazear                                Entrepreneurship                          January, 2002




(5)       x2 < 8x1 .

This is shown as the cross-hatch area in the diagram. The region in the northwest corner corresponds

to individuals who have sufficiently high values of x2 relative to x1 that it pays for them to specialize

in x2 and to receive income x2.

        The probability of becoming an entrepreneur for any 8 is given by the probability that the

pair of skills lies in one of the two shaded areas in figure 1 or

                               ∞ λ x1

(6) prob of entrepreneur =     ∫ ∫ λg( x , x )dx dx
                               0 x1 /
                                        1   2       2       1




        It is now possible to derive and explain intuitively how occupational choice varies with a

number of different parameters. First, consider 8, the market value of entrepreneurial talent.

Differentiate (6) with respect to 8 to obtain




           ∂ prob ∞                                x x
                 = ∫ [ g ( x1 , λx1 ) x1 + g ( x1 , 1 ) 12 ]dx1
             ∂λ    0
                                                   λ λ



which is positive.

        The higher is 8, the more likely is the individual to become an entrepreneur.

Diagrammatically, as 8 increases the shaded areas become larger because the borders move toward

the axes. If 8 were infinity, everyone would become an entrepreneur since for any positive values


                                                        9
Edward P. Lazear                              Entrepreneurship                              January, 2002




of x1 and x2, entrepreneurial income would be infinite. As 8 goes to 1, the shaded areas get pinched.

When 8=1, the borders of the shaded area are the line x1 = x2 and there are no entrepreneurs.

Obviously, if 8=1, it is impossible for condition (3) to hold since the min of something can never

exceed the max of something.6

        This result is important for equilibrium. The market value of entrepreneurial talent, 8, is a

parameter that determines the supply of entrepreneurs in an economy. As 8 rises, everyone chooses

to become an entrepreneur. As 8 falls to 1, no one opts for entrepreneurship. This will guarantee

an interior solution for 8 and will ensure that there is a finite number of individuals wanting to enter

entrepreneurship.

        The technological aspect of the 8 variable lends itself to a number of interpretations. In some

fields, agency problems are pronounced and the technological component of 8 is low because it is

difficult to transform raw ability into entrepreneurial skills. In these fields, if you want it done, you’d

better do it yourself. In other fields, management is possible because monitoring is less costly and

specialization can be orchestrated more easily. Economies of scale may also be important in

determining 8. In some industries, it may be that raw skills can be transformed into high levels of

entrepreneurial output because technology allows one skilled manager to leverage his talents.

        It is also possible to think of 8 as being person specific. Some individuals have a

comparative advantage in entrepreneurship. This might relate to creativity or other skills, but it is



        6
        The interpretation is also correct when min[x1, x2] is negative. Then, using one’s talents
as an entrepreneur destroys output and individuals are charged for this. The larger is 8, the more
output destroyed and the less likely is the individual to become an entrepreneur.

                                                    10
Edward P. Lazear                              Entrepreneurship                           January, 2002




reflected in high values of 8. Since such talents are generally unobservable, not much more is said

about the idiosyncratic variation in 8.   7




Balance:

        There is another related result. The smaller is the difference between x1 and x2 for any given

individual, the more likely is he to become an entrepreneur. To make this more precise, think of

an individual who has total skill X. The more evenly divided X is between x1 and x2, the more likely

that the individual becomes an entrepreneur. The individual becomes an entrepreneur when (3)

holds. Rewrite (3) as



(3')    8 min [x1, X-x1] > max [x1,X- x1]



If x1 < X/2 , then entrepreneurial income is x1 and specialist income is X - x1 . An increase in x1

toward X/2 raises the l.h.s. of (3') and lowers the r.h.s. of (3') making entrepreneurship more likely.

Conversely, if x1>X/2, then entrepreneurial income is X-x1, which decreases in x1 and specialist

income is x1. Lowering x1 toward X/2 raises the likelihood that the individual will choose to be an

entrepreneur. For a given X, the maximum likelihood that the individual chooses to be an

entrepreneur occurs when x1 = x2 = X/2.


        7
         One of the skills can be interpreted as the ability to raise capital. This argument is
central to Evans and Jovanovic (1989). Holtz-Eakin, Joulfaian, and Rosen (1994) show that
capital is important in starting a business by linking the receipt of an inheritance to the likelihood
of starting a business.

                                                    11
Edward P. Lazear                            Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




        The point is that entrepreneurs are balanced individuals. They must be almost equally

talented in a number of different areas. The idea that balance is important suggests that the supply

of entrepreneurship may vary by industry. For example, those endowed with great artistic talent are

not likely to be also endowed with great business skills. As long as both artistic and business skills

are relevant for production in the art business, then few will have high enough levels to avoid

specializing in one or the other aspect of the business. Thus, the supply of entrepreneurial talent in

art would be expected to be low, so most artists must be managed by others. The prediction is that

there would be very few artists who run their own studios and publicize their own work.

        An alternative example involves insurance agencies. The ability to understand complex

insurance policies is a skill that is likely to be correlated with the accounting and management skills

necessary to run a business. As a result, there are many who are well-suited to running their own

agencies and so the number of agencies should be great and their average size small.

        In the context of figure 1, the supply of entrepreneurs is greater for any given 8 when most

of the points lie close to the 45o line. Individuals whose endowments are near the line x1 = x2 are

more balanced.

        The empirical statements are verifiable by looking at real world data.8 In situations where

entrepreneurs are rare, a few must run the whole industry, driving up concentration ratios. In

situations where many opt to be entrepreneurs, the concentration ratios should be low. Of course,

other technological considerations are key here and must be held constant. If scale economies are


        8
          To make statements about groups, it is necessary to show that the propositions are true in
a statistical sense at the level of the population. This is derived in the appendix.

                                                  12
Edward P. Lazear                            Entrepreneurship                            January, 2002




more important in some industries (e.g., automobiles) than in others (e.g., restaurants), the

concentration ratios are likely to be higher in the former than the latter, independent of

entrepreneurial supply considerations.



Ability Levels:

        At the outset, it was suggested that there are entrepreneurs at all income and ability levels.

The model presented suggests some patterns that may be observable in real world data. In particular,

entrepreneurship should be more prevalent among higher income individuals. The intuition is easily

obtained by examining a special case of figure 1 shown as figure 2.

        Here, the joint density of x1, x2 is such that all points lie within the box bounded by (0,0),




                                                  13
Edward P. Lazear                            Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




(1,0), (1,1) and (0,1). Now suppose that we stratify a sample of individuals on the basis of their

income. A specialist can never have income greater than 1 because sup {max[x1 , x2 ]} = 1 .

Entrepreneurs can have income greater than 1 because their minimum skill is multiplied by the

market value of entrepreneurial talent, 8, to obtain income. For example, an individual with x1=1

and x2=1 would have income of 8, which exceeds 1.

        In fact, there are three ways to have income equal to 1. An individual can have x1 equal to

1 and specialize in x1, he can have x2 equal to 1 and specialize in x2, or he can be an entrepreneur.

This is shown by the thick saw-tooth iso-income line that joins 1 on the x1 axis with 1 on the x2 axis.

The same is true for other levels of income, e.g., I0 and I1, which reflect two more among the family

                                                  14
Edward P. Lazear                            Entrepreneurship                            January, 2002




of iso-income lines.

        Clear from figure 2 is that irrespective of the income brackets or of the underlying density

functions, at least at the top income brackets (for income > 1), all individuals are entrepreneurs. At

lower levels of income, some individuals must be specialists so at least at the extremes, there must

be a rising proportion of entrepreneurs with income levels.9



Complexity of Production:

        Some production processes are very complex, requiring many skills in order to produce

output. Others are relatively straightforward. As the world has become complex, a larger variety

of skills may be required to be an entrepreneur. In an agrarian society, a farmer did not require too

many business skills to run his small farm and get his produce to market. The founders of the

modern corporation are a different breed. They are more than competent technicians; they must

understand how to create a worldwide business.

        What happens to the supply of entrepreneurs as the number of factors increases? Without

being more specific about the distribution of the factors, it is impossible to make qualitative

statements. However, it is possible to show that the introduction of independent factors always

reduces the supply of entrepreneurs.

        Consider the original joint density g(x1,x2). Now introduce a third factor, x3, and let the

density of the three be denoted k(x1,x2,x3). If x3 is an independent factor with (marginal) density


        9
       The production functions guarantee this result. Less restrictive production technologies
would also produce this result.

                                                  15
Edward P. Lazear                                   Entrepreneurship                          January, 2002




m(x3), then it is possible to write


        k(x1,x2,x3) =    ∫ m( x ){∫ ∫ g( x , x )dx dx }dx
                                3           1      2         2       1           3




The condition necessary to ensure an entrepreneur for two variables must still hold. For any given

x3, the projection onto the x1, x2 plane does not lie in the entrepreneurial area, the individual will not

choose to be an entrepreneur. That is, if

        8min[x1,x2] < max[x1,x2] ,

the individual becomes a specialist, irrespective of x3. In addition, there are some potential cutoff

values, x3* and x3**, that are also required for entrepreneurship. So the probability of being an

entrepreneur cannot exceed



                              x3**        ∞ λ x1

                              ∫ m( x ){∫ ∫ λg( x , x )dx dx }dx
                                      3                  1       2           2       1   3
                              x3*         0 x1 /




which can be written as

                                                ∞ λ x1

                   { M ( x3** ) − M ( x3* )} ∫       ∫ λg( x , x )dx dx
                                                                 1       2           2   1
                                                0 x1 /




                                                         16
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                          January, 2002




Since the first term cannot exceed 1, the probability of being an entrepreneur cannot be higher with

three factors than with two, and in general must be lower.

           The proof can be repeated, adding one factor at a time.        Therefore, the supply of

entrepreneurs falls as the production process requires more independent skills. One implication is

that the number of entrepreneurs should decline over time as few individuals have high enough

levels of all skills to choose to be entrepreneurs.




The Distribution of Income

           The model presented above has a number of implications for the observable distribution of

income. There are some measurement problems that camouflage some of the results, but let us put

those aside for now and derive the implications of the pure model in the absence of complicating

factors.        It is interesting to examine the distribution of income among specialists, among

entrepreneurs, and the overall distribution of income that does not distinguish between them.10



Minimum and Maximum Income:

           The maximum income for an entrepreneur occurs on the 45o line in figure 1. Since the

binding constraint is always the lowest income, for any x1 or x2, income can never be higher than it



           10
         Hamilton (2000) shows that entrepreneurs have lower initial earnings than non-
entrepreneurs. He attributes this to a compensating differential for being able to be one’s own
boss.

                                                   17
Edward P. Lazear                            Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




is for the corresponding value of the other factor on the 45o line. Let x1 and x2 be defined over

intervals x1 = [x1L, x1U] and x2 = [x2L, x2U] . Then, the maximum income among entrepreneurs is

                    8 x1U if x1U < x2U

                           and

                    8x2 if x1U > x2U



The maximum specialist income depends only on the maximum of either x1 or x2. Thus, the

maximum income among specialists is



                    x1 if x1U > x2U

                           and

                    x2 if x1U < x2U



Because 8>1, a sufficient condition for the maximum income of entrepreneurs to exceed the

maximum income of specialists is that x1U = x2U . This is not a necessary condition. As 8 goes to

infinity, the maximum income among entrepreneurs must exceed that among specialists, for any

finite x1U, x2U .

         A similar analysis can be done for minimum income. Because an individual will not choose

an occupation unless the income is higher there than in the other occupation, with a sufficiently large

number of individuals in the population, the minimum for both groups must be the same. To see this

more formally, note that for a sufficiently large population, there exists an individual whose values

                                                  18
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




of x1 , x2 lie within an epsilon neighborhood of x1L , x2L for arbitrarily small epsilon. Now

suppose that x1L < x2L . Then the minimum specialist income would be x2L if there were not the

entrepreneurial option. There are two cases. The worst entrepreneurial option may be worse than

the worst specialist option. This occurs when 8 x1L < x2L . Then the lowest specialist income is

indeed x2L because the lowest x1 , x2 individual chooses to be a specialist. But that is also the lowest

entrepreneurial income because no one would choose to be an entrepreneur unless x1 were

sufficiently high that 8x1= x2L. Minimum income for the specialist equals that for the entrepreneur.

In this case, the minimum income for each group is x2L . In the second case, the worst entrepreneurial

option is better than x2L. Then the minimum entrepreneurial income is 8 x1L > x2L . But then

individuals will not choose to specialize unless x2 is sufficiently high to equal the income of an

entrepreneur. Once again, minimum income for the specialist equals that for the entrepreneur, only

this time the minimum is 8 x1L.

        Summarizing, the maximum income for entrepreneurs, under general conditions is higher

than that of specialists, but the minimum income of both groups is the same.

        Observed income may be different than that predicted, especially for very low levels and very

high levels. There are two reasons. Self-employed individuals have wages that reflect not only

human capital, but physical capital. When starting a business, reported income is negative because

the self-employed person takes his “wage” and invests it, along with other capital, directly into the

business. In a mature business, the reverse is true. What shows up as wage is in part a return on

human capital, but in part a return on the physical capital that the individual invested in early. Wage

and salary workers separate the earnings and investment. They take their earnings, which are always

                                                   19
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




non-negative and then invest it in physical capital. Even if the total investment exceeds their wage,

the wage still shows up as a positive number. Second, there is likely to be a larger transitory

component in the earnings of the self-employed, especially at very high and very low earnings.

Some of this can be dealt with by averaging earnings over a longer period of time, or ideally,

computing lifetime wealth, which is really the variable to which the theory speaks directly.



Average Income:

        There is no general proposition that can be stated on the relation of average income among

the entrepreneur to that of specialists. The results are distribution specific. What can be said,

however, is that numerical methods reveal the following.11

        If x1 .and x2 are distributed normally and independently, then it is always true that mean

entrepreneur’s income exceeds mean specialist income, for any value of 8. The difference between

the means is increasing in 8 as is clear because entrepreneurial income goes to infinity as 8 goes to

infinity.

        The same logic implies that for any distribution of x1,x2, the mean income of entrepreneurs

is higher than that of specialists for sufficiently large values of 8. But there are distributions, e.g.,

the gamma, where for sufficiently low values of 8>1, the mean specialist earns more than the mean

entrepreneur.



        11
         Here as well, measurement issues complicate the empirical analysis. For example,
industries dominated by start-ups have low average measured earnings because entrepreneurs
invest some income in physical capital before income is measured.

                                                   20
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                            January, 2002




Skewness:

        Earnings distributions tend to acquire skew, even when the underlying ability distributions

are symmetric. The reason is that entrepreneurs add an upper tail to the distribution that would not

be present were there no entrepreneurs. To see this, consider a distribution without any skew,

namely the normal. Suppose that x1 and x2 are i.i.d. normal random variables. Table A reports the

mean, variance and skew for the relevant variables in a numerical simulation where x1 and x2 are

standard normal random variables.

        Overall income is skewed for two reasons. First, the entrepreneurial income distribution is

itself skewed because there are some very high earning entrepreneurs, but the bottom entrepreneurial

income is truncated because individuals can choose to become specialists if their entrepreneurial

income would be too low. That is, an individual with a very low value of x2 need not settle for an

entrepreneurial income of 8x2. He can earn a higher income by specializing in x1 instead. Second,

the overall income distribution for entrepreneurs lies to the right of that for specialists and

entrepreneurs are rare, creating an upper tail to the distribution.12

        It is tedious but straightforward using the formulas for the relevant areas in figure 2 to show

analytically that a uniform i.i.d. distribution of x1 and x2 results in a density as shown in figure 3.

Figure 3 is based on uniform densities of x1 and x2 that lie between 0 and 1 and on 8=2. More of

the mass lies below 1, because an income level that is less than 1 can be obtained both through the

entrepreneurial route and through the specialist route. But only entrepreneurs can obtain an income



        12
             But as 8 gets large, entrepreneurship becomes more common.

                                                   21
Edward P. Lazear                            Entrepreneurship                            January, 2002




greater than 1, since the maximum value of the underlying ability variables never exceed 1. It is only

when the values of the weakest attribute exceeds ½ that the individual obtains an income greater than

1, and this is by becoming an entrepreneur.

                                              Table A
                                               8=3
 Variable                       Number of          Mean           Variance        Skew
                                Observations


 x1                             10,000             .0009          1.01            -.003
 x2                             10,000             .007           1.01            -.001
 Proportion entrepreneurs       .14
 Income, given specialist       8565               .48             .71            .21
 Income, given entrepreneur     1435               2.01            1.32           .89
 Income (entire population)     10,000             .70             1.08           .85




                                                  22
Edward P. Lazear                            Entrepreneurship                            January, 2002




                                            Equilibrium

        Earlier, it was mentioned that 8, which has been called the market value of entrepreneurial

talent, is determined by demand and supply. To make things simple, but without loss of generality,

suppose that there are a fixed number of firms in an economy and each firm requires one and only

one entrepreneur. Then the demand for entrepreneurs is perfectly inelastic at q*, where q* is the

number of entrepreneurs demanded. Let the number of individuals in the labor force be given by N.

Then, using (6), which defines the probability of being an entrepreneur as a function of 8, the supply

                                                  23
Edward P. Lazear                                           Entrepreneurship              January, 2002




of entrepreneurs is simply

                    ∞ λ x1

                   N∫     ∫ g( x , x )dx dx
                                   1       2   2   1   .
                      0 x1 / λ




Market equilibrium occurs when 8 is set such that


                                  ∞ λ x1

(7)                              N∫    ∫ λg( x , x )dx dx
                                               1   2       2    1   = q*
                                  0 x1 /




Eq. (7) is one equation in one unknown, namely 8, which determines the equilibrium value of

entrepreneurship. The market value of entrepreneurial talent adjusts to induce enough individuals

to become entrepreneurs so that demand is satisfied.



                                                           Investment

        So far, x1 and x2 have been taken as given. But much of economic activity as it relates to

occupational choice involves investment in skills. It is important to take investment in skills into

account both for the purposes of completing the theory and in order to allow predictions for

empirical analysis.

        Augment the previous model by defining x10 as the initial stock of skill x1, x20 as the initial



                                                                 24
Edward P. Lazear                                    Entrepreneurship                        January, 2002




stock of skill x2, and x1 and x2 as the (final) attained level. Let the individual obtain levels of x1, x2,

given the initial stock according to the cost function

        C(x1, x2, x10, x20)

with C1, C2 >0 , Cii>0 .

        Define x1 to be the skill with which the individual is endowed the largest amount. This

means that a worker who chooses to specialize is likely to specialize in x1 and will solve



              Max        x1 - C(x1, x2, x10, x20)
               x1

with f.o.c.

                   1 - C1(x1, x2, x10, x20) = 0 .

Someone who is going to specialize will only invest in one of the two skills. There is no value to

augmenting a skill that will not be used. It is possible that C2 is sufficiently low relative to C1 that

the individual will ignore his higher endowment of x1 and instead specialize in x2. This is of little

importance. Essential here, is that the individual invests in one or the other, but not both.

        Now consider an individual who is going to become an entrepreneur. His constraint is the

minimum skill, defined to be x2. Should the aspiring entrepreneur invest in x1, in x2 or in both?

        Since the constraint is x2, there is no point in investing in x1 unless x2 is brought up at least

to the level of x1 . If there is an interior solution for x2, then it satisfies



(9)     8 - C2(x1, x2, x10, x20) = 0 .


                                                          25
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                              January, 2002




        There are three possibilities, but they can be dealt with quickly. If C2(x1, x2, x10, x20) > 8,

then it does not pay for the individual to increase his stock of x2 and so no investment occurs. (It

surely does not pay to increase x1 since there is already an excess of x1 at x10.) If C2(x1, x2, x10, x20)

< 8, but C2(x10, x20 , x10, x20) > 8, the individual will invest only in x2 because it does not pay even

to bring x2 up to the endowed level of x1. (There is no advantage to augmenting x1 until x2has

reached the level of x1.) In this case, the individual specializes in investment in x2 and behaves

identically to a specialist, except that he invests in the skill in which he is weak instead of the skill

in which he is strong, which is the more common case for the specialist. Finally, if              C2(x10,

x20 , x10, x20) < 8, then it pays for the individual to exceed x10 in attained x2. But now x1 becomes

the constraint. As long as C1(x10, x20 ; x10, x20) < 8 , the individual benefits by increasing his

investment in x1 as well and continues to do so, but the optimum must have x1 = x2 in this case.

What is important, however, is that in this situation, the individual does not look like a specialist;

he invests in more than one skill.

        To summarize, those who are going to specialize invest in only one skill. Those who become

entrepreneurs may invest in one skill, but if they do so, it will be the skill in which they are weak.

But entrepreneurs are the only individuals who may invest in more than one skill. To put this in

somewhat less stark terms, individuals who become entrepreneurs should have a more balanced

investment strategy on average than those who end up specializing as wage and salary workers.



                                         Empirical Analysis

                                                   26
Edward P. Lazear                            Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




        There are a number of implications that have been suggested in the theory section above.

Some relate to occupational choice and some to income distribution, by group and overall. To

examine these issues, a unique data set will be used. In the late 90s, Stanford surveyed its Graduate

School of Business alumni (from all prior years). The primary focus of the survey was compiling

a job history for each of the graduates, with special emphasis on information about starting

businesses. The response rate was about 40%, which resulted in a sample of about 5000

respondents. In addition to the detailed job histories, I matched these data with the student

transcripts so that it is possible to see which courses were taken by those who went on to be

entrepreneurs and which by those who became specialists. Additionally, the grade obtained in each

of the courses taken is reported in my data.

        The basic hypothesis is that entrepreneurs are jacks-of-all-trades. In the “Investment” section

above, it was shown that individuals who want to become entrepreneurs will invest in a broader

range of skills than will those who want to become specialists. Going into any job, individuals with

a broader range of skills, acquired either through investment or through endowments, are more likely

to be entrepreneurs.13

        The data allow this hypothesis to be tested. The data set is a job history panel so that each

respondent has one row of data corresponding to each employer (including self) that he or she has

held. For example, an individual who had six jobs would have six rows of data, one for each


        13
         Lentz and Laband (1990) find that there is a higher likelihood of self-employment
among the children of the self-employed. They interpret this as human capital that is passed
from one generation to the next. There are also papers on the link between education and
entrepreneurship. See for example Bates (1985 and 1990) .

                                                  27
Edward P. Lazear                            Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




employer. An individual who had 4 employers and one spell of unemployment would have five rows

of data. The beginning and ending dates for each job is recorded, as is the beginning and ending

salary and size of firm. Additionally, all roles within the job (up to five) are described through a

coding system that corresponds to occupational titles. Industry and demographic data are also

provided.

        Table 1 provides the means and standard deviations of the relevant variables. Table 2 reports

the results of logits and linear probability estimates, where the dependent variable is 1 if the

employment event is reported as an entrepreneurial one and 0 otherwise. (All non-employment

spells are dropped.) Panel A is for linear probability estimates. The dependent variable is a dummy

equal to one when the employment to which the observation refers is one where the individual lists

his role as “Founder - among those who initially started the business.” The key independent

variable, “nprior,” is the number of roles in total that the individual has had before the employment

in question. So if an individual had three previous employers, and held two roles with the first, four

roles with the second, and one with the third then nprior would equal 7. “Avjobten” is the average

number of years per employer. “Male” is a variable that is 1 if the individual is male and 0 if female.

“Amer” is a dummy for nationality being American. White is a dummy for white, age is age at the

time of the survey and MBA year is the year of graduation from the MBA program. Age and

MBAyear can be thought of as experience and cohort effects. Variables with a “2" at the end mean

that the variable is squared.

        Obvious from an examination of panel A is that nprior is most important in determining

entrepreneurship. This finding holds up in all subsequent analyses. The t value on this variable is

                                                  28
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002




almost 30, which is very large relative to anything else in the regression, and which reflects the

importance of the variable in magnitude and the precision of estimation. Panel B is the same

analysis, but with a logit specification and panel C adds non-linear terms. The importance of

additional roles diminishes as more roles are added (the quadratic term is negative).14

        The significance of having had prior roles is striking support of the “jack-of-all-trades” view.

An additional one role increases the probability that the job will be one where the individual is an

entrepreneur by 1 percentage point (from panel B). This is large because the probability of

entrepreneurship in the overall sample is only 6.6%. The mean number of roles held before starting

a job is about 3. The point is also clear using some simple statistics. In table B, the probability of

entrepreneurship is reported by the number of previous roles. Only three percent of those who have

had fewer than three roles are entrepreneurs, whereas 29% of those with over 16 prior roles are

entrepreneurs.15




        14
          It is possible that those with more roles received more promotions with their previous
employer. To check this, the same models were run including a variable that measured the final
salary on the last job. Those with higher final salaries do have a slightly higher probability of
being entrepreneurs, but the coefficient is not significant in the logits. Furthermore, there is
virtually no effect on the size of the nprior coefficient.
        15
         One possibility is that those who have been entrepreneurs in the past list many roles
when they are entrepreneurs and that entrepreneurship is serially correlated. To check this, nprior
was redefined such that each entrepreneurial employment was given one and only one role. The
results were substantially unaltered.

                                                   29
Edward P. Lazear                            Entrepreneurship                              January, 2002




                                               Table B

                    Probability of Entrepreneurship by Number of Prior Roles Held

 Number of Prior Roles                                 Proportion entrepreneurial roles
 Fewer than 3                                          .03
 3 to 16                                               .10
 More than 16                                          .29

        The other variable of interest is “avjobten” which is the average number of years per

employer. Holding the number of roles constant, moving from firm to firm decreases the probability

that an individual becomes an entrepreneur. This may reflect unobserved ability to focus or some

other latent characteristic. It is not the case that entrepreneurs are those who cannot sit still. They

are not individuals who bounce from employer to employer. For any given number of roles, the

shorter period that the individual is with an employer, the less likely he is to be an entrepreneur in

his next pursuit.

        The results on “avjobten” also speak to risk taking. One might argue that entrepreneurs are

risk takers and the fact that they take on many roles reflects their willingness to take chances with

their careers, doing things that they otherwise are not well-suited to do. But were this the case, one

would also expect these individuals to be willing to change employers more frequently. In fact, the

reverse is true. Those who stay longer with a given employer are more likely to become

entrepreneurs.

        There are two interpretations of the “nprior” variable, both of which are consistent with the

jack-of-all-trades hypothesis. The first is that those who are endowed with high levels of multiple

                                                  30
Edward P. Lazear                              Entrepreneurship                              January, 2002



skills (or have acquired them by the time they reach the labor market) are able to perform many roles

and “nprior” proxies the existence of a balanced skill set. The second is that those who want to be

entrepreneurs intentionally choose to perform a number of roles in order to acquire a balanced skill

set. This can be thought of as investment in on-the-job training that prepares the individual to be an

entrepreneur along the lines discussed in the investment section above. Either interpretation is

consistent with the model.

        Because the definition of entrepreneur is somewhat arbitrary, another group was defined to

be entrepreneurs. They are those who reported their position as high-level general manager,

specifically, “I am responsible for the organization’s overall direction, including responsibility for

major business functions and personnel decisions (examples: CEO, President, COO, Executive

Director).” Although individuals in this category may not assume the same risk as those who found

a business, they are senior general managers so the jack-of-all-trades argument should pertain to

them as well. To test this, a regression identical to the one in panel A of table 2 was run, except that

the dependent variable was a dummy equal to one if the employment reported was defined high-level

general manager. The results were almost identical to those for panel A. In particular, the

coefficient on nprior is virtually identical to the size of that in the original regression. The t-ratio is

31.7. So the jack-of-all-trades story applies well to senior level managers.

        The data on work histories were matched with data from student transcripts. As a result, we

have information on the courses taken and performance in those courses while the individual was

a student at the Stanford Graduate School of Business. The records begin in the mid-80s so the

transcript-matched data only pertain to those who graduated during approximately the last fifteen

                                                    31
Edward P. Lazear                            Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002



years. But almost 2000 records of alumni work history data have been matched with transcript

information so a significant amount of information is contained in the fifteen years of records.

        Table 3 gives the means of the relevant variables. Simple relationships can be seen in the

comparison. The sample of entrepreneurs is less specialized as seen in the means. The variable

“specdif” is the difference between the maximum number of courses taken in one field and the

average number of courses taken across fields. This is a measure of lopsidedness in the study

curriculum. Another measure of lack of balance is gpadiff, which is the difference between the

highest grade point average field and the lowest grade point average field. Again, this is supposed

to capture a lack of balance. “Mathgpa” is the grade point average in accounting, economics, and

finance courses. Specdiff and gpadiff, are lower for entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs are also older,

more male, they have taken more entrepreneurial courses and they have lower grades than the sample

as a whole.

        The first analysis reported in table 4 is a logit where the dependent variable is a dummy equal

to one if the individual answers that he or she has started a business and zero otherwise. The jack-of-

all-trades theory suggests that those who have large values of specdif and of gpadiff should be less

likely to become entrepreneurs. Panels A through C of table 4 provide weak support of this

prediction in the data since all coefficients are negative on specdif and gpadif variables.16

        It is also possible to examine the performance of individuals in the data. One clear estimate



        16
         MATHGPA did not enter significantly in other forms of the logits and regressions. The
grade level does not seem to have any significant effect on whether someone becomes
entrepreneur, although the simple relationship is negative.

                                                  32
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002



of performance is the maximum earnings ever obtained by the entrepreneur. Panel D of table 4

provides evidence. The conclusion is that nothing seems to affect performance once an individual

chooses to become an entrepreneur. Number of entrepreneurship classes enters negatively, but is

not significant. Only MBA year matters, reflecting the newness of the graduates who have less time

during which to build a highly valuable business.

        The zero or negative effect of certain variables, particularly the entrepreneurship classes

taken, is consistent with the investment model. Since it pays to invest in those subjects in which

there is a weakness, those who take entrepreneurship classes are relative weak in this skill. The

investment model also predicts that there will not be a complete closing of the gap, since some

investors will find that it pays to stop short of the level of other skills. As a result, those who take

classes in a particular subject start out weaker and end up weaker than those who do not.

        Figure 4 reveals that another prediction of the model is borne out in the data. Specifically,

the higher is the income category, the higher is the proportion of entrepreneurs in the data. Among

the highest income bracket (earning in the millions per year), almost 25% of the individuals are

entrepreneurs. In the lowest income bracket, fewer than 5% are entrepreneurs. There exist

entrepreneurs even in the lowest income brackets, but their prevalence is as predicted.

        The results from the one-observation-per-individual data support the earlier conclusions.

Entrepreneurs are jacks-of-all-trades. They have more varied course work while in the MBA

program and have many more positions when they are actually in the labor market.



Income Distribution:

                                                   33
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                             January, 2002



        The primary implication of the model for income distribution is that the overall distribution

should be positively skewed and that entrepreneurs should have a fatter upper tail in their distribution

than that of specialists. It is somewhat dangerous to place much stock in the income distribution

numbers in this sample because this is such an unusual population of individuals. Nevertheless, the

numbers are instructive if not conclusive. Figure 5 presents the findings graphically.

        The main conclusion is that the entrepreneurial income distribution does have a fatter upper

tail than the specialist distribution. Note that nothing is held constant in these data. Every

observation is treated as independent and most of the data are made up of specialists so the overall

distribution is close to that observed for the specialists. Still, the data are consistent with the

predictions of the model in that the positive skew shows up among entrepreneurs. It is also true that

the entrepreneurial distribution has a fatter left tail as well, which reflects the observation made

earlier that income for entrepreneurs is more likely to include investments in and returns to physical

capital than is income for specialists.

                                             Conclusion

        Entrepreneurs are individuals who are multi-faceted. Although not necessarily superb at

anything, entrepreneurs have to be sufficiently skilled in a variety of areas to put together the many

ingredients required to create a successful business. As a result, entrepreneurs tend to be more

balanced individuals. When students, those who will become entrepreneurs are predicted to have

more uniform grades and test scores across fields than those who end up being specialists and

working for others.

        Because individuals who do not have the requisite levels of all skills can choose to specialize

                                                   34
Edward P. Lazear                             Entrepreneurship                              January, 2002



in those things at which they are good, entrepreneurs are more likely to be found in the upper ranges

of income distributions and so the probability of entrepreneurship tends to increase with wealth.

Related, the upper tail of the income distribution is fatter for entrepreneurs than it is for specialists.

The top of the income distribution should be dominated by entrepreneurs, but the bottom should

have both specialists and entrepreneurs.        Also, because of occupational sorting, symmetric

underlying ability distributions generate positively skewed income distributions. A final prediction

is that individuals who become entrepreneurs should have a more balanced human capital investment

strategy on average than those who become specialists.

        Data from Stanford MBA alumni support the predictions. Individuals are more likely to

become entrepreneurs when the number of previous roles (not employers) increases. Those with

more varied experience have much higher probabilities of starting their own business. The number

of prior roles is by far the most important variable in explaining the propensity to start a business,

even when holding constant previous experience, earnings and past employment tenure.

Furthermore, those who study a more general curriculum when in the Stanford MBA program are

also more likely to become entrepreneurs. Entrepreneurs are not the individuals who perform

particularly well in one specialized area. These results support the “jack-of-all-trades” view of

entrepreneurship.

        The data on income are consistent with the predictions, especially that the upper tail of the

income distribution should have a disproportionate share of entrepreneurs. But not too much can

be made of these results since the income distribution numbers are from a very small and select part

of the overall population, namely those who graduated from the Stanford MBA program.

                                                   35
Edward P. Lazear                          Entrepreneurship                         January, 2002



        Much more can be done, especially at the empirical level.            The prevalence of

entrepreneurship by occupation and industry is predicted by the model. Educational systems differ

by country in terms of amount of specialization and this has implications for the proportion of

entrepreneurs by country. The model gives quite specific predictions about these relations, but

investigation is left to the future.




                                                36
Edward P. Lazear                      Entrepreneurship                  January, 2002



                                        Table 1
                           Variables and Descriptive Statistics

Whole Sample:

   Variable         Obs           Mean            Std. Dev.       Min      Max
 mbayear           26842        74.33507          14.16078        13        97
 male              26842        .8424484          .3643268         0         1
 age               26842        50.16392          13.53321        25        93
 white             26842        .8671112          .3394608         0         1
 income            26842        108.8579          272.8131         0       3000
 exp               26842        66.54206          33.48872         0        98
 nprior            26842        3.261139          3.397093         0        37
 entre             26841        .0666145          .2493578         0         1
 salend            24461        2.639099          2.193911         0        12
 nbus              26842        .3935996          .7966955         0         5
 amer              26842        .7326578          .4425807         0         1
 njobs             26842        3.888384          2.614436         1        27
 avjobten          26842        18.57568          13.22497         0        94


Specialists:

 Variable           Obs           Mean            Std. Dev.       Min      Max
 mbayear           25053        74.41221          14.19583        13        97
 male              25053        .8384225          .3680701         0         1
 age               25053        50.09959          13.58672        25        93
 white             25053        .8666427          .3399673         0         1
 income            25053        101.8165          251.1824         0       3000
 exp               25053        65.48872          33.98158         0        98
 nprior            25053        3.107055          3.269165         0        37
 entre             25053            0                 0            0        0
 nbus              25053        .3606754          .7498719         0         5
 amer              25053        .7311699          .4433603         0         1
 njobs             25053        3.796312          2.588059         1        27
 avjobten          25053        18.58135          13.43031         0        94



                                            37
Edward P. Lazear               Entrepreneurship              January, 2002




Entrepreneurs:

 Variable          Obs      Mean           Std. Dev.   Min      Max
 mbayear           1788   73.25224         13.62178    13        97
 male              1788   .8993289          .300977     0         1
 age               1788   51.06879         12.73224    26        88
 white             1788   .8736018         .3323906     0        1
 income            1788   207.5666         472.1862     0       3000
 exp               1788   81.33837          20.4812     0        97
 nprior            1788   5.531574         4.261686     1        38
 entre             1788       1                0        1        1
 nbus              1788   .8545861         1.192729     0         5
 amer              1788   .7533557         .4311785     0         1
 njobs             1788   5.180089         2.640777     1        20
 newobs            1788    .045302         .2080239     0         1
 avjobten          1788   18.50666         9.907772     0       48.5




                                     38
Edward P. Lazear                       Entrepreneurship                     January, 2002



                                          Table 2
Panel A:
                   Linear Probability Estimates: Dep Var is Entrepreneur
                               (0=specialist, 1=entrepreneur)

                                  Number of obs= 26841
                                  F( 7, 26833) = 131.11
                                  Prob > F      = 0.0000
                                  R-squared     = 0.0331
                                  Adj R-squared = 0.0328
                                  Root MSE      = .24523

      entre             Coef.            Std. Err.                    T     P>|t|
 nprior               .0131869           .0004493                  29.350   0.000
 avjobten             .0004112           .0001183                   3.475   0.001
 male                 .0245469           .0043457                   5.649   0.000
 white                -.002874           .0046676                  -0.616   0.538
 amer                 .0049672           .0035321                   1.406   0.160
 mbayear             -.0006043           .0004356                  -1.387   0.165
 age                 -.0009847           .0004535                  -2.171   0.030
 _cons                .0881361           .0552416                   1.595   0.111

Panel B:                 Logit Estimates: Dep Var is Entrepreneur
                               (0=specialist, 1=entrepreneur)

                                  Number of obs=           26841
                                  LR chi2(7)   =          727.20
                                  Prob > chi2 =           0.0000
Log likelihood = -6206.8732       Pseudo R2    =          0.0553

      entre             Coef.            Std. Err.                    z     P>|z|
 nprior               .1615081           .0062554                  25.819   0.000
 avjobten             .0138789           .0024143                   5.749   0.000
 male                 .4804365           .0845725                   5.681   0.000
 white               -.0408468           .0789505                  -0.517   0.605
 amer                 .0808379           .0601467                   1.344   0.179
 mbayear             -.0144044           .0074716                  -1.928   0.054
 age                 -.0201495           .0078187                  -2.577   0.010
 _cons               -1.931958           .9466163                  -2.041   0.041

                                             39
Edward P. Lazear                        Entrepreneurship                     January, 2002



Panel C:
                              Dependent Variable is Entrepreneur
                                (0=specialist, 1=entrepreneur)

                                    Number of obs=          26841
                                    LR chi2(9) =           910.10
                                    b > chi2     =         0.0000
Log likelihood = -6115.4203         pseudo R2    =         0.0693

      entre               Coef.           Std. Err.                    z     P>|z|
 nprior                 .262436           .0173133                  15.158   0.000
 nprior2              -.0061698           .0009088                  -6.789   0.000
 avjobten              .0789464           .0090172                   8.755   0.000
 avjob2               -.0013885           .0001957                  -7.094   0.000
 male                  .4890949           .0848632                   5.763   0.000
 white                -.0551111           .0791936                  -0.696   0.486
 amer                  .0858171           .0601514                   1.427   0.154
 mbayear              -.0098551           .0073898                  -1.334   0.182
 age                  -.0165565           .0077231                  -2.144   0.032
 _cons                -3.255904           .9400495                  -3.464   0.001




                                              40
Edward P. Lazear                          Entrepreneurship                   January, 2002



                                            Table 3
                                        Summary Statistics


Whole sample: 2034 Observations
                                                             Mean   Std. Deviation

Ever start a business - dummy                                .17
Number of businesses started                                 .24            .54
specdif (max - mean courses by field)                        2.49          1.14
gpadiff (max - min gpa by field)                             1.51           .73
age                                                          34.6          5.10
male                                                         .69
v (number of entre classes)                                  1.65           .81
mathgpa                                                      3.84           .68


Specialists Only: 1695 Observations
                                                             Mean   Std. Deviation

specdif (max - mean courses by field)                        2.51          1.14
gpadiff (max - min gpa by field)                             1.52           .72
age                                                          34.4          5.01
male                                                         .66
v (number of entre classes)                                  1.81          .93
mathgpa                                                      3.73          .72


Entrepreneurs Only: 339 Observations

                                                             Mean   Std. Deviation

Number of businesses started                                 1.34            .69
specdif (max - mean courses by field)                        2.36          1.08
gpadiff (max - min gpa by field)                             1.46           .73
age                                                          36.1          5.76
male                                                         .80
v (number of entre classes)                                  1.72          .84
mathgpa                                                      3.70          .65



                                                41
Edward P. Lazear                       Entrepreneurship                     January, 2002



                                          Table 4
                                  Transcript Matched Data

Panel A: Dependent variable = Ever start a business

Logit estimates                    Number of obs=          1991
                                   LR chi2(4) =            49.78
                                   Prob > chi2 =          0.0000
Log likelihood = -906.97912        Pseudo R2    =         0.0267

 entrealt                Coef.           Std. Err.                    z     P>|z|
 specdif              -.1105497          .0541239                  -2.043   0.041
 gpadiff              -.1179076          .0835377                  -1.411   0.158
 age                   .0413336           .011112                   3.720   0.000
 male                  .7506783          .1484805                   5.056   0.000
 _cons                -3.097318          .4493102                  -6.893   0.000



Panel B: Dependent variable = Ever start a business

Logit estimates             Dep Var is Entrepreneur
                     (0=specialist, 1=entrepreneur)


                                   Number of obs=          1605
                                   LR chi2(5)   =         63.20
                                   Prob > chi2 =          0.0000
Log likelihood = -732.6649         Pseudo R2    =         0.0413


 entrealt                Coef.           Std. Err.                    z     P>|z|
 specdif              -.1073166          .0664185                  -1.616   0.106
 gpadiff              -.1228518          .0933233                  -1.316   0.188
 age                   .0635247          .0133443                   4.760   0.000
 male                  .6827019          .1650519                   4.136   0.000
 # ent. c              .3538476          .0806161                   4.389   0.000
 _cons                -4.389872          .5852857                  -7.500   0.000



                                             42
Edward P. Lazear                      Entrepreneurship                           January, 2002




Panel C: Number of business started
1838 Observations
R-square = .04
                                                         Parameter Estimates

 Variable            Parameter Estimate           Standard Error       t Value
 Intercept           -0.48859                     0.13481              -3.62
 specdiff            -0.01821                     0.01449              -1.26
 gpadiff             -0.02702                     0.02116              -1.28
 age                 0.01718                      0.00319               5.39
 male                0.15885                      0.03342               4.75
 V (# entrepreneur   0.07191                      0.01983               3.63
 classes)




                                            43
Edward P. Lazear                       Entrepreneurship                    January, 2002




Panel D: Dependent Variable = Maximum entrepreneurial income (in real 1985 dollars)

234 Observations
R-square = .04


                                                   Parameter Estimates

 Variable             Parameter Estimate            Standard Error       t Value
 Intercept                2232.96626                   622.36472            3.59
 specdiff                   26.13276                   16.04499             1.63
 gpadiff                    37.23032                   28.04609             1.33
 age                        -3.23646                    3.47121            -0.93
 male                       21.07999                   46.17728             0.46
 V (# of entre.            -16.03367                    24.25218           -0.66
 classes)
 mathgpa                    3.14903                       32.40286         0.10
 mbayear                   -23.19545                       5.85621        -3.96




                                             44
Edward P. Lazear                               Entrepreneurship                    January, 2002




                                             Figure 4
                                    Entrepreneurial Probability

   0.25

    0.2

   0.15

    0.1

   0.05

      0
           25      62   87   125   175   250   350    450    625   875 1500 3000
                                   Income in Thousands




                                                     45
 Edward P. Lazear                      Entrepreneurship                      January, 2002



                           Figure 5: Real Income Distributions


            .408628




                                                              All
Fraction




                  0
                       1                                  8
                               inc

             .417279
 Fraction




                                                                      Specialists




                  0
                       1                                  8
                                inc



             .287879
  Fraction




                                                                    Entrepreneurs



                                             46
                   0
                       1                                  8
                                inc
Edward P. Lazear                          Entrepreneurship                          January, 2002



                                           References

Bates, Timothy. Autumn 1985. Entrepreneur human capital endowments and minority business
       viability. Journal of Human Resources 20:4, 540-554.

Bates, Timothy. November 1990. Entrepreneur human capital inputs and small business
       longevity. Review of Economics and Statistics 72:4, 551-559.

Becker, Gary S. and Casey B. Mulligan. "The Division of Labor and Household and Market
       Economies.” manuscript, University of Chicago, March 2002.

Becker, Gary S. and Kevin M. Murphy. November 1992. The division of labor, coordination
       costs, and knowledge. Quarterly Journal of Economics 57:4, 1137-1160.

De Meza, David and Clive Southey. March 1996. The borrower's curse: optimism, finance and
      entrepreneurship. Economic Journal 106:435, 375-386.

Evans, David S. and Linda S. Leighton. June 1989. Some empirical aspects of entrepreneurship.
       American Economic Review 79:3, 519-535.

Evans, David S. and Boyan Jovanovic. August 1989. An estimated model of entrepreneurial
       choice under liquidity constraints. Journal of Political Economy 97:4, 808-827.

Hamilton, Barton H. June 2000. Does entrepreneurship pay? An empirical analysis of the returns
      of self-employment. Journal of Political Economy 108: 3, 604-631.

Holmes, Thomas J. and James A. Schmitz, Jr. April 1990. A theory of entrepreneurship and its
      application to the study of business transfers. Journal of Political Economy 98:2, 265-
      294.

Holtz-Eakin, Douglas, David Joulfaian, and Harvey S. Rosen. Summer 1994. Entrepreneurial
       decisions and liquidity constraints. RAND Journal of Economics 25:2, 334-347.

Iyigun, Murat F. and Ann L. Owen. May 1998. “Risk, Entrepreneurship, and Human-Capital
        Accumulation.” In Banking Crises, Currency Crises, and Macroeconomic Uncertainty.
        American Economic Review 88:2, Papers and Proceedings of the Hundred and Tenth
        Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association, 454-457.

Kihlstrom, Richard E. and Jean-Jacques Laffont. August 1979. A general equilibrium
       entrepreneurial theory of firm formation based on risk aversion. Journal of Political
       Economy 87:4, 719-748.

                                                47
Edward P. Lazear                        Entrepreneurship                         January, 2002



Landier, Augustin. “Entrepreneurship and the Stigma of Failure.” Unpublished thesis. Mimeo,
       MIT. 2002.

Lentz, Bernard F.and David N. Laband. August 1990. Entrepreneurial success and occupational
       inheritance among proprietors. Canadian Journal of Economics 23: 3, 563-579.

Otani, Kiyoshi. May 1996. A human capital approach to entrepreneurial capacity. Economica
       63:250, 273-289.

Stopford, John M. and Charles W. F. Baden-Fuller. September 1994. Creating corporate
       entrepreneurship Strategic Management Journal 15: 7, 521-536.




                                              48
Edward P. Lazear                            Entrepreneurship                            January, 2002



                                             Appendix

        In what follows, it is shown that as the correlation between x1 and x2 rises, the supply of

entrepreneurs increases. Before deriving this formally, we state the intuition. Since entrepreneurial

output and income is determined by the weakest link, it does little good to have a high value of x1

if x2 is not also high. Under such circumstances, it is necessary that x2 be high whenever x1 is high

or there is little chance that an individual will become an entrepreneur. Diagrammatically, for any

given 8, a larger proportion of the population prefers to be entrepreneurs, the more points lie in the

shaded area of figure 1. The shaded area consists of points where x1 and x2 are close in value. For

small values of 8, only points very close to the x1=x2 line result in choosing to become an

entrepreneur. If most of the mass of the distribution lies close to the axes, then individuals will be

inclined to specialize in one or the other skill because they have a strong absolute advantage in one

skill. Entrepreneurs are jacks-of-all-trades, which means that they must be relatively good (or

relatively bad) at everything.17

        Formally, let x2 be defined in terms of x1 as follows:



                   x2 = D x1 + (1-D) <



where x1 has density f(x1) and < has density h(<). When D=1, x1 and x2 are perfectly correlated.



        17
         Stopford and Baden-Fuller (1994) list five components (proactiveness, team orientation,
dispute resolution skills, innovative, and ability to learn) that are important in entrepreneurship.
Thus, an entrepreneur might be someone who was highly endowed with each of the five factors.

                                                  49
Edward P. Lazear                                     Entrepreneurship                 January, 2002



When D=0, they are uncorrelated. In fact, D is the correlation coefficient between x1 and x2. The

probability being an entrepreneur in (6) can be rewritten as



                                       λ x1 − ρ x1
                                   ∞      1− ρ

(A1) prob of entrepreneurship =    ∫ ∫ f ( x )h(ν )dνdx
                                   0 x1
                                                        1               1
                                        − ρ x1
                                     λ
                                      1− ρ




by using a standard change of variables and altering the limits of integration appropriately.

        Next, differentiate (A1) with respect to D to obtain




         ∂ ∞          ∂ UL          ∂ LL
           = ∫ [h(UL)      − h( LL)      ] f ( x1 )dx1
         ∂ρ 0          ∂ρ            ∂ρ



where UL and LL stand for upper and lower limits of the inside integral in (A1). After substitution,

this becomes




         ∂ ∞         x (λ − 1)            x1 (1 − 1 / λ )
           = ∫ [h(UL) 1       2 + h ( LL)                 ] f ( x1 )dx1
         ∂ρ 0         (1 − ρ)               (1 − ρ) 2



                                                            50
Edward P. Lazear                          Entrepreneurship                          January, 2002



which is positive since density functions are always positive and since 8>1 for there to be any

entrepreneurs in the economy at all. Thus, as correlation increases between the two variables, the

proportion of entrepreneurs rises.




                                                51
