NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNDERSTANDING MUTUAL FUND AND HEDGE FUND
STYLES USING RETURN BASED STYLE ANALYSIS

Arik Ben Dor
Ravi Jagannathan

Working Paper 9111
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9111

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002

We would like to thank David A. Hsieh for providing us with the hedge funds returns data and Narayan Naik
for the options strategy return data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Arik Ben Dor and Ravi Jagannathan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Understanding Mutual Fund and Hedge Fund Styles Using Return Based Style Analysis
Arik Ben Dor and Ravi Jagannathan
NBER Working Paper No. 9111
August 2002
JEL No. G10, G14, G20, G23
ABSTRACT
We provide an introduction to the use of return based style analysis of Sharpe (1992) in practice.
We demonstrate the importance of selecting the right style benchmarks and how the use of inappropriate
style benchmarks may lead to wrong conclusions. When style analysis is applied to sector oriented funds
such as healthcare, precious metals, energy, technology, etc., the set of benchmarks should include sector
or industry indexes. Following Glosten and Jagannathan (1994), Fung and Hsieh (2001), and Agarwal
and Naik (2001), we show how to analyze the investment style of hedge fund managers by including the
returns on selected option based strategies as style benchmarks. In the examples we consider, return based
style analysis provides insights not available through commonly used “peer” evaluation alone.

Arik Ben Dor
Northwestern University

Ravi Jagannathan
J.L. Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Leverone/Anderson Complex
Evanston, IL 60208-2001
and NBER
rjaganna@northwestern.edu

Introduction
Several changes have taken place in the past three decades in the U.S. capital
markets.

An important one among them is the reduction in the direct holdings of

corporate equities by individual investors and a corresponding increase in institutional
holdings. The growth of mutual funds and pension funds during this period has been the
primary cause of the sharp increase in the institutional holdings of equities in the U.S.A.
Whereas mutual funds and pension funds held only 14% of all U.S. corporate equities in
1970, they held almost 40% by 20011. While holding equities through money
management institutions has made it possible for individual investors to reap
diversification benefits and plan sponsors to benefit from specialization it has not been
without cost. Individual investors as well as pension plan sponsors who invest through
professional money managers need to monitor their actions and evaluate their
performance and this introduces invisible agency costs.
For example, consider a large plan sponsor who allocates the funds across several
money managers based on each manager’s unique investment style. How can a plan
sponsor verify that the investment decisions taken by the manger and the securities he
purchased are consistent with the assigned investment style? How can a plan sponsor
ensure that the bets taken by different external managers do not offset each other?
Furthermore, external money mangers are compensated based on their performance. In
many cases an active investment manger’s performance is assessed in terms of her ability

1

Based on the Flow of Funds Accounts of the United States, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System.

2

to “beat a benchmark”2. How can the pension fund manger evaluate the nature of the risk
the manager undertook in order to attain a performance that is superior to that of the
benchmark? These problems are not unique to plan sponsors however, but are also of
considerable concern to Individual investors who own actively managed mutual funds.
Return-based Style Analysis provides a way of identifying the asset mix style of
the fund manager and comparing it with the asset mix style of the performance
benchmark. This enables the plan sponsor or an individual investor to evaluate how well
an active money manager performed and whether he provides diversification benefits in a
multi-manager portfolio. The use of the technique however, is not without limitations. As
we illustrate in several examples the technique relies crucially on the correct specification
of the style benchmark asset classes. Inappropriate or inadequate choice of style
benchmarks may lead to wrong inferences about performance and the level of “active”
management. For example, when style analysis is applied to sector oriented funds such as
healthcare, precious metals, energy, technology, etc., the set of benchmarks should
include sector or industry indexes. We also show how to analyze the investment style of
hedge fund managers by including the returns on selected option based strategies as style
benchmarks. In the examples we consider, return based style analysis provides insights
not available through commonly used “peer” evaluation alone.
The reminder of the paper is organized as follows. We provide a brief overview of
Portfolio-based Style Analysis in section 1 and review the underlying theory behind
Return based Style Analysis in section 2. We provide several examples showing how to

2

An example would be a management fee of 10 basis points (0.10%) of assets under management plus
additional 15 basis points for each 1% of performance over the benchmark such as the S&P500. Typically
the fees are determined from time to time through negotiation between the manger and the pension plan
sponsor.

3

implement Return Based Style Analysis using mutual fund data in section 3 and examine
style consistency over time using a ‘rolling windows’ methodology in section 4. We
show how to evaluate the performance of money mangers with style analysis in section 5
and discuss some common pitfalls in implementing the technique in section 6. We
discuss the use of Return-based Style Analysis of hedge fund managers who use dynamic
trading strategies and derivative instruments in section 7 and conclude in section 8.

1.

Portfolio-Composition-Based Style Analysis

The performance of money managers is often evaluated by comparing the performance of
the managed portfolio against the performance of a particular manager-specific passive
benchmark (e.g. S&P500 for a Large Cap manager). Performance attribution seeks to
explain the sources of the difference between the manager’s performance and that of the
specified benchmark. In other words, once it is clear what the results were, the goal is to
find out why they were what they were. One commonly used approach is to examine the
portfolio composition of the manager’s portfolio and compare the characteristics or
attributes of the securities the manager has invested in with the characteristics of the
securities that make up the performance benchmark. Some of the common characteristics
that are often used in such comparisons include: Market cap, book to market (price) ratio,
historic earning growth rate, dividend yield and for fixed income securities attributes
such as duration, rating, etc. The attributes are averaged across securities and the returns
associated with each attribute are determined.
Table 1 provides a simple example of a global manager who outperformed his
benchmark during 2001 by 165 basis points (1.65%). The analysis shows that of the total

4

difference, 115 basis points could be attributed to the portfolio “tilt” toward investing in
Japanese stocks during a period in which Japanese stocks outperformed stocks of firms
from other Developed countries and Emerging Markets countries. The remaining 50 basis
points could then be associated with the manger’s ability to select “winners” within the
various regions.
As mentioned earlier the use of portfolio based style analysis requires knowledge
of the composition of the managed portfolio as well as the performance benchmark at the
time of the analysis. In the case of a pension plan sponsor the money manger typically
would provide the necessary information to the pension plan for performing the analysis.
In the case of mutual funds, the investor can obtain this information from quarterly
filings. Some websites also provide information on mutual fund characteristics computed
using portfolio-weight-based style analysis and classify the funds they cover into various
categories.
Table 2 displays information available from the Morningstar web site
(www.morningstar.com), for the Goldman Sachs Growth and Income Fund as of January
2002. Panel A, displays the equity characteristics of the fund portfolio and a comparison
to the S&P500 Index. The portfolio attributes represent an aggregation of the individual
securities comprising the fund portfolio (the top 25 holdings are shown in panel B). The
fund invests in only 95 stocks with no bonds, and also maintains some exposure to
foreign markets (roughly 5%). The companies owned by the fund are much smaller than
those included in the S&P500 (the median firm size is roughly $28 billion versus $58
billion in the S&P500) and the industry weightings differ substantially (see panel C). The
fund has a somewhat higher average Price to Book ratio, but a lower Price to Earning

5

ratio. This is probably because the stocks owned by the fund experienced a higher
earning growth relative to price in the past than the stocks comprising the benchmark.
The difference in returns between the fund and the benchmark that may arise may be
attributed to the characteristics bets the fund took relative to the performance benchmark.
For example, the difference in industry weighting between the fund and the benchmark,
coupled with the returns for each industry can be used to calculate the contribution of
‘industry bias’ to the overall return difference as shown in Table 1.
Portfolio-based Style Analysis requires information on portfolio composition,
which may be difficult to obtain. Further the classification of individual securities into
slots based on characteristics can involve substantial amount of judgment. For example,
a conglomerate firm would typically have operations in several different sectors of the
economy and it may be difficult to identify how much of the firm goes into each sector.
In addition, portfolio compositions may change over time. Point in time categorization
may result in significant style “drift”. Such “drift” would render long-term stylistic
comparisons not very meaningful. One solution is to calculate these characteristics at
different points in time and use multiple portfolios to classify the investment manager.
Another problem arises from simply calculating portfolio characteristics based on
the portfolio holdings. A domestic equity mutual fund investing in domestic stocks that
derive a majority of their revenue from sales abroad will clearly be influenced by factors
in foreign economies. If the foreign economies go into recession, the fund will be
affected. In this way, the fund, although domestic, responds to factors in foreign
economies with a manner similar to an international equity fund. An investor interested in
foreign exposure may be able to obtain it through investing in such a domestic fund. In

6

William Sharpe’s oft-quoted words, what is important here is that “If it acts like a duck,
assume it’s a duck”. One advantage of the approach however, is that it provides updated
information on the money manger investment strategy and asset allocation.

2.

Return-based Style Analysis

While it is possible to determine a fund’s investment style from a detailed analysis of the
securities held by the fund, a simpler approach that uses only the realized fund-returns is
possible. Return-based Style Analysis, requires only easily obtained information, while
Portfolio-based Style Analysis requires knowledge of the actual composition of the
portfolio.
2.1

Relation to multifactor models

Multiple factor models are commonly used to characterize how industry factors and
economy wide pervasive factors affect the return on individual securities and portfolios
of securities. In such models a portfolio of factors is used to replicate the return on a
security as closely as possible.

Equation (1) gives a generic n-factor model that

decomposes the return on security i into different components:
~
~
~
~
Ri ,t = β i ,1 F1,t + β i , 2 F2,t + .... + β i ,n Fn,t + ε~i ,t

t = 1,2,3...T

(1)

~
~
~
Ri ,t is the return on security i in period t; F1 represents the value of factor 1; F2 the value
~
of factor 2; Fn the value of the nth factor and ε~i is the “non-factor” component of the

return. The coefficients β i ,1 , β i , 2 , ...β i ,n represent the exposure of security i to the
different

set

~

~

of

industry

and

economy

~

wide

pervasive

factors.

β i ,1 F1,t + β i , 2 F2,t + .... + β i ,n Fn ,t is the particular combination (portfolio) of factors that best

7

~
replicates the return Ri ,t . In factor models the portfolio weights, β i ,1 , β i , 2 ,...., β i ,n need
~
not sum to 1 and a factor, Fk ,t , need not necessarily be the return on a portfolio of
financial assets.
Sharp’s (1988, 1992) Return-based Style Analysis can be considered a special
case of the generic factor model. In Return-based Style Analysis we replicate the
performance of a managed portfolio over a specified time period as best as possible by
the return on a passively managed portfolio of style benchmark index portfolios. The two
important differences when compared to factor models are: (i) Every factor is a return on
a particular style benchmark index portfolio, and (ii) The weights assigned to the factors
sum to unity. Rewriting equation 1 yields,
~
R p ,t = [δ 1, p x1,t + δ 2, p x 2,t + .... + δ n , p x n,t ] + ε~t , p

t = 1,2,3,...T (2)

~
Where R p ,t represents the managed portfolio return at time t and x1 , x 2 ...x n are the
return on style benchmark index portfolios. The slope coefficients δ 1 , δ 2 ....δ n represent
the managed portfolio average allocation among the different style benchmark index
portfolios – or asset classes during the relevant time period. The sum of the terms in the
square brackets is that part of the managed portfolio return that can be explained by its
exposure to the different style benchmarks and is termed the style of the manger. The
residual component of the portfolio return - ε~t, p reflects the manager decision to depart
from the benchmark composition within each style benchmark class. This is the part of
return attributable to the manger stock picking ability and is termed selection.
Given a set of monthly returns for a managed fund, along with comparable returns
for a selected set of style benchmark index portfolios (asset classes), the portfolio

8

weights, δ 1 , δ 2 ....δ n , in equation (2) can be estimated using multiple regression analysis.
However, in order to get coefficients’ estimates that closely reflect the fund’s actual
investment policy it is important to incorporate restrictions on the style benchmark
weights. For example, the following two restrictions are typically imposed:

δ j , p ≥ 0 ∀ j ∈ {1,2,...n}
δ 1, p + δ 2, p + .... + δ n , p = 1

(3)
(4)

The first restriction corresponds to the constraint that the fund manager is not allowed to
take short positions in securities. The second restriction imposes the requirement that we
are interested in approximating the managed fund return as closely as possible by the
return on a portfolio of passive style benchmark indexes. The no short sale restriction is
standard for pension funds and mutual funds3. For funds known to employ some leverage
or short selling such as hedge funds other bounds may be invoked.
As before, the objective of the analysis is to select a set of coefficients that
minimizes the “unexplained” variation in returns (i.e. the variance of ε~t , p ) subject to the
stated constraints. The presence of inequality constraints in (3) requires the use of
quadratic programming since standard regression analysis packages typically do not
allow imposing such restriction. Rearranging Equation (2) yields,
Ε p = Rp − Χ ⋅ ∆ p

3

(5)

The Investment Company Act of 1940 requires mutual funds to state their likely use of derivatives in their
prospectuses. Although most of the mutual funds do explicitly state so in their prospectuses, they rarely
use derivatives. Koski and Pontiff (1999) find that only 20% of the mutual funds in their sample of 675
equity mutual funds invest in derivatives.

9

where Χ is the T × n matrix of asset classes returns, R p is the T × 1 vector of portfolio
returns and ∆ p is the n × 1 vector of slope coefficients δ 1 , δ 2 ....δ n . The term on the left
Ε p can be interpreted as the T dimensional column vector, [ ε~t , p , t = 1,2..]’, of differences
between the return on the fund and the return on the portfolio of passive benchmark style
indexes corresponding to the n dimensional vector ∆ p of style benchmark portfolio
weights – also referred to as style-asset class exposures. The goal of Return-based Style
Analysis is to find the set of non-negative style-asset class exposures δ 1 , δ 2 ....δ n that sum
to 1 and minimize the variance of ε~t , p , referred to as fund’s tracking error over the style
benchmark. Note that the objective of this analysis is not to choose style benchmarks that
make the fund “look good” or “bad”. Rather the goal is to infer as much as possible about
a fund’s exposures to variations in the returns of the given style benchmark asset classes
during the period of interest.
It is also important to understand that the ‘style’ identified in such an analysis
represents an average of potentially changing styles over the period covered. Month-tomonth deviations of the fund’s return from that of style itself can arise from selection of
specific securities within one or more asset classes, rotating among asset classes, or both.
We use the term selection to cover all such sources of tracking differences.
2.2

“Active” versus “Passive” management

The decomposition of a managed portfolio return into two components, style and
selection, provides a natural distinction between “active” and “passive” managers. An

“active” manager is looking for ways to improve performance by investing in asset
classes as well as individual securities within each asset classes that she considers

10

underpriced. She will therefore deviate from the style of the performance benchmark
index – i.e., tilt towards style benchmarks that she considers undervalued and away from
style benchmarks she considers overvalued – and in addition select individual securities
within each style benchmark asset class that she considers as being good buys. Hence
she will typically have different exposure to the style benchmark asset classes when
compared to her performance benchmark. She will also be holding a different portfolio
of securities within each style benchmark asset class. She may also be holding securities
that fall outside the range of asset classes spanned by the style benchmarks
As a result, the benchmarks will have a lower explanatory power and the residual
terms ε~i will be larger for the managed funds when compared to their respective
performance benchmarks. In contrast, “passively managed” funds do not buy and sell
securities based on research and analysis; rather, the fund’s assets are simply deployed
among different asset classes. As a result, the ε~i 's will be closer to zero for passively
managed funds when compared to actively managed funds. In this sense, a passive fund
manger provides an investor with an investment style, while an active manger provides
both style and selection.
A useful metric for identifying “active” managers from “passive” managers is the
R2 or the proportion of the variance “explained” by the selected style benchmark asset

classes. Using the traditional definition of R-Square we have for portfolio p:

Var (ε~p )
R = 1−
~
Var ( R p )
2

(6)

The right side of Equation (6) equals 1 minus the proportion of variance “unexplained”.
~
The resulting R-squared value thus indicates the proportion of the variance of R p

11

“explained” by the n asset classes. It is important to recognize that this measure indicates
only the extent to which a specific model fits the data at hand. A better test of the
usefulness of any implementation is its ability to explain performance out of sample.
Notice also that the vector of residuals is not necessarily orthogonal to the matrix of
benchmark returns as is the case in multivariate regression, because of the constraints

(e.g Χ ' ⋅ Ε p ≠ 0).

As

a

result,

the

alternative

definition

for

R-square,

( R 2 = ∆' p ⋅ Χ ' ⋅ Χ ⋅ ∆ p / Var ( R p )) , is in general not equivalent to the definition given in
(6) for Return-based Style Analysis.

3.

Implementing Return-based Style Analysis

To demonstrate how Return-based Style Analysis is applied in practice, we analyze a set
of open-end mutual funds returns using StyleAdvisor software of Zephyr Associates
Inc. We use twelve asset classes, each represented by a market capitalization-weighted
index of a large number of securities (see Appendix 1 for a description of the asset
classes). In addition to Bills (Cash equivalent with less than 3-months to maturity), the
model includes intermediate and long term government bonds (between 1-10 years and
over 10 respectively) and corporate bonds as 3 distinct asset classes. Longer maturities
government bonds correspond to higher risk due to variation in the shape of the yield
curve and higher expected returns. Corporate bonds returns are also affected by changes
in the market price of default risk (credit spread).
We use the Russell 3000 index as a measure of the value of all publicly traded
corporate equities in the U.S.A. The Index tracks the performance of the 3,000 largest


Registered Trademark, Zephyr Associates Inc.

12

U.S. companies and represents approximately 98% of the investable U.S. equity market.
The largest 1,000 companies in the Russell 3000 constitute the Russell 1000 index and
the remaining companies are included in the Russell 2000 index. The Frank Russell
Company also assigns all stocks in each index to growth and value sub indices based on
their relative price-to-book ratio and the Institutional Brokers Estimate System (I/B/E/S)
consensus analyst forecast for long-term earnings per share growth rate. All four indexes
are mutually exclusive and exhaustive, market cap-weighted, annually rebalanced and
include only common stocks domiciled in the United States and its territories. This
division captures the two key dimensions that previous research found to affect the
variation in equity returns: size (“small/large”) and book to market (“growth/value”).
The returns on foreign stocks are measured by MSCI Japan, MSCI EASEA and
MSCI EM Free, which represent Japan, Developed Countries excluding Japan and
Emerging Markets countries, respectively. Finally, the Lehman non-U.S. bond index is
used as a proxy for all fixed income securities outside the U.S. It is important to note that
each index represents a strategy that could be followed at low cost using index funds (or
Exchange Traded Funds for some of the equity indices).
3.1

Vanguard Windsor Fund

Figure 1.1 portrays the results of style analysis for the Vanguard Windsor mutual fund
using return data for the period January 1988 - August 2001. The fund is classified as a
large value fund by Morningstar and has $18 billion in assets under management as of
December 2001. The bar chart suggests that consistent with Morningstar classification,
the fund invests primarily in large value stocks (roughly 83% invested in the Russell
1000 value) with the rest invested in small value stocks. As indicated by the pie chart

13

(Figure 1.2) during the period investigated over 87% of the month-to-month variation in
returns on the fund could be explained by the concurrent variation in the return of this
particular mix of large and small value stocks. The pie chart also demonstrates the
additional information we get from Return-based Style analysis. Standard & Poor’s 500
stock index, a commonly used performance benchmark for large cap funds, explains only
66% of the variation in monthly returns of Vanguard Windsor Fund whereas the return on
the style benchmark asset classes explain 87%. It would be wrong to conclude that the
relative low R-Square with respect to S&P500 is due to Windsor management following
a very active strategy. Part of the low R-Square with respect to the benchmark is due to
the fact that the S&P500 may not be the best performance measure. The S&P500 had an
equal share of value and growth stocks whereas Windsor invested nearly 83% of its
assets in value stocks. A large cap value index may be a more appropriate performance
benchmark for the Windsor fund.
3.2

Growth and Income funds

The universe of domestic equity funds in the U.S. includes thousands of mutual funds.
Investors, frequently make inferences about a fund’s investment policy from its
classification by companies such as Morningstar or Lipper or simply from the fund’s
name. We now examine whether Return-based Style Analysis provides any incremental
information beyond that conveyed by the fund’s classification and investment policy as it
appears in its prospectus. Specifically, we compare the results of style analysis for a
group of funds, all with an identical name (Growth and Income Fund) offered by several
leading money management firms. The funds objective, size and fee structure are
described in Appendix 2.

14

An examination of the investment objective and strategy of each fund (based on
its prospectus) reveals little differences. Basically, all funds follow a value strategy where
they invest in stocks they deem undervalued based on fundamental research or compared
to similar companies. The funds focus on stocks of large and established companies that
are expected to pay dividends (the income component). The funds maintain a long-term
investment horizon and do not engage in market timing. An investor who considers
investing in a growth and income fund should have little reason to prefer one fund over
the other based on their declared investment policies.
The style analysis results for the group of funds using return data for the period
March 1993 through August 2001 are presented in Figure 2.1-2.2. Despite the similarities
in objectives and investment strategy they have substantial differences in their Style.
While Putnam’s style reflects over 90% exposure to large value stocks, Goldman Sachs
fund has less than half that exposure. Although the fund followed a ‘value strategy’, the
analysis reveals extensive style exposure to Large Growth (20%) and Small Value. These
findings are generally consistent with results of the Portfolio-based Style analysis for GS
Growth & Income fund reported in the previous section. The comparison reveals
however, the advantages of the technique, mainly its easy graphical representation and
quantitative nature.
The style of the Vanguard fund on the other hand, reflects an S&P500 like
composition with equal holding of large value and growth stocks. The exposures to
European and Japanese stocks might reflect the activity of American companies in these
markets, rather than a direct investment in foreign stocks. Note also the difference in the
selection component of return among the funds. The relatively low R-Square obtained

15

using style benchmarks for the Goldman Sachs fund may indicate that the fund may be
pursuing a relatively more active stock selection strategy within each style asset class.
This may also explain why the fund charges the highest front-load commission (5.50%)
and has the highest expense ratio (1.19%). Overall, the results point to substantial style
differences among funds that appear similar based on stated objectives.
3.3

Fidelity Convertible Securities Fund

Although convertibles are not represented as a distinct asset class in the model, Returnbased Style Analysis is able to capture over 86% of the monthly variation in the fund’s
returns through a combination of stocks, bonds and bills (Figure 3.1-3.2). This should not
come as a surprise however, as convertible bonds characteristics of both stocks and
bonds. These results demonstrate the versatility of return-based style. Note that the fund
holds a substantial fraction (about 12%) of its assets in foreign securities (probably
convertibles) as measured by its exposure to the MSCI indexes.
3.4

Style Analysis for multiple-manager portfolios

The effective asset mix represents the style of the investor’s overall portfolio or pension
fund overall assets. Once the style of the individual mutual funds or money mangers have
been estimated, it is quite straightforward to determine the corresponding effective asset
mix. Denote by ω j the proportion of the assets allocated to manger j. The overall
~

portfolio return ( R P ) will be:

~
RP =

∑ω
j

Substituting Equation (2) in (7) yields another linear equation:

16

j

~
Rj

(7)


~
RP ,t = ∑ ω jδ 1,t
 j



 x1,t + ∑ ω jδ 2,t

 j



 x2,t + ... ∑ ω j δ n,t

 j


 x n ,t


(8)

which can be rewritten as follows,
~
~
R p ,t = [Ψ1, p x1,t + Ψ2, p x2,t + .... + Ψn, p xn ,t ] + ζ t , p

t = 1,2,3,............T (9)

Where Ψ1, p , Ψ2, p ....Ψn, p are the pension fund or investor’s portfolio overall exposure to
each style benchmark asset class. As can be seen by comparing equation (8) and (9), each
Ψ j, p is the weighted average of the exposures of the different managers to style
benchmark asset class, j, with the relative amount of money allocated to each manager
used as the weight for that manager. The resulting effective style benchmark asset mix
will account for a large proportion of the month-to-month variation in the return of a
portfolio invested with several money managers. When the residual terms across different
managers are uncorrelated, diversification across different fund managers will
substantially reduce the variance of the aggregate non-factor component and thus
increase the portion of the variance attributable to asset allocation. Even if some of the
residuals are correlated, the use of multiple fund managers will often lead to a large
reduction in selection risk.

4.

Asset Allocation and Style Consistency over Time

It is important to remember that the style identified in each of the three examples, is in a
sense, an average of potentially changing styles over the period covered. Since a fund’s
style can change substantially over time, it is also helpful to study how the exposures to
various style benchmark asset classes evolve. For that purpose we conduct a series of

17

style analyses, using a fixed number of months for each analysis, rolling the time period
used for the analysis through time.
4.1

Vanguard Balanced Index fund

Figure 4.1 portrays the evolution of style for the Vanguard Balanced Index fund using a
60 months rolling window between October 1992 and August 2001. The point at the far
left of the diagram represents the fund style when the sixty months ending in September
1997 are analyzed. Every other point represents the results of an analysis using a different
set of sixty months. Note that each set has fifty eight months in common with its
predecessor. As its name suggests, the fund is indeed balanced, spreading its investments
among stocks, bonds and bills. As documented in Figure 4.2 style accounted for
practically all the variation in the fund’s return and remained largely constant throughout
the period analyzed.
4.2

Vanguard Windsor fund

In contrast, the style of Vanguard Windsor Fund changed several times between 1990 and
2001 (Figure 5). The fund was a “pure” value fund until August 1997, investing about
75% of its assets in large stocks and the rest in small stocks. It then eliminated
completely its exposure to small value stocks (Russell 2000 value) and replaced it with
mostly small growth stocks and emerging markets stock4. About a year later, another
style change occurred which lasted through the rest of the time period covered. The fund
began investing again in small value stocks but still kept an exposure to small growth
stocks (roughly 7%). The fund also developed a substantial exposure to emerging
markets through holding stocks of companies from these countries (10% on average).

18

The ability of Return-based Style Analysis to capture changes in investment style
over different time horizons is one of its key advantages. While Portfolio-based Style
Analysis description of a fund style is accurate for a point in time, Return based Style
Analysis describes an average style over a time period (much like a balance sheet and an
earning report) and can account for changes in style. An investor who owned shares in
the fund anytime after August 1998 and thought, based on Morningstar classification that
he was betting solely on a value strategy in the U.S., would in fact have also been
exposed to risks and rewards associated with investing in small growth stocks and
Emerging Markets to some extent.

5.

Performance Evaluation

While a passive fund manager provides investors with an investment style, an active
manager provides both style and selection. This suggests that the performance benchmark
should consist of a portfolio of asset classes that gives the desired exposure to benchmark
style asset classes. Superior performance relative to the performance benchmark which
provides a static mix of the style benchmark asset classes would justify the higher fees
usually paid to “active” as opposed to “passive” managers.
We follow this approach and focus on the fund’s selection return, defined as the
difference between the fund’s return and that of a passive mix with the same style. The
assumption we make is that the active manager declares the fund style at the beginning of
each period and is engaged only in picking undervalued securities within each style
benchmark asset class – and that the style benchmark is a more appropriate benchmark

4

Based on Morningstar records, there was no management change in that year.

19

for measuring performance than the commonly used S&P500 index5. Note that this
differs from the use of the ε~t, p ’s values obtained as by products of a style analysis,
because the ε~t, p ’s were constructed in-sample.
To illustrate this approach for the Vanguard Windsor Fund we employ the following
steps for each month t:
1. The fund’s style is estimated, using returns from month t - 36 through t - 1. The
length of the estimation period while somewhat arbitrary, tries to balance between
two opposing issues. A longer estimation period reduces “noise” and provides a more
accurate description of the fund’s style exposure. For active managers who
dynamically rotate among several asset classes in addition to providing stock picking
abilities however, a longer estimation period will not produce accurate estimates. A
shorter estimation period will be able to better track such managers.
2. The return on the resulting style (i.e. using the coefficients estimated in step 1) is
calculated for month t.
3. The difference between the actual return in month t and that of the style benchmark
determined in the previous steps is computed. This difference is defined as the fund’s
selection return for t.
Figure 6 shows the cumulative excess returns from Jan 1988 through August 2001 for
Vanguard Windsor. In such a graph, increases result from positive selection returns and
decreases from negative ones. On average, the fund outperformed its style benchmarks by
0.027% per month, with a standard deviation of 1.69% per month. The t-statistics

5

This approach would not be valid when the portfolio manager is a market or sector or style timer.

20

associated with the mean difference is however small in absolute value suggesting that
the average difference was not statistically significantly different from zero.
Figure 7 demonstrates the advantages of using style analysis to analyze the
performance the way we have done. It compares the return on Vanguard Windsor with
the S&P500 stock index. The fund’s performance so measured was almost three times as
good as that shown previously: the cumulative difference was 9.75% and the average
difference was 7.6 basis points per month. However, such a comparison includes results
attributable to both style and selection. During the period in question the fund’s style
outperformed that of the S&P500. Indeed, this accounts for approximately two-thirds of
the fund’s superior performance. An investor choosing to invest in the fund could have
known that its style favored value and small stocks. The choice to expose some of the
portfolio to these assets classes is the investor’s. Results (good or bad) associated with
the choice of a style should be attributed to taking style bets.

6.

Common pitfalls in interpreting Style Analysis results

The popularity of Return-based Style Analysis lies in the ease with which it can be
applied. The ability to correctly interpret the results however depends on the selection of
appropriate style benchmark asset classes to use, which raises several questions. What
types of style benchmarks and how many style benchmarks should one include in the
model? Which index should be chosen to represent a style asset class when there are
several indexes available? Is the set of benchmarks appropriate for one fund necessarily
appropriate for another?

21

In general, it is desirable that the asset classes used in the model include as many
securities as possible, and are mutually exclusive such that no security is included in
more than one asset class. Benchmarks that are not mutually exclusive might cause the
factor weightings to oscillate between the correlated asset classes. A similar problem
arises, if the set of benchmarks is incomplete (i.e. not exhaustive) or inadequate. The
optimization algorithm will have trouble pinning down a benchmark that consistently
explains the fund’s behavior from period to period and, and the regression is likely to
flip-flop between those that temporarily provide a best fit (a fact, which will likely be
reflected in a low R2 as well). Finally, asset class returns should either have low
correlation with one another or, in cases where correlation is high, different standard
deviations.
The number of asset classes used in the model, represents a tradeoff. Using a
larger number of distinct asset classes or a finer partition of the investment universe
facing the portfolio manager will provide more information and better tracking of the
portfolio performance. An example of that is the division of the Russell 2000 index to
growth and value sub indices, or the use of several regional indexes instead of the MSCI
EM (Latin America, Asia, Africa and the Middle East). However, it is necessary to
consider not only the ability of a model to explain a given set of data but also its
parsimony. The use of a larger number of benchmarks has the potential of introducing
more “noise” into the analysis. This problem is especially acute, since we have no easily
available statistical procedure for assessing the significance of the exposure coefficients6.
In addition, the higher the number of benchmarks used, the longer the estimation period

6 The conventional assumptions regarding the distributional properties of the benchmark coefficients are
not valid in the presence of inequality constraints as in (3).

22

required. Other things equal (e.g. R-Squared values), the fewer the asset classes, the
higher likelihood that the model will capture continuing fundamental relationship with
predictive content.
6.1

Model misspecification – an example for sector funds

Table 3 highlights the potential for misinterpretation of style analysis results when the
benchmarks used are inadequate. The column entitled “basic model”, presents the result
of style analysis performed on Putnam Utilities Growth and Income during January 1992
through August 2001. As demonstrated previously, in the case of Fidelity Convertible
Securities fund, the technique tracks how a portfolio returns co-vary with other assets
classes rather than its composition. Although utility funds hold common stocks, Putnam
Utility returns behave more like a passive portfolio invested in both stocks and bonds.
That is, utility revenues are “sticky” because of the regulatory process, causing shares of
such companies to have features that are both stock-like and bond-like. Note that Putnam
Utilities Growth and Income has large exposure to Large Value Stocks. It is not that the
fund invests in such stocks – it is just that this asset class reflects the return characteristics
of the fund’s investment in utilities during this period. Utility funds typically concentrate
their holdings in one industry and as a result style accounts for an unusually small
fraction (about 60%) of the monthly variation in returns. The low R2 is not a result of a
highly “active management” strategy, but merely a manifestation of inadequate
benchmarks7.
It is clear from this example that when style analysis is applied for sector oriented
funds (such as healthcare, precious metals, energy, technology, etc.), the set of

23

benchmarks should include sector or industry indexes. For example, in the case of a REIT
(Real Estate Investments Trust) asset classes related to real estate such as mortgages and
housing indexes will be used.
The column entitled “Extended Model“ reports the analysis result for Putnam
Utilities when the basic 12 asset classes model is extended by adding three sector
indexes: Utilities, Communication and Energy, constructed by Dow Jones. The addition
of the Energy and Communications indexes reflects the focus of utility companies in
these industries and can potentially capture some of the variation in the fund’s return.
Contrasting the analysis results with and without the inclusion of sector indexes is
striking. The Selection component of returns decreases from roughly 33% to about 7%,
confirming our prior assertion that the fund does not employ a highly active management
strategy. As expected the fund invests primarily in utility stocks. The loading on Energy
and Communication indexes reflects the common component in returns of utility
companies stocks’ that operate in these industries (such as Gas, Electricity and Phone
companies), as well as actual holdings of energy and communication firms stocks. Note
the exposure to Bills, which probably results from the actual cash holdings the fund,
maintains to meet liquidity needs.
We revisit the issue of model misspecification and inadequate benchmarks in the
next section, when we demonstrate how Style Analysis can be used to analyze the
performance of hedge funds by suitable choice of style index benchmark asset classes.
6.2

7

Interpreting R-Squared – “Active” management or inadequate benchmarks?

The result is not unique for Putnam utility fund. Sharp (1992) reports a similar average value of R2 for a
sample of utility funds.

24

Although some see a low value of R2, solely as an indicator of “active” management, a
higher R2 also implies that the technique is better, and often more consistently, able to
explain the long-term return behavior of the fund. As the last example demonstrates,
Style Analysis using an inadequate set of benchmarks results in a low R-Squared.
Drawing inferences on a fund solely from the overall power of the technique to
explain the monthly variation in returns (e.g. R2), is improper and should be done in
tandem with an analysis of style changes through time (e.g. a rolling window
methodology) and cost structure. A relatively unstable style graph could indicate
inadequate benchmarks or market timing/sector rotation. In the latter case, the fund
manager may be switching in and out of asset classes or sectors, with the result that the
customized benchmark that best explains the fund’s return changes from time to time.
Typically a high fund turnover ratio will accompany market timing.

If the

turnover on the fund is low, it could be that the types of securities held by the fund are
changing and causing a constant shift in style. Funds with high concentrations in
individual securities are candidates for this type of activity. The Windsor Fund, for
example, has an unstable style graph, but a turnover that rarely exceeds 35% annually.
Based on the 3rd quarter report of 2001, the fund top 5 holdings comprise 20% of total
assets and the top 10 holdings comprise over 30% of total assets. Clearly, this fund will
be highly sensitive to how quickly its top holdings go in and out of favor, how much they
behave like value or growth stocks, etc.
It is also important to examine the fund’s cost structure. Funds with active
management differ from passive funds in their cost structure. Active funds have higher

25

expense ratios to compensate for the excess trading costs and typically also charge a
buying or selling fee known as a load (either a front-load or a back-load).

7.

Style analysis and Hedge Funds

The success of Sharpe's (1992) approach is due to the fact that most mutual fund
managers are typically constrained to buying and holding assets in a well defined number
of asset classes and are frequently limited to little or no leverage. Their mandates are to
meet or exceed the returns on a given mix of asset classes. Thus, these mangers are called
relative return managers since they look to beat a specific benchmark. They tend to
generate returns, which are highly correlated with the returns on standard asset classes.
Stylistic differences among these managers are primarily due to the different securities in
their portfolios.
Return-based style analysis is particularly helpful in characterizing the risk in the
strategies employed by Hedge Funds and Commodity Trading Advisors (CTA) that
employ dynamic trading strategies when suitable style benchmark asset classes are used8.
Standard style benchmarks however will not work with hedge funds and CTAs that have
mandates to make an absolute return target, regardless of the market environment and are
given the flexibility to choose among many asset classes and to employ dynamic trading

8

A commodity trading advisor (CTA) is an individual or trading organization, registered with the
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC) through membership in the National Futures
Association, granted the authority to make trading decisions on behalf of a customer in futures, options,
and securities accounts established exclusively for the customer. Until the 1980's, CTAs were limited as
to what they could trade (commodities, commodity futures, and futures options). The globalization of
markets and reduction in regulatory constraints over the past years have given CTAs the ability to trade
an increasing number of instruments, such as global interest rate, currencies and physical commodity
markets. As a result, while historically CTAs have been viewed separate from hedge fund managers, over
the past ten years the difference between the two diminished as CTAs have established private investment
partnerships with broad mandates in almost any financial market.

26

strategies that frequently involve short sales and substantial leverage9. While dynamic
trading strategies that have been discussed in the literature focused primarily on mutual
funds, the range of trading strategies employed by hedge funds are far more complex10.
The literature on market timing for example, has focused on the ability of mutual funds
managers to time the market on the long side (Merton 1981 and Dybvig and Ross 1985).
In contrast, hedge fund managers can make money on the short side as well. In addition,
hedge funds positions can involve time horizons much shorter than a month (and
sometime just several days). Furthermore, hedge fund managers can use derivatives and
complex options. As result, these alternative managers generate returns that have low
correlation with the returns of standard asset classes. Because of the dynamic strategies
followed by hedge funds the number of asset class needed to proxy hedge funds styles
becomes very large, even though they trade the same asset classes as mutual funds (see
Fung and Hsieh 1997 and Laing 2000 for an excellent discussion of related issues).
7.1

Applying Return-Based Style Analysis to Hedge Funds

Hedge funds’ strategies are typically classified as Directional or Non-directional.
Directional strategies hope to benefit from broad market movements, while NonDirectional strategies have low correlation with any specific index by being “market
neutral”. These strategies aim to exploit short term pricing discrepancies and market
inefficiencies between related securities while keeping market exposure to minimum.
Some popular directional strategies include: Emerging Markets, Equity Non-Hedge and
Short Selling. Non-Directional strategies include: Event Driven, Relative Value Arbitrage
9 Hedge fund managers derive a substantial part of their compensation from incentive fees, which are paid
only when these managers make a positive return. A "high-watermark" feature in their incentive contracts
require them to make up all previous losses before an incentive is paid.

27

and Equity Hedge11. We use net of fees return data on two directional funds (Emerging
Market fund and a Managed Futures advisor) and two non-directional funds (Market
Neutral) to demonstrate the difficulties of analyzing the return pattern of alternative
managers (Appendix 3 contains a more detailed description of the funds).
Table 4 (The columns entitled “basic model”) and Figure 8.1 present the Style
Analysis for the four hedge funds when no leverage or short sales constraints are
imposed12. The results when compared to the mutual fund examples in the previous
sections are striking. The ability to track the market neutral funds is extremely low (as
measured by the R-Squared)13. The analysis was more successful in the case of
directional funds, although it still captured at most only 57% of the monthly variation in
returns of the Axiom fund. Not surprisingly, with the debt crisis in Russia and South
America during the time period analyzed, this fund was shorting emerging markets bonds
and investing in U.S. Corporate bonds and emerging markets equities. The magnitudes of
some of the coefficients imply extreme levels of leverage and shorting activity. In
particular notice that there is no significant exposure to any component of the Russell
3000 Index. This finding probably reflects the nature of the dynamic trading strategies
employed by the funds rather than actual holdings.
To illustrate this point, consider a manager involved in index arbitrage on the
S&P 500 by trading futures contracts and cash (e.g. individual stocks comprising the
index). Without leverage, a fully invested position of being consistently long 1 futures
contract (i.e. buy-and-hold) will result in the style analysis showing a coefficient of 1 on
10

For an excellent review on the organization, compensation and trading strategies of hedge funds see:
Fung, W., and D. Hsieh, 1999, “A Primer on Hedge Funds,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 6, 309-331.
11
For a more detailed description of the various strategies employed by hedge funds see the Hedge Fund
Research Company website www.hfr.com

28

the S&P 500 index. If the manager leverages up to 3 futures contract, the coefficient will
be 3. If the manger is short 1 futures contract, the coefficient will be -1. When the
alternates between long and short positions each month however, the regression
coefficient will be close to 0. Although in all examples, the manger invests in the US
stock market, the returns are very different depending on the trading strategy. In the first
two cases, the returns are positively correlated with US stocks. In the third case, the
returns are negatively correlated with US stocks. And in the fourth case, the returns are
uncorrelated with US stocks.
7.2

Evaluating Hedge fund performance using Hedge Fund indexes

Another approach for evaluating the performance of hedge funds often used by
practitioners is peer-comparison. To help investors understand hedge funds, consultants
and database vendors group hedge funds into “categories” of funds based on the
managers' self-disclosed strategies and location. The objective of the peer-group
approach is to capture the performance characteristics of funds operating “similar”
strategies.
To demonstrate this approach, the performance of each fund is regressed against
an index that is composed of hedge funds with similar investment strategy. The returns
of Hillsdale and Nippon funds are compared to a Market Neutral Hedge Fund index while
we use Emerging Market and Managed Futures indexes as benchmarks for Axiom Fund
and John W. Henry & Company CTA respectively. Out of the many companies that offer
hedge fund indexes, we use those constructed by the Hedge Fund Research company

12

The sum of the coefficients is still constrained to one.

29

(HFR), CSFB/Tremont and MAR Futures (for a description of the indexes see appendix
4).
The peer-evaluation results are presented in Panel A, of Table 5. The Market
Neutral funds exhibit extremely low correlation with the index benchmarks and in three
out of six cases, the coefficients are not even significant. Although, for the two other
funds (Emerging market and Trend Following CTA), the benchmarks are highly
significant, they still capture only about 60%-70% of the variation in returns. Notice also
the large differences in explanatory power among the various indexes for the same fund.
As Table 5 demonstrates, while peer evaluation can be useful as a first step to
understanding the multitude of hedge fund styles, in the absence of a well formulated
model of hedge-fund styles, the allocation of funds to “peer” (or style) groups is largely
judgmental and can be, at times, ad hoc. Database vendors’ interpretations of what fund
managers say they do may not correspond to what managers actually do. There is a need
to verify that similar sounding strategies do indeed deliver similar performance
characteristics.
Another problem with peer evaluation is that over time, there has been an
increasing tendency for hedge-fund mangers to employ multiple strategies. The need for
a more stable stream of returns over different market cycles has attracted hedge-fund
managers to adopt a multi-strategies approach. Homogeneous peer-groups are easier to
verify if the number of strategies involved in the group is small. When different funds
employ different combinations of strategies dynamically over time, using an aggregation
measure of “peers” to closely capture the essence of both the strategies employed and the

30

dynamical allocation of capital to these strategies over time becomes an extremely
difficult task.
Panel B of Table 5, repeats the peer evaluation. Instead of using only one index
for each index, we use five different benchmarks. The Event Driven and Fixed Income
indexes are included to better capture the range of trading possibilities facing the four
hedge funds. The fact that indexes, which represent different trading strategies than the
primary investment strategy of each fund, have significant coefficients confirms that
hedge funds employ multiple trading strategies. For example, the table reveals that the
Axiom fund returns also covary with the CSFB/Tremont Event Driven index returns and
the improvement in R2 is substantial (from 55% to 68%).
7.3

Option-like features in hedge funds returns

As the last section demonstrated, performing peer evaluation using an index of hedge
funds with the same investment strategy does not provide satisfactory results.
Furthermore, in some cases (such as for the market neutral hedge funds), Style Analysis
using standard asset classes has more explanatory power than any single hedge fund
index.
Fung and Hsieh (1998) extended the traditional style analysis to incorporate
dynamic trading strategies by defining “style” as the common factor in the highly
correlated returns of a group of mangers. They argued that the concept of "style" should
be thought of in two dimensions: namely location choice and trading strategy. Location
choice refers to the asset classes, i.e., the x's in equation (2), used by the managers to
generate returns. Trading strategy refers to the direction (long/short) and leverage (i.e.,
the δ’s in equation 2), applied to the assets to generate returns. The actual returns are,

31

therefore, the products of location choice and trading strategy (recall the example about
the manger involved in index arbitrage on the S&P500). They applied principal
components and factor analysis on hedge fund returns to extract style factors. By
extracting these common factors, they obtain the most popular investment styles.
However, the results are difficult to interpret and similar to peer evaluation, do not shed
light on how exactly hedge funds operate.
Simply improving the Style Analysis explanatory power by incorporating a larger
number of asset classes, or shorter time periods to account for the changes in trading
strategies faces another problem. Glosten and Jagannathan (1994) argued that the returns
of portfolios managed using active strategies – as is the case with hedge funds -- would
exhibit option like features. Recently Fung and Hsieh (2001), and Mitchell and Pulvino
(2001) have empirically demonstrated that returns generated by hedge fund strategies
exhibit significant non-linear option like patterns. The non-linear return pattern results
from the use of derivatives -- either explicitly or implicitly through the use of dynamic
trading -- which amounts to the investor having written a call option.
When manager’s returns relate to the benchmark in a non-linear manner, linear
regression models such as style analysis can lead to incorrect inference. Jagannathan and
Korajczyk (1986) and Grinblatt and Titman (1989) showed that if investors were to
evaluate the performance of a manager by measures like Jensen’s alpha or TreynorBlack’s appraisal ratio, then a manager selling call options on a standard benchmark will
appear to be a falsely classified as a superior performer. Merton (1981) and Dybvig and
Ross (1985) noted that portfolios managed with superior information would typically
result returns that exhibit option-like features even when the managers do not explicitly

32

trade in options. Glosten and Jagannathan (1994) suggested augmenting the return on
style benchmark indices with returns on selected options on the style benchmark indices
in order to capture the investment style of portfolio managers who employ dynamic
trading strategies. Agarwal and Naik (2001) show how the systematic risk of hedge funds
can be expressed through a combination of naïve option-based strategies on the S&P 500
Index and standard asset classes like equities and bonds. Agarwal and Naik find that the
inclusion of options trading strategies increased the explanatory power of the regression
dramatically and accounted for the non-linear component of returns.
The options strategy used by Agarwal and Naik involves trading once-a-month in
short-maturity highly liquid European put and call options on the S&P 500 index. On the
first trading day in every month, an at-the-money call or option on the S&P 500 with one
month to maturity is purchased. On the first trading day of the following month, the
option is sold and another at-the-money call or put option on the S&P 500 index that
expires a month later is bought. This trading pattern is repeated every month. The returns
from this trading strategy are calculated for two options: an at-the-money and out-of-themoney options14. The at-the-money call (put) option on the S&P500 index are denoted as
Cat (Pat) and out-of-the-money call (put) option as Cout (Pout).
We repeat the style analysis for the four hedge fund including the options strategy
(Table 4 the columns entitled ‘Basic model + Options Strategy’ and Figure 8.2). The
explanatory power of the model increases substantially especially for the directional
funds. We also hold a “horse race” contest between the hedge fund indexes and the Style
Analysis benchmarks to see which has more explanatory power. Since the total number

33

of variables or factors is above 20 and some of them are highly correlated we use
stepwise regression to identify the most important factors for each fund. Stepwise
regression involves adding and/or deleting variables sequentially depending on the F
value. We specify a 10% significance level for including an additional variable in the
stepwise regression procedure. The advantage of this approach in our setting lies in its
parsimonious selection of factors and its ability to solve the multicolinearity problem that
arises from the hedge fund indexes being partially correlated with the asset classes15.
The stepwise estimation is presented in Table 6. As before the regressions
demonstrate a higher ability to track the variation in returns of directional funds relative
to non-directional funds. The R2 for the Emerging market and CTA funds range between
70%-80%, a somewhat higher figure than the style analysis. The analysis also reveals that
options are used in different ways by the funds. Market neutral funds for example use
them to hedge, selling call (put) options if they positive (negative) exposure to the
market. The trend following fund returns are similar to being long in an out of the money
put and call options. To summarize, we believe that by including new style benchmark
asset classes such as options and benchmark portfolios that use pre-specified dynamic
trading strategies, Return-based Style Analysis can be extended to analyze the style of
hedge fund managers as well.

14

From the different strike price contracts available, Agarwal and Naik select the option where the strike
price is closest to the current index value and define this to be at-the-money option. For calls (puts), they
select the option with next higher (lower) strike price to be the out-of-the-money option.
15
For more information of stepwise regressions see:
Draper, N. and H. Smith., 1998, Applied Regression Analysis. 3rd ed. NewYork: John Wiley and Sons.
Hocking R. R. 1976. The analysis and selection of variables in linear regression. Biometrics 32:1-50.

34

8.

Summary

Style Analysis can help investors make order out of the chaos that often surrounds the
investment process. Both Portfolio-based and Return-based Style Analysis enable
investors to keep their actual asset allocation consistent with their investment goals and
evaluate the performance of fund managers against a proper benchmark.
Return-based analysis is easy to implement and interpret. Portfolio-based analysis
provides a more in-depth analysis but is more data intensive, and requires knowledge of
portfolio holdings (which may not be readily available). Both methods can be used in
tandem to enhance the asset allocation process. Return-based analysis is often a precursor
to the more detailed analysis associated with Portfolio-based analysis. That is, Returnbased analysis is employed to define a particular universe of funds that appear to exhibit
the same style. Subsequently, Portfolio-based analysis can help one understand the exact
strategies and exposures that distinguish each of those funds.
Although return-based analysis is an effective tool for analyzing the sources of a
portfolio's performance, as we illustrated using several examples, there are limitations.
The technique relies crucially on the correct specification of the style benchmark asset
classes. Inappropriate or inadequate choice of style benchmarks may lead to wrong
inferences about performance and the level of “active” management. In addition, since
the data used are historical returns, it is difficult to draw any conclusions about the future
risk/return profile of the manager. The method also tends to detect style changes slowly
and at times may leave some style changes completely undetected. It may occasionally
indicate style changes that never occurred, often due to how the style indices are
correlated with each other. In short, correlation anomalies may occur, resulting in false

35

signals. We also show how Return-based Style Analysis can be modified to analyze the
style of hedge fund managers and alternative investment managers who use dynamic
trading strategies and derivative instruments. For analyzing the style of such managers
Portfolio-based style analysis may be difficult to apply for the simple reason that hedge
fund managers are typically reluctant to disclose their portfolio holdings.

Another

difficulty arises from the fact that portfolio holdings may change rather very frequently.

36

References
Agarwal, Vikas, and Narayan Naik, 2001, "Characterizing Systematic Risk of Hedge
Funds with Buy-and-Hold and Option-Based Strategies," Working Paper, London
Business School.
Dybvig, H., and S. Ross, 1985, “Differential Information and Performance Measurement
using a Security Market Line,” Journal of Finance, 40 (2), 383-399.
Fung, William, and David A. Hsieh. 1997. "Empirical Characterizations of Dynamic
Trading Strategies: the Case of Hedge Funds," Review of Financial Studies, 10, 275-302.
--------------- 1998, "Performance Attribution and Style Analysis: From Mutual Funds to
Hedge Funds," Duke University working paper.
--------------- 1999, “A Primer on Hedge Funds,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 6, 309331.
--------------- 2001, “The Risks in Hedge Fund Strategies: Theory and Evidence From
Trend Followers,” Review of Financial Studies, 14, 313-341.
Glosten, Lawrence and Ravi Jagannathan, 1994, “A Contingent Claim Approach to
Performance Evaluation,” Journal of Empirical Finance, 1, 133-160.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman. 1989. "Mutual Fund Performance: An Analysis of
Quarterly Portfolio Holdings." Journal of Business, 62, 393-416.
Jagannathan, Ravi, and Robert A. Korajczyk. 1986. "Assessing the Market Timing
Performance of Managed Portfolios." Journal of Business, 59, 217-236.
Jennifer, L. Koski and Jeffrey Pontiff, 1999, “How Are Derivatives Used? Evidence
from the Mutual Fund Industry,” Journal of Finance 54, 791-816.
Liang, Bing, 2000, “Hedge Funds: The Living and the Dead,” Journal of Financial and
Quantitative Analysis, 35, 309-336.
Merton , R.C., 1981, “On Market Timing and Investment Performance I: An Equilibrium
Theory of Values for Markets Forecasts,” Journal of Business, 54 (3), 363-406.
Mitchell, Mark, and Todd Pulvino, 2001, “Characteristics of Risk in Risk Arbitrage,”
Journal of Finance.
Sharpe, William, 1992, “Asset Allocation: Management Style and Performance
Measurement,” Journal of Portfolio Management, 18, 7-19.
------------------- 1988, “Determining a Fund’s effective asset mix.” Investment
Management Review, pp. 59-69.

37

APPENDIX 1 – Asset classes in Return-based Style Analysis
Description16

Asset Class

Index

Bills

Salomon Brothers’
Treasury Bill index

90-day

Cash equivalence with less than 3-months to
maturity

Government
Bonds

Salomon Brothers’ Treasury
Indexes

Intermediate Government bonds have maturity
between 1 and 10 years. Long Term Bonds have
maturity over 10 years.

Corporate Bonds

Salomon Corporate composite
Index

Corporate bonds with ratings of at least BB

U.S. Equity

Russell 3000 style sub-indexes

Developed
countries

MSCI EASEA

Japan

MSCI Japan

Emerging Markets

MSCI EM Free

Non-U.S. Bonds

Lehman Global
U.S. Bond Index

16

The Russell 3000 Index measures the performance of
the largest 3,000 companies domiciled (incorporated)
in the United States based on total market
capitalization. The index represents approximately
98% of the investable U.S. equity market. The
Russell 1000 Index measures the performance of the
1,000 largest companies in the Russell 3000 and
represents approximately 92% of its total market
capitalization. The next 2,000 stocks constitute the
Russell 2000 Index. The two indexes are
reconstituted annually to reflect changes in the
marketplace. The returns of their constituents are
market cap-weighted and include dividends. Stocks
in each base index (the Russell 1000 and Russell
2000), are ranked by their price-to-book ratio (PBR)
and their I/B/E/S forecast long-term growth mean
(IBESLT).
Composite country index of all Developed countries
except the U.S. The securities in each country are
organized by industry group, and stocks are selected,
targeting 60% coverage of market capitalization.
Selection criteria include: size, long- and short-term
volume, cross-ownership and float.
The index covers 27 emerging market country
indices. Designation as an emerging market is
determined by a number of factors such as GDP per
capita, local government regulations, perceived
investment risk; foreign ownership limits and capital
controls. The index reflects only investable
opportunities for global investors by taking into
account local market restrictions on share ownership
by foreigners.

Excluding

Bonds outside the U.S. and Canada.

For more details on the methodology and composition of the indexes see the Russell Company and MSCI
Web sites: www.russell.com, www.msci.com.

38

APPENDIX 2 - Growth and Income Funds Objective and Investment Strategy
(Based on funds’ prospectuses as of December 2001)
Goldman Sachs Growth & Income

Objective: This Fund seeks long-term growth of capital and growth of income through
investments in equity securities of well-established companies that are considered to have
favorable prospects for capital appreciation and/or dividend-paying ability.
Primary Investment Strategies: Based on a research-intensive approach, the fund employs
a value investing strategy that emphasizes stocks they believe to be inexpensive relative
to the fund’s estimate of their actual worth. The fund maintains a long-term investment
horizon with low turnover.
Size: $335 millions

Front Load: 5.50%

Expense Ratio: 1.19%

Putnam Fund for Growth & Income

Objective: The fund seeks to provide capital growth and current income by investing
primarily in common stocks that offer the potential for capital growth while also
providing current income.
Primary Investment Strategies: The fund invests mainly in common stocks of U.S.
companies, with a focus on value stocks that offer the potential for capital growth, current
income, or both. Value stocks are those that we believe are currently undervalued by the
market. We look for companies undergoing positive change. If we are correct and other
investors recognize the value of the company, the price of the stock may rise. We invest
mainly in large companies.
Size: $18.6 billions

Front Load: 5.75%

Expense Ratio: 0.81%

Vanguard Growth & Income

Objective: The Fund seeks to provide a total return (capital appreciation plus dividend
income) greater than the return of the Standard & Poor’s 500 Index.
Primary Investment Strategies: To achieve its objective, the Fund’s adviser uses
computer models to select a broadly diversified group of stocks that, as a whole, have
investment characteristics similar to those of the S&P 500 Index, but are expected to
provide a higher total return than that of the Index. At least 65% (and typically more than
90%) of the Fund’s assets will be invested in stocks that are included in the Index. Most
of the stocks held by the Fund provide dividend income as well as the potential for capital
appreciation.
Size: $6.6 billions

Front Load: 0

Expense Ratio: 0.38%

39

Alliance Capital Growth & Income

Objective: The Fund seeks to provide Income and Capital appreciation.
Primary Investment Strategies: The fund primarily invests in dividend-paying common
stocks of good quality. It may also invest in fixed-income and convertible securities. The
fund tries to maintain a defensive dividend yield and price-to-earnings ratio, a fully
invested posture, and a high degree of sector and industry diversification. The fund
invests in quality companies that trade at undeserved discounts to their peers. The fund
does not make sector or market timing bets, but instead emphasize intensive, bottom-up
research and careful stock selection.
Size: $3.2 billions

Front Load: 4.25%

Expense Ratio: 0.91%

40

APPENDIX 3 - Hedge Funds Description
Hillsdale U.S. Market Neutral Fund (http://www.hillsdaleinv.com)
The US Market Neutral Equity Fund is beta, style and industry neutral. It invests in up to
150 companies and may use leverage up to 1 times equity. The investment objective of
the strategy is to provide a consistent 10-15 percent annualized return with volatility less
than or equal to bonds and 0% correlation with major US equity indices. The portfolio is
constructed by taking long and short positions in common share of U.S. corporations
primarily with a market capitalization in excess of one billion dollars.
Hillsdale Investment Management Inc. also manages the US Aggressive Hedged Equity
Fund and two additional funds with similar strategies that focus on the Canadian market.
The investment strategies are based on a proprietary investment platform that uses a
dynamic, fundamental based, multi-factor approach to stock selection and portfolio
construction. The firm, founded in 1996, is majority owned by its employees and is
registered with the Ontario Securities Commission as an Investment Counsel, Portfolio
Manager and a Limited Market Dealer.

Nippon Fund (http://www.aventineinvestments.com)
The Nippon Performance Fund is a market neutral hedge fund designed to deliver
consistent and positive returns with a low level of risk and virtually no correlation to the
Nikkei 225, or any global equity or bond market. The Fund capitalizes on the
undervaluations in Japanese convertible bonds and equity warrants by employing a
convertible arbitrage strategy to extract these undervaluations. These undervaluations
allow the Fund to deliver a superior rate of return with a low level of volatility while
removing the unwanted and unnecessary risks associated with Japanese securities. The
Fund's long positions include convertible bonds and warrants, which are hedged by
selling short the underlying stocks to remove the equity risk, and interest rate futures to
remove interest rate risk. The Fund is denominated in U.S dollars, and utilizes currency
futures, forwards, options and swaps to remove any currency risk.

Axiom Fund (http://www.axiom-invest.com)
Axiom Balanced Growth Fund invests primarily in listed shares of companies deriving a
significant portion of their revenues from emerging markets (including those in Southeast
Asia), but will also invest in fixed income obligations (such as US dollar Brady-type
bonds) of issuers in emerging markets (including those outside Southeast Asia). A wide
range of hedging techniques and instruments will, however, be employed where
considered appropriate with a view to minimizing the level of volatility, which is
normally associated with Emerging Market funds. The fund was launched on April 15th
1996.

41

John W. Henry & Company - Financial and Metals Portfolio (http://www.jwh.com)
John W. Henry & Company Inc. (JWH) is an alternative asset manger and one of the
largest managed futures advisor in the world. The Financial and Metals Portfolio is
JWH's second longest running program. The program seeks to identify and capitalize on
intermediate-term price movements in four worldwide market sectors: currencies, interest
rates, metals, and non-US stock indices. The program seeks to detect repetitive price
behavior in these sectors using computer systems and capitalize on them.

42

APPENDIX 4 - Hedge Funds Indexes

Hedge Fund Research (www.hfr.com) provides 29 equally weighted style categories
and a composite index. Funds of funds are not included in the composite index. The
indexes are based on 1,100 funds drawn from a database of 1,700 funds. Funds in the
database represent $260 billion in assets. The index was launched in 1994 with data back
to 1990. Funds are assigned to categories based on the descriptions in the offering
memorandums. Survivorship bias is minimized by incorporating funds that have ceased
to exist.

Credit Suisse First Boston/Tremont (www.hedgeindex.com) covers nine strategies and
is based on 340 funds, representing $100 billion in invested capital, selected from a
database of 2,600 funds. It is the only asset (capitalization) weighted hedge funds index.
The CSFB/Tremont Index discloses its construction methods and identifies all the funds
within it. CSFB/Tremont accepts only funds (not separate accounts) with a minimum of
$10 million under management and an audited financial statement. If a fund liquidates, its
performance remains in the Index for the period during which the fund was active in
order to minimize survivorship bias. The index was launched in 1999, with data going
back to 1994. It incorporates the TASS+ database.

MAR Futures (www.marhedge.com) reports especially on the performance of Managed
Futures strategies in each of 15 categories, 10 of which are combined into four submedians. The variety of Zurich (formerly MAR) index databases contains 1,300 funds.
Managers usually select their own categories. The firm’s website identifies the number of
funds and assets in each category. MAR, the former publisher of the index, sold its
database business to Zurich Financial Services in spring 2001.

43

TABLE 1
An example of Portfolio Based analysis for a Global Manager
January 2001 through December 2001
Manager
holdings

Benchmark
composition

Difference
in weights Return

Total
effect

Japan

65%

40%

25%

8%

2.0%

Europe and U.S.

20%

30%

-10%

5.5%

-0.55%

Emerging Markets

15%

30%

-15%

3%

-0.3%

Overall

100%

100%

-

-

1.15%

Total difference in returns

1.65%

Attributed to country weighting

1.15%

Return due to Selection

0.50%

TABLE 2
Portfolio Based analysis for Goldman Sachs Growth & Income Fund
Based on Morningstar data as of 01/31/2002

Panel A: Equity Characteristics

Growth and

S&P500

Income fund
Number of Stocks
Median Market Cap
Price/Earnings Ratio
Price/Book Ratio
Price/cash flow
Earnings Growth Rate
Bond holding
Foreign Holdings
Turnover Rate (Fiscal Year)
Cash Investments

95
$27.84B
25.1x
4.2x
13.2x
16.2%
0%
4.93%
40.0%
0.1%

44

500
$58.0B
30.3x
3.7x
18.85x
14.2%
---------

Panel B: Portfolio stock composition

1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25

Name of Holding

Sector

P/E

ExxonMobil
Citigroup
ChevronTexaco
Bank of America
ConAgra
Merck
Philip Morris
Freddie Mac
Heinz HJ
XL Cap Cl A
Kimberly-Clark
US Bancorp
SBC Comms
PPL
KeyCorp
Alliance Cap Mgmt Hldg
Wells Fargo
Anheuser-Busch
Energy East
PNC Finl Svcs Grp
Keyspan
Aon
Deere
Motorola
Intl Paper

Energy
Financial
Energy
Financial
Staples
Health
Staples
Financial
Staples
Financial
Industrial
Financial
Services
Utility
Financial
Financial
Financial
Staples
Utility
Financial
Energy
Financial
Industrial
Technology
Industrial

17.64
16.00
26.54
12.36
18.71
19.51
13.43
11.18
28.99
23.48
20.38
22.24
17.39
26.66
78.00
20.57
23.32
25.53
11.98
29.22
20.16
45.35
-------

YTD
% Net
Return % Assets
-0.19
3.35
-13.50
3.32
-8.00
2.87
-2.81
2.70
-0.66
2.46
4.18
2.43
13.35
2.26
-3.44
2.18
1.53
2.08
3.04
2.05
4.26
2.04
-6.50
1.74
-4.80
1.70
-6.69
1.61
-0.66
1.52
-9.20
1.46
6.33
1.43
7.14
1.34
2.81
1.33
0.09
1.27
-10.42
1.24
-1.01
1.21
3.28
1.21
-17.64
1.19
6.82
1.13

Panel C: Industry weightings

Sector Diversification
(% of Common Stocks)
Utilities
Energy
Financials
Industrials
Durables
Staples
Services
Retail
Health
Technology

Growth and
Income Fund
6.40
10.00
36.20
10.40
0.70
11.00
10.80
1.00
6.30
7.30

S&P500
Index
2.89
6.42
17.78
11.06
2.82
8.92
4.86
13.56
14.90
16.80

45

Difference
3.51
3.58
18.42
-0.66
-2.12
2.08
5.94
-12.56
-8.60
-9.50

TABLE 3
Putnam Utilities Growth and Income
(January 1992 through August 2001)
Asset Class

Basic
model

Extended
model

0

3.4%

Treasury 1-10yr

11.9%

0

Treasury 10+ yr

20.5%

0

Corporate Bonds

0

0

Large Cap. Value

56.8%

14.7%

Large Cap. Growth

0

0

Small Cap. Value

0

4.4%

Small Cap. Growth

0

0

Developed Countries

0

0

Japan

0

0

Emerging Markets

0

0

10.8%

10.6%

Dow Jones Utilities

---

44.6%

Dow Jones Communications

---

16.5%

Dow Jones Energy

---

5.9%

0.669

0.929

Bills

Foreign Bonds

R2

46

TABLE 4
Hedge Funds Style Analysis
The table reports the results of Style Analysis for three hedge funds and a CTA during March 1997 to
November 2001. The coefficients are not constrained to be non-negative due to the use of leverage and
short sales, but the sum of the coefficients is constrained to one. All figures in the table are in percents. The
columns titled ‘Basic Model’ report the results for the set of 12 asset classes. The next four columns show
the results of re-estimating the coefficients for each fund using the 12 asset classes and returns on 4
S&P500 options strategies. At-the-money call (put) options are denoted as Cat (Pat) and out-of-the-money
call (put) option as Cout (Pout).

Basic Model

Bills
Treasury 1-10yr
Treasury 10+ yr
Corporate Bonds
Large Value
Large Growth
Small Value

Hillsdale

Nippon

Axiom

CTA

Hillsdale

Nippon

Axiom

CTA

161.9

219.0

257.5

9.2

137.7

295.7

393.7

-432.0

-161.4

-281.6

-324.8

676.0

-223.1

-404.0

-450.0

698.5

44.0

-6.6

-21.9

85.3

32.4

8.8

-35.5

-4.5

22.9

177.6

216.8

-297.0

79.8

215.1

240.1

-166.1

27.4

-22.3

-24.8

14.0

40.6

-33.5

-44.4

7.6

21.1

10.0

-5.0

-32.6

48.9

-12.3

-23.0

-7.0

-3.4

28.3

50.1

24.4

2.2

20.8

89.0

19.5

7.7

-11.3

-23.9

-9.8

0.3

-4.8

-38.2

-12.5

-14.8

2.4

14.3

0.2

-8.9

4.3

19.5

8.8

6.7

25.8

25.5

-30.4

10.2

19.7

38.9

-53.3

-36.7

-16.7

37.9

30.8

-38.4

-15.5

21.8

28.7

27.4

-24.7

-94.4

-15.0

16.7

4.4

-107.2

8.5

---

---

---

---

0.1

3.3

-0.1

5.9

---

---

---

---

-2.0

2.9

-12.7

11.2

---

---

---

---

-0.8

-1.7

-0.8

-4.3

---

---

---

---

4.1

-3.3

9.0

-9.1

32.2

39.8

77.3

55.4

Small Growth
Developed Countries
Japan
Emerging Markets
Foreign Bonds

Cat
Pat
Cout
Pout
R-Squared

Basic Model + Options Strategy

28.3

29.6

55.4

47

37.5

TABLE 5 - Hedge Funds Style Analysis
Panel A, reports the results of regressing the returns of each fund on a benchmark index that is composed of hedge funds with similar investment strategy. The
returns of Hillsdale and Nippon funds are compared to a Market Neutral Hedge Fund index. Emerging Market and Managed Futures indexes are the benchmarks
for Axiom Fund and John W. Henry & Company respectively. The analysis is repeated separately for each hedge fund database17. Panel B repeats the procedure
in Panel A, using five different benchmarks. *, ** Significantly different than zero at the 5% and 1% level respectively.

Hillsdale
Market Neutral
HFR

CSFB

MAR

Nippon
Market Neutral
HFR

CSFB

Axiom
Emerging Markets

MAR

HFR

CSFB

MAR

CTA
HFR

CSFB

MAR

1.45**
0.52

1.55**
0.71

Panel A: Peer Evaluation using single Hedge fund Index
Benchmark
R2

1.29**
0.17

0.42
0.01

0.52
0.01

0.60
0.05

0.95**
0.13

1.14**
0.09

0.96**
0.57

0.91**
0.55

1.12**
0.66

-----

Panel B: Peer Evaluation using multiple Hedge fund Indexes
Market
Neutral
Emerging
Market
Managed
Futures
Event
Driven
Fixed
Income
R2

17

1.45**

0.50

0.09

0.28

1.00*

1.44

0.39

-0.53

-1.22

2.68**

.08

0.94

-0.21

-0.27

-0.32

-0.01

-0.02

0.05

0.91**

0.47**

0.88**

-0.02

-0.26*

-0.16

---

0.17

0.04

---

-0.16

-0.15

-0.30

-0.15

1.44**

1.52**

-0.07

0.16

0.71

0.04

-0.17

-0.27

0.00

1.53**

1.26

-1.12*

0.12

-0.27

-0.05

0.24

0.74

0.79*

---

0.24

0.11

0.32

0.66

---

0.27

0.13

0.11

0.23

0.57

0.68

0.13

0.56

--0.09

---

0.12

HFR and MAR do not report a Managed futures and Fixed Income Indexes respectively

49

--0.72

---

0.72

TABLE 6 - Hedge Funds Style Analysis using Stepwise Regression
The table reports for each fund, the results of a stepwise estimation using 12 asset classes, 5 hedge funds indexes and 4 option strategies. The analysis is repeated
separately for each hedge fund database. Stepwise regression involves adding and/or deleting variables sequentially depending on the F value. We specify a 10%
significance level for deleting a variable in the stepwise regression procedure. *, ** Significantly different than zero at the 5% and 1% level respectively.

Hillsdale
HFR
Bills

TRE

Nippon
MAR

HFR

TRE

Axiom
MAR

-23.36*

HFR

TRE

31.9**

Treasury 1-10 years

-7.32**

CTA
MAR

HFR

TRE

23.36
-4.58**

-6.07**

Treasury 10+ years

-0.37

Corporate Bonds

3.11**

Large Cap. Value

-0.21

Large Cap. Growth

0.38**

-0.24*

1.75*

2.62**

2.86**

-0.37**

0.35**

-0.29*

Small Cap. Value
Small Cap. Growth

-0.39**

-0.18**

-0.26**

Developed countries
0.23**

Emerging Markets

-0.33**

-0.33**

1.86**

0.98*

2.49**

-0.17

-0.23*

-0.23*

-0.33**

-0.19**

0.60

0.49*

0.72**

1.44**

3.01*

0.32**

0.81**

-0.17

0.32

1.28**
0.81*

1.47**

At the money call

0.014*

0.012*

1.82**

0.02**

0.02**

-0.10*

-0.12

0.08*
0.46

-0.02
0.27

0.22

0.21

1.51**

0.85**

Event Driven

R2

1.89**

-0.51**

Fixed Income

Out of the money Put

0.15

-0.58**

Managed Futures

At the money Put

0.52**

0.36**

Foreign Bonds
Emerging Markets

0.47**
-0.29

Japan

Market Neutral

MAR

0.33

0.29

50

0.82

0.82

0.80

0.08

-0.10**

0.2**

-0.08

0.09**

0.19

0.68

0.77

Figure 1.1 - Vanguard Windsor Fund
January 1988 - August 2001
0.0%
Bills 0.0%
82.7%

Large Cap. Value
Large Cap. Growth

47.3%
0.0%
48.7%

Small Cap.Value 0.0%

15.0%

0.0%

Small Cap. Growth 0.0%
0.0%

Corporate Bond 0.0%
Treasury 1-10 yr

0.0%
0.0%

Treasury 10+ yr

0.0%
1.8%

Vanguard Windsor
S&P 500 Index

0.0%

Foreign Bonds 0.0%
Developed Countries

0.0%
2.0%
2.3%

Emerging Markets 0.0%
0.0%

Japan 0.3%
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Figure 1.2 - Vanguard Windsor Fund
January 1988 - August 2001

Style Benchmark

S&P 500 Index

65.4%

86.6%

13.4%

Residual

34.6%

R-Squared to Benchmark

51

Figure 2.1 - Growth and Income Funds
March 1993 - August 2001
Bills

0.0%
0.0%

3.9%
3.7%
48.7%

Large Cap. Value

Corporate Bond

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

Treasury 1-10 yr

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

Treasury 10+ yr

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

Developed Countries

21.1%

2.8%
1.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

Foreign Bonds

48.3%

1.7%

Small Cap.Growth

90.8%

23.2%

16.7%

Large Cap. Growth
Small Cap. Value

78.6%

46.9%

Goldman Sachs
Alliance Capital
Vanguard
Putnam

0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
1.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%

3.6%

Emerging Markets

1.1%
1.8%
0.0%
0.6%

Japan

1.9%
0.0%
0.0%
2.2%

0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Figure 2.2- Growth and Income Funds
March 1993 - August 2001
100%
91.9%
75%

97.0%

95.5%

Vanguard

Putnam

83.8%

50%

25%

0%
Goldman Sachs

Alliance Capital

Residual

R-Squared to Benchmark

52

Figure 3.1 - Fidelity Convertible Securities Fund
January 1988 - August 2001
20.9%

Bills
Large Cap. Value 0.0%
13.1%

Large Cap. Growth
Small Cap. Value 0.0%

40.9%

Small Cap. Growth
13.3%

Corporate Bond
Treasury 1-10 yr

0.0%

Treasury 10+ yr

0.0%

Foreign Bonds 0.0%
7.7%

Developed Countries
Emerging Markets

4.0%

Japan 0.2%
0%

20%

40%

60%

80%

100%

Figure 3.2 - Fidelity Convertible Securities Fund
January 1988 - August 2001

86.5%

13.5%

Residual

R-Squared to Style Benchmark

53

Figure 4.1 - Vanguard Balanced Fund
60-Month Moving Windows, Computed Monthly, October 1992 - August 2001
100%

80%

Bills
Large Cap. Value
Large Cap. Growth
Small Cap. Value
Small Cap. Growth
Corporate Bond
Treasury 1-10 yr
Treasury 10+ yr
Foreign Bonds
Developed Countries
Emerging Markets

60%

40%

20%

0%
Sep 1997

Jun 1998

Mar 1999

Dec 1999

Sep 2000

Aug 2001

Figure 4.2 - Vanguard Balanced Fund
October 1992 - Augusut 2001

99.4%

0.6%

Residual

R-Squared to Style Benchmark

54

Figure 5 - Vanguard Windsor Fund
60-Month Moving Windows, computed monthly, January 1990 - August 2001

100%

80%

Large Cap. Value
Small Cap. Value
Small Cap. Growth
Corporate Bonds
Treasury, 1-10 year
Foreign Bonds
Developed Countries
Emerging Markets
Japan

60%

40%

20%

0%
Dec 1994

Aug 1996

Apr 1998

Dec 1999

55

Aug 2001

Figure 6 - Vanguard Windsor Excess Return vs. Style Benchmark
36-Month Moving Windows, Computed Monthly, January 1988 - August 2001
4%

1.4%

-1.2%

-3.8%

-6.4%

-9%
Dec 1990

Aug 1993

Apr 1996

Dec 1998

Aug 2001

Figure 7 - Vanguard Windsor Excess Return vs. S&P500
36-Month Moving Windows, Computed Monthly, January 1988 - August 2001
12%

5.8%

-0.4%

-6.6%

-12.8%

-19%
Dec 1990

Aug 1993

Apr 1996

Dec 1998

56

Aug 2001

Figure 8.1 - Hedge Funds Style Analysis with Basic Model
March 1997 - November 2001
Bills
Large Cap. Value
Large Cap. Growth
Small Cap. Value
Small Cap. Growth

Axiom Emerging Market
Trend following CTA
Hillsdale market neutral
Nippon Market Neutral

Corporate Bond
Treasury 1-10 yr
Treasury 10+ yr
Foreign Bonds
Develoed Countries
Emerging Markets
Japan
-400%

-262.5%

-125%

12.5%

150%

287.5%

425%

562.5%

700%

Figure 8.2 - Hedge Funds Style Analysis with Basic Model + Option Strategy
March 1997 - May 2001
Bills
Large Cap. Value
Large Cap. Growth
Small Cap. Value
Small Cap. Growth
Corporate Bond
Treasury 1-10 yr
Treasury 10+ yr
Global Bonds
Developed Countries
Emerging Markets
Japan
P at
P out
C at
C out
-500%

-337.5%

-175%

-12.5%

150%

57

312.5%

475%

800%

