NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL JOINT VENTURES AND THE BOUNDARIES OF THE FIRM

Mihir A. Desai
C. Fritz Foley
James R. Hines Jr.

Working Paper 9115
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9115

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
August 2002

The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the International
Investment Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce under arrangements that
maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect
official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce. Helpful comments on earlier drafts were provided
by Ray Fisman, Bernard Yeung, and seminar participants at Columbia University, Harvard Business School,
New York University, and the NBER Strategic Alliances Conference. Financial support from the Lois and
Bruce Zenkel Research Fund at the University of Michigan and the Division of Research at Harvard Business
School is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Mihir A Desai, C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

International Joint Ventures and the Boundaries of the Firm
Mihir A Desai, C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 9115
August 2002
JEL No. F23, L23, G32, H87
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes the determinants of partial ownership of the foreign affiliates of U.S.
multinational firms and, in particular, why partial ownership has declined markedly over the last 20 years.
The evidence indicates that whole ownership is most common when firms coordinate integrated
production activities across different locations, transfer technology, and benefit from worldwide tax
planning. Since operations and ownership levels are jointly determined, it is necessary to use the
liberalization of ownership restrictions by host countries and the imposition of joint venture tax penalties
in the U.S. Tax Reform Act of 1986 as instruments for ownership levels in order to identify these effects.
Firms responded to these regulatory and tax changes by expanding the volume of their intrafirm trade as
well as the extent of whole ownership; four percent greater subsequent sole ownership of affiliates is
associated with three percent higher intrafirm trade volumes. The implied complementarity of whole
ownership and intrafirm trade suggests that reduced costs of coordinating global operations, together with
regulatory and tax changes, gave rise to the sharply declining propensity of American firms to organize
their foreign operations as joint ventures over the last two decades. The forces of globalization appear
to have increased the desire of multinationals to structure many transactions inside firms rather than
through exchanges involving other parties.

Mihir A. Desai
Harvard Business School
Morgan 363
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu

C. Fritz Foley
University of Michigan
Business School
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
ffoley@bus.umich.edu

James R. Hines Jr.
University of Michigan
Business School
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
jrhines@umich.edu

1.

Introduction
The appropriate ownership of productive enterprise is a central issue in economic theory

and a very practical question for multinational firms establishing new foreign affiliates.
Multinational firms frequently have the option to own 100 percent, majority, or minority shares
of newly created foreign entities; additionally, they might participate in foreign markets by
exporting from home countries or by permitting foreign companies to produce under licensing
agreements. These alternatives imply varying levels of control and commitment and allow
multinational firms to tailor the organization of foreign operations to the circumstances of
individual product and geographic markets. A variety of ownership forms entailing less than 100
percent parent ownership, and the accompanying coordination of interests between more than
one firm, are loosely grouped in the academic and popular literature and known as “alliances.”
The rapid pace of globalization suggests to many observers that international alliances are
essential to the success and survival of multinational enterprises.1 This viewpoint has not,
however, been subjected to sharp statistical tests based on actual practice, in part due to the
difficulty of identifying the determinants of such a heterogeneous group of activities as those
encompassed by alliances. The purpose of this paper is to identify the factors associated with
one class of such activity, situations in which American multinational firms share ownership of
foreign affiliates. The comprehensive U.S. data described in section 4, and analyzed in section 5,
offer clues to the magnitudes of the costs and benefits associated with partial ownership, as
revealed by the behavior of American companies in creating new foreign affiliates. The data
also answer the question of whether the joint venture form of international alliance is an
increasingly important feature of international business, and indicate the way in which ownership
decisions have responded to the changing nature of globalization over the last two decades.
The behavior of American multinational firms suggests that partial ownership is most
valuable to firms with extensive contact with local markets. Affiliates purchasing large fractions
of their inputs locally and those selling large fractions of their output locally are more likely than
others to be organized as joint ventures. Parent companies with extensive foreign operations and
those establishing affiliates in the same industry are more likely to own minority stakes in newly
1

Ohmae (1989, p. 143), for example, suggests that “Globalization mandates alliances, makes them absolutely
essential to strategy.”

1

created affiliates, suggesting that effective management of shared ownership requires significant
experience. While it is possible that firms choose to share the ownership of their foreign
affiliates in settings in which doing so mitigates expropriation risks, the data indicate that parent
companies have as much at risk in typical joint venture affiliates as they do in their wholly
owned affiliates and that there is no distinctive relationship between investment and risk levels
by ownership form.
Parent firms are more likely to own majority or 100 percent stakes of affiliates that sell
high fractions of their output to related parties or buy high fractions of their inputs from related
parties. Majority and wholly owned affiliates are also more likely to make royalty payments to
their U.S. parents for the use of intangible assets, and majority and wholly owned affiliates are
the most useful to firms seeking to avoid taxes. Indeed, partial ownership by local firms appears
to deter aggressive transfer pricing by multinational parents. These patterns suggest that settings
in which there are strong benefits to coordinating parent and affiliate operations in order to
conduct intrafirm trade, use technology abroad, or avoid taxes, are those in which parents are the
most likely to establish their operations as majority or 100 percent owned affiliates. This cross
sectional evidence does not, however, prove that ownership is a function of these considerations,
since it is possible that both ownership and operational decisions represent joint responses to
other unmeasured factors.
Fortunately, it is possible to exploit two types of changes in government policy that affect
the relative costs of sharing ownership – the liberalization of ownership restrictions by certain
host countries and the U.S. Tax Reform Act of 1986 – in order to identify the extent of linkage
between ownership and coordinated activity between parents and affiliates. American firms
operating in countries that liberalize their restrictions on foreign ownership of local affiliates
trade more with their affiliates after liberalization. American firms in tax situations that reward
the ability to coordinate closely with foreign affiliates, and those whose joint ventures are subject
to tax penalties after 1986, likewise trade extensively with affiliates. These results are precisely
what should appear if intrafirm transactions and majority and 100 percent ownership are
complementary. It follows, therefore, that greater desire to coordinate parent and affiliate trade,
technology transfer, and tax planning makes firms more likely to establish their foreign
operations with majority or 100 percent ownership.

2

A comprehensive review of all U.S. overseas affiliate activity from 1982 to 1997
indicates that American multinational firms are decreasingly likely to establish their foreign
affiliates as joint ventures. Aggregate activity by joint ventures has fallen considerably over
time, and the cross sectional evidence is consistent with an increased appetite for control by
multinational parents. Moreover, disappearing government-imposed ownership restrictions
explain only a portion of the declining use of shared ownership by U.S. firms.
The forces of globalization appear to have diminished rather than accelerated the use of
shared ownership. This is at first surprising, since globalization typically improves the return to
international business activity, including joint ventures – but it is understandable if the
opportunities created by globalization are best exploited by the use of wholly owned (or majority
owned) foreign affiliates. In particular, ease of communication, reduced transportation costs, and
integration of worldwide financial and commodity markets make it possible to coordinate
integrated production activities in disparate locations, transfer technology between countries, and
arrange international operations to reduce associated tax burdens. All of these activities are most
profitably undertaken by foreign affiliates under the exclusive control of multinational parents.
Section 2 of the paper reviews the theoretical and empirical literature on international
joint ventures. Section 3 presents a model that outlines the tradeoffs implicit in choosing
ownership levels when operating abroad, thereby serving as the basis of the empirical work to
follow. Section 4 provides an overview of the data on international joint ventures and describes
recent patterns of joint venture activity. Section 5 analyzes the determinants of the ownership
fractions of the foreign affiliates of American multinational corporations. Section 6 is the
conclusion.
2.

International Joint Venture Activity2
There is extensive discussion of the factors that influence a multinational parent’s

preferences for full or shared ownership of affiliates. The considerations that have received the
most theoretical and empirical attention stem from work on transactions costs and contract
theory. The transactions cost approach to the organization of firms, developed by Williamson
(1975), Klein, Crawford, and Alchian (1978), and others, stresses that agents who develop a
specific asset confront the possibility of opportunistic behavior by their trading partners. The

3

transaction cost literature, notably the work of Oxley (1997) and Anand and Khanna (2000), also
identifies the hazard of technological appropriability in arm’s-length relationships and various
forms of alliances. These inefficiencies are thought to be mitigated when activities are organized
under common ownership. Based on similar premises, the property rights approach, developed
by Grossman and Hart (1986), Hart and Moore (1990), and others, formalizes the notion of asset
specificity and focuses on the way in which ex ante investment incentives differ across
ownership structures.3 In this framework, joint ownership is generally suboptimal due to the
sharing of residual control rights.
The moral hazard problems that arise in cooperative efforts have attracted considerable
attention since Holmstrom’s (1982) finding that efficient sharing rules do not exist for certain
types of partnerships. Subsequent work identifies circumstances in which efficient sharing rules
may exist, including those with repeated play, unlimited liability, and those in which risk-averse
agents use stochastic sharing rules.4 In the important case in which assets are jointly used, joint
ownership may be an efficient arrangement. Aghion and Tirole (1994) find that “split” property
rights can encourage innovation in settings with incomplete information. Similarly, the existence
of potential spillovers means that parent firms may benefit from coordinated R&D activity in
spite of the associated moral hazard problems.5 The moral hazard created by partnership
arrangements can facilitate certain types of market transactions. Crampton et al. (1987) note
that, in environments with incomplete information, joint ownership of an asset may be consistent
with efficient resource allocation.6 Similarly, Rey and Tirole (1999) demonstrate that joint
ventures can alleviate biased decision-making but can also be associated with complexities
arising from divergent objectives.
Empirical work on the use of joint ventures by multinational companies suggests that
firms select ownership levels that economize on transaction costs.7 As outlined by Stopford and
Wells (1972), Beamish and Banks (1987), Contractor and Lorange (1988) Gomes-Casseres

2

This section draws on Desai and Hines (1999).
For a careful treatment of the differences between the transactions cost approach and the property rights approach,
see Whinston (2002).
4
See, for example, Legros and Matthews (1993).
5
See Bhattacharya et al. (1992), Kaimen et al. (1992), and Gandal and Scotchmer (1993) for examples.
6
Hart and Moore (1998) and other recent work on non-profit cooperative ownership structures considers joint
ownership through cooperatives but typically in a not-for-profit setting.
7
These theories are reviewed in Caves (1996).
3

4

(1989) and Asiedu and Esfahani (2001), joint ventures balance the benefits of combining
complementary assets with costs that include managerial conflicts and shirking. Gatignon and
Anderson (1988) present evidence that parents seek higher levels of ownership in affiliates that
make greater use of proprietary assets. In a study of technology transfers to Indian firms,
Ramachandran (1993) finds that subsidiaries that are 100 percent owned by foreign
multinationals receive greater technology transfers than do Indian-owned firms, or subsidiaries
that are partially owned by foreign multinationals. In contrast, Hennart (1991) argues that the
cost of using market transactions to purchase other firms’ intermediate inputs makes joint
ventures particularly attractive.
Multinational parents also select ownership levels with eyes to facilitating the
coordination of pricing and production decisions. Unlike other types of firms, multinational
firms have units that are simultaneously active in multiple countries. As a result, these firms
have the ability to adjust prices used for intrafirm transfers in order to allocate taxable income
among jurisdictions in order to reduce the associated tax liabilities. Horst (1971) and Kant
(1990) model the optimal transfer prices that multinational firms should charge in cross border
transactions. Kant (1990) points out a limitation of joint ventures by indicating that significant
conflicts of interest can arise in setting transfer prices between whole and partially owned
affiliates – since multinational parents have incentives to shift profits away from affiliates owned
jointly with other investors. Sole ownership also provides multinational firms the control needed
to integrate worldwide operations. Franko (1971) reports limited use of joint ventures by
multinational firms with the ability to shift production between locations, presumably due to
excessive compensation demanded by potential joint venture partners fearing that multinational
parents would shift production away from them first.
Recent empirical work on international trade suggests that there are significant benefits
from coordinating production and pricing within multinationals. Feenstra and Hanson (1996a,
1996b) and Feenstra (1998) point out that the integration of world markets has been
accompanied by a disintegration of the production process in which different stages of making a
finished good take place in different places. Hanson, Mataloni, and Slaughter (2001) find
evidence that parents export a small but growing volume of intermediate goods to affiliates for
further processing, and that affiliates play growing roles as distributors and regional exporters.
Zeile (1997) indicates that a growing percentage of U.S. multinational parent company trade

5

takes place with affiliated parties. Given that multinationals are transferring more goods inside
the firm, there may be growing benefits to 100 percent ownership of affiliates in thereby
avoiding hold-up problems with foreign partners, limiting transfer pricing conflicts, and
simplifying integration of worldwide production.
Resource-constrained firms have the potential to learn from their local partners without
incurring prohibitive expenses. Stopford and Haberich (1978) present data suggesting that
smaller British MNEs made greater use of joint ventures when entering markets outside of the
Commonwealth. Blomstrom and Zejan (1991) find evidence that parents were more likely to
choose partial as opposed to 100 percent ownership when diversifying, although Ghemawat,
Porter and Rawlinson (1985) suggest the opposite in their study of international coalitions.
Kogut (1991) characterizes joint ventures as “real options” that provide firms with information
they can use in forming subsequent plans – that may include acquiring their partners or
dissolving their joint ventures. Similarly, Balakrishnan and Koza (1993) view joint ventures as
intermediate forms between markets and hierarchies that permit firms to overcome informational
asymmetries at low cost.
An additional common motivation for finding a local partner is the need to curry favor
with host governments. As recently as two decades ago, many host country governments
attempted to restrict foreign ownership of domestic firms. Franko (1989), Gomes-Casseres
(1990), and Contractor (1990) argue that sole ownership is generally preferred by multinational
parents but occasionally conceded in bargains with host governments. Henisz (2000) and
Gatignon and Anderson (1988) present evidence that multinational parents entering countries
with higher political risk are more likely to use joint ownership since local firms are well
positioned to interact with local government.
Older surveys commonly report a rising use of joint ventures by multinational firms.
Anderson (1990) and Geringer and Hebert (1991) claim that American firms rely to an evergreater extent on international joint ventures, and will continue to do so. Curhan, Davidson, and
Suri (1977) document a dramatic rise in the use of international joint ventures by American firms
between 1951 and 1975 using survey data collected through the Harvard Multinational Project.
Hladik (1985) extends Curhan et al.’s data through 1984 and projects continued growth of
international ventures by U.S. firms. In contrast, Desai and Hines (1999) draw attention to the

6

reduced usage of minority ownership after passage of the U.S. Tax Reform Act of 1986, and
identify patterns in the data suggesting that the tax penalties introduced in 1986 may be at least
partly responsible for the decline.
3.

A Model of Multinational Ownership
The agency costs intrinsic to joint ventures discourage their formation except in

circumstances in which there are important offsetting considerations. The literature on alliances
offers several candidates for such considerations, which fall into a few broad categories, thereby
permitting them to be expressed in a manner that makes them possible to test. There are two
purposes of this section, the first of which is to identify the restrictions needed to analyze the
determinants of whether new affiliates are established as joint ventures, conditional on prior
decisions to create new affiliates. The second purpose is to identify an indirect method of
measuring the extent to which higher payoffs to intrafirm transactions contribute to the demand
for majority or 100 percent ownership of affiliates.
Joint venture theories start from the assumption that firms are guided by profitability
considerations in deciding whether or not to establish a foreign affiliate, what fraction of the
affiliate the parent company should own, and operational issues such as the deployment of
proprietary technology and the volume of intrafirm trade. Since firms make these choices on the
basis of specific information, much of which is unavailable to researchers, it can be very difficult
to identify causal effects. For example, the evidence (examined in detail in section 5) indicates
that firms with extensive trade with their affiliates have higher than average propensities to be
majority or 100 percent owners of them. In order to identify an effect of trade on ownership,
however, it is necessary to use instruments that affect only one of either ownership or trade. As
it happens, instruments (in the form of changing government regulations and tax policies) are
available for levels of parental ownership of foreign affiliates. The theory of the firm, elucidated
in what follows, implies that such instruments can be properly used to identify other factors that
contribute to the demand for whole and partial ownership of affiliates.
The maximum net profit ( π ) that a foreign affiliate is capable of earning can be
expressed as π (X , c, ω , ε ) , in which X is a vector of attributes of the parent company and the
market in which the affiliate is located, and ε is a vector of residuals. The vector c captures
exogenous determinants of the costs of undertaking transactions between the parent and its

7

affiliate, so that an element of c might be the distance between the parent and affiliate (to the
extent that greater distances are associated with higher trade costs), and another element of c
might be the extent of the parent company’s ownership of intangible assets. Finally, ω
represents any ownership restriction imposed by the host country, such as a requirement that
foreign investor ownership not exceed 49 percent of any local affiliate. The profit function is
understood to capture profits associated with establishing a foreign affiliate net of relevant
opportunity costs, so it subtracts, for example, the profits that could otherwise be earned by
exploiting opportunities via arm’s length contracts with unrelated parties.
It is extremely useful to restrict attention to situations in which the profit function takes
the following form:

π ( X , c, ω , ε ) = f 1 ( X , c, ε 1 ) ⋅ f 2 ( X , c , ω , ε 2 ) ,

(1)

in which ε 1 and ε 2 are independently distributed elements of ε , and the function f 2 is defined
so that f 2 (⋅) > 0, ∀(X , c, ω , ε 2 ) . Profit functions that satisfy the decomposition in equation (1)
have several attractive analytic properties, of which the most important is that the decision of
whether or not to establish an affiliate is independent of the profit-maximizing choice of parent
ownership level.8 This property follows from the combination of the simple profit maximization
rule that parent firms establish foreign affiliates whenever π (X , c, ω , ε ) ≥ 0 , and the fact that
f 1 ( X , c, ε 1 ) ≥ 0 is a necessary and sufficient condition for π (X , c, ω , ε ) ≥ 0 . Intuitively, a
multinational firm whose profits can be expressed by π (X , c, ω , ε ) as given in (1), and that
would maximize profits by owning 100 percent of its affiliate, would also find it profitable
(though less so) to establish an affiliate with 30 percent parent ownership, since doing so
produces profits given by a value of [ f1 (⋅) f 2 (⋅)] in which f 2 (⋅) incorporates an ownership
restriction of 30 percent. Since the ownership level restriction embedded in ω can be selected
for any (positive) value without changing the fact that π (X , c, ω , ε ) and f 1 ( X , c, ε 1 ) have the
8

An example of a function satisfying these properties is one based on the specification:
π = β1 X + β 21 Xy − β 22 Xy 2 + ε1 exp φ  β 3 X + β 41 Xy − β 42 Xy 2  + β 5 X φ 2 + ε 2 , in which y is the level of


intrafirm trade, and φ is the fraction of an affiliate that the parent owns. In this specification, the costs that are

(

) {

}

elements of the vector c are embedded in the β terms. It is then possible to construct the π ( X , c, ω , ε ) function by
solving for profit-maximizing levels of y and φ , subject to the ω constraint, and substituting those values into the
expression for π .

8

same sign, it follows that the existence of positive profitability is not a function of the fraction of
parental ownership.
Profit-maximizing firms choose affiliate ownership levels, denoted φ (X , c, ω , ε 2 ) , that
correspond to maximal values of π (X , c, ω , ε ) . A host government ownership restriction may
take the form that φ ≤ ω . Consequently, for any desired value of φ < ω , the constraint does not
bind, so

∂f
∂φ
∂π
∂π
= 0 and
= 0 . From equation (1),
= 0 implies that 2 = 0 . For values of
∂ω
∂ω
∂ω
∂ω

ω for which the constraint does bind,

∂f
∂φ
∂π
> 0 and
> 0 , and therefore 2 > 0 . The
∂ω
∂ω
∂ω

unconstrained profit-maximizing level of φ is therefore characterized locally by the value of ω
at which the function f 2 (X , c, ω , ε 2 ) transits from

∂f 2
∂f
> 0 to 2 = 0 .
∂ω
∂ω

It follows, therefore, that in circumstances in which the profit function satisfies (1), it is
feasible to estimate desired levels of affiliate ownership by comparing actual levels of affiliate
ownership by firms in differing circumstances. In particular, it is not necessary to incorporate
the alternative of not establishing an affiliate at all. Given the very great difficulty of including
all the information necessary to determine whether firms establish affiliates, and the millions of
observations of potential affiliates that are not established, this is a valuable separation. But it is
necessary that a restriction of the type embedded in equation (1) hold.
The evidence (examined in detail in section 5) indicates a close connection between the
provision of parental inputs and whole or majority ownership of foreign affiliates. The difficulty
with interpreting this evidence is that input provision as well as ownership levels represent
choices made by firms on the basis of possibly a large number of correlated omitted variables,
thereby clouding inference. Ideally, one would want to estimate the φ (X , c, ω , ε 2 ) function in
order to identify

∂φ
, recalling that c represents the costs associated with the provision of
∂c

parental inputs. This derivative indicates directly the effect of the costs (and therefore levels) of
intrafirm transfers on desired ownership, but in practice, since it is very difficult to measure c, it
cannot be reliably estimated.

9

Fortunately, there is an indirect method of inferring the sign and magnitude of
Differentiating the profit function with respect to ω yields

∂φ
.
∂c

∂π
, which is the effect of a small
∂ω

∂ 2π
change in ω on profitability. Further differentiating this function with respect to c yields
.
∂ω∂c
Since

∂π
is zero unless the ω constraint binds, it follows that, if ω is selected so that
∂ω

ω = φ (X ,c, ω , ε ) , then the constraint binds on the positive side and not on the negative side.
(Appropriately redefining the ω constraint to be a minimum ownership constraint rather than a
maximum ownership constraint would make the constraint bind on the negative side.) Then a
∂ 2π
corresponds to a case in which increasing c raises the value of additional
positive value of
∂ω∂c
∂ 2π
ownership of an affiliate, while a negative value of
implies that higher levels of c reduce
∂ω∂c
the value of additional ownership shares. Since c is the cost of exchanges between the parent
firm and its affiliates, higher values of c correspond to fewer exchanges between parents and
affiliates. Thus, a negative value of

∂ 2π
corresponds to a situation in which greater desired
∂ω∂c

exchange (such as goods or technology trade, driven by low values of c) between parents and
affiliates leads to greater desired parental ownership of affiliates (

The challenge is to estimate the function

∂φ
< 0 ).
∂c

∂ 2π
in the absence of reliable information on
∂ω∂c

the value of c. For this purpose, it is useful to invoke Hotelling’s lemma:
(2)

y=−

∂π (X , c, ω , ε )
,
∂c

in which y is the magnitude of exchange between the parent company and its affiliate. Equation
(2) is simply the envelope property that, for small price changes, induced factor substitution can
be ignored in calculating the extent to which profitability falls as costs rise. It follows from (2)
that:

10

∂ 2π ( X , c , ω , ε ) ∂ 2π ( X , c , ω , ε )
∂y (X , c, ω , ε )
=
=−
.
∂ω∂c
∂c∂ω
∂ω

(3)

 ∂y 
Equation (3) implies that the effect of ownership restrictions on intrafirm trade  −
 equals
 ∂ω 
 ∂ 2π 
 .
the effect of intrafirm trade desirability on the profitability of additional ownership 
 ∂ω∂c 
Neary and Roberts (1980) analyze this symmetry property in some detail in a related context.
Since the value of

∂y
is amenable to measurement even in the absence of reliable measures of
∂ω

c, this is a potentially useful method of drawing inferences, and is adopted in section 5.
A similar method of estimating

∂φ
is available if it is possible to identify features, such
∂c

as special tax provisions, that affect only the cost of holding joint ventures and not the cost of
intrafirm exchanges. The U.S. Tax Reform Act of 1986 provides just such an example.9 Then
letting c1 denote the cost of intrafirm exchanges such as trade and technology transfers, and c2
denote the cost of maintaining a foreign affiliate as a joint venture, it follows that:
(4)

∂φ
∂ 2π
∂ 2π
∂y
−
=
=
=−
.
∂c1 ∂c 2 ∂c1 ∂c1 ∂c 2
∂c 2

 ∂y
Equation (4) implies that the effect of ownership costs on intrafirm transfers 
 ∂c 2


 is identical –


 ∂φ 
 . The main
in sign and magnitude – to the effect of intrafirm transfer costs on ownership 
 ∂c1 
virtue of the former effect is that it can be estimated with available data. The empirical work
reported in section 5 uses both types of specifications, those presented in equations (3) and (4), to
estimate the extent to which ownership and transfers are related.
4.

Data and Descriptive Statistics
The empirical work presented in section 5 is based on the most comprehensive available

data on the activities of American multinational firms. The Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA)
9

See Desai and Hines (1999) for an analysis.

11

annual survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad from 1982 through 1997 provides a panel of
data on the financial and operating characteristics of U.S. firms operating abroad. These surveys
ask reporters to file detailed financial and operating items for each affiliate and information on
the value of transactions between U.S. parents and their foreign affiliates. The International
Investment and Trade in Services Survey Act governs the collection of the data and the Act
ensures that “use of an individual company’s data for tax, investigative, or regulatory purposes is
prohibited.” Willful noncompliance with the Act can result in penalties of up to $10,000 or a
prison term of one year. As a result of these assurances and penalties, BEA believes that
coverage is close to complete and levels of accuracy are high.
U.S. direct investment abroad is defined as the direct or indirect ownership or control by
a single U.S. legal entity of at least ten percent of the voting securities of an incorporated foreign
business enterprise or the equivalent interest in an unincorporated foreign business enterprise. A
U.S. multinational entity is the combination of a single U.S. legal entity that has made the direct
investment, called the U.S. parent, and at least one foreign business enterprise, called the foreign
affiliate. In order to be considered as a legitimate foreign affiliate, the foreign business
enterprise should be paying foreign income taxes, have a substantial physical presence abroad,
have separate financial records, and should take title to the goods it sells and receive revenue
from the sale. In order to determine ownership stakes in the presence of indirect ownership,
BEA determines the percentage of parent ownership at each link and then multiplies these
percentages to compute the parent’s total effective ownership.
The foreign affiliate survey forms that U.S. multinational firms are required to complete
vary depending on the year, the size of the affiliate, and the U.S. parent’s percentage of
ownership of the affiliate. The most extensive data are available for 1982, 1989, and 1994, when
BEA conducted Benchmark Surveys. In these years, all affiliates with sales, assets, or net
income in excess of $3 million in absolute value and their parents were required to file extensive
reports. In non-benchmark years between 1982 and 1997, exemption levels were higher and less
information is collected.10 Although wholly owned and majority owned affiliates report many
10

From 1983-1988, all affiliates with an absolute value of sales, assets, or net income less than $10 million were
exempt, and this cutoff increased to $15 million from 1990-1993 and $20 million from 1995-1997. BEA uses
reported data to estimate universe totals when surveys cover only larger affiliates or when only certain affiliates
provide information on particular survey forms. Estimated data is unlikely to have a significant impact on the
BEA’s published data at the industry or country level as data based on actual reports exceeds 90 percent of the

12

accounting items and information concerning operations each year, minority owned affiliates
need only file information about sales, net income, assets, employment, employment
compensation, and trade with the United States in non-benchmark years. “Majority owned”
affiliates are foreign affiliates in which the largest ownership claim by a U.S. parent exceeds 50
percent and is less than 100 percent; “minority owned” affiliates are those in which the largest
ownership claim by a U.S. parent is at least 10 percent but not more than 50 percent.11 “Wholly
owned” affiliates are those that are 100 percent owned by an American parent.
BEA collects identifiers linking affiliates through time, thereby permitting the creation of
a panel. By checking the status of all affiliates that filed forms in the previous year and are
expected to fall within reporting requirements, BEA identifies which enterprises leave the
sample. By monitoring news services for information on mergers, acquisitions, and other
activities of U.S. companies, BEA identifies which new enterprises should be included in the
sample. As a result, it is possible to examine the entry and exit of affiliates. Measures of entry
and exit are most reliable when looking from one benchmark to the next since there are more
extensive efforts to update data in these years. In addition, since all reporting affiliates report
the parent’s level of ownership in an affiliate annually, it is also possible to examine the
consequences of changes in levels of ownership.
Table I displays basic information on the incidence and size of affiliates by level of
parent ownership in the three benchmark years – 1982, 1989, and 1994 – and in the most recent
year in the panel, 1997. In the most recent benchmark year and in 1997, approximately 80
percent of all affiliates are organized as wholly owned affiliates, with minority and majority
ownership each comprising approximately 10 percent of the sample. The dynamics of
multinational ownership over the sample period appear quite clearly as the prevalence of
minority owned affiliates declines from 17.9 percent of affiliates in 1982 to 10.6 percent, while
the prevalence of wholly owned affiliates increases from 72.3 percent of affiliates to 80.4
percent. There is little evidence that minority owned affiliates are smaller than majority owned
estimated totals of assets and sales in each of the years between 1982 and 1997. To avoid working with estimated
data, only affiliates required to provide all the information associated with a particular analysis are considered.
11
In contrast to the categorization employed in this paper, the BEA classifies affiliates as majority owned if the
combined ownership stakes of all U.S. parents is greater than 50 percent even if no single U.S. person owns a
majority stake. In practice, the distinction between these two categorizations of majority ownership is minor. There
are no more than 79 joint ventures between U.S. parents in any given year and this activity is concentrated in the
petroleum industry.

13

affiliates. In fact, the median sales, assets, and employment of minority owned affiliates are
almost always larger than the median sales, assets, and employment of wholly owned affiliates.
In 1997, median sales for minority owned affiliates was $46.7 million while the median sales for
majority owned affiliates was $44.9 million and the median sales for wholly owned affiliates was
$41.1 million.
The bottom of Table I displays entry and exit rates of affiliates over the 1982-1989 and
1989-1994 periods. The entry rate is calculated as the ratio of the number of affiliates appearing
for the first time during the period that did not appear in the beginning year to the number of
affiliates appearing in the beginning year. The exit rate is computed by taking the ratio of the
number of affiliates leaving the sample during the period to the number of affiliates appearing in
the beginning year. The entry and exit rates are large, suggesting that there is a large amount of
turnover among affiliates in the sample. These entry and exit rates also indicate that turnover is
associated with a shift towards higher levels of ownership. For minority owned affiliates, the
entry rate is significantly less than the exit rate in the 1982-1989 period. For wholly owned
affiliates, the entry rate exceeds the exit rate in both periods.
These declines in the propensity to share ownership may represent the changing
geographic concentration of multinational activity or purely a response to the reduction in
ownership restrictions during the sample period. Figures 1a and 1b consider the dynamics of
ownership decisions over the sample period for countries sorted by host country per-capita
income quartiles, and by a measure of the barriers to acquiring majority stakes.12 Figure 1a
demonstrates that the declining use of minority ownership positions is uniform across all
quartiles of ownership restrictions as measured by Shatz (2000). In countries in the two highest
quartiles of receptivity to controlling acquisition by foreigners, partial ownership is only
employed by 14 percent of affiliates in 1997. While affiliates in the most liberal countries are
increasingly wholly owned, affiliates in less liberal quartiles are increasingly majority owned.
Given that the majority of U.S. multinational activity is in the two most liberal quartiles and that
these two quartiles were characterized by minimal restrictions during the entire sample period,

12

Income quartiles are constructed by taking the average value of GNP per capita in 1995 dollars over the 1982 to
1997 period. The quartiles measuring barriers to acquisition are constructed using the rating system developed and
documented in Shatz (2000).

14

the declining overall incidence of shared ownership cannot be exclusively attributed to
ownership restriction liberalizations.
Figure 1b indicates that affiliates in developing countries are the most likely to be only
partially owned by their American parents. In the richest countries, partially owned affiliates
only comprise 15.5 percent of all affiliates in 1997 and declined significantly over the sample
from 24.4 percent in 1982. Within the poorest countries, whole ownership characterizes less
than half of all affiliates throughout the sample period. Nonetheless, the mode of partial
ownership has shifted considerably over the sample period, with majority ownership becoming
more popular than minority ownership in the poorest countries.
As indicated in Figure 2, the use of alternative organizational forms varies considerably
across industries. In 1994, minority owned affiliates account for more than 15 percent of
affiliates in the petroleum, food manufacturing, chemical manufacturing, and transportation
equipment manufacturing industries, while they make up less than 10 percent of affiliates in the
industrial machinery manufacturing, electronic manufacturing, wholesale trade, and financial
services industry groups. In fact, nearly 88 percent of wholesale trade affiliates are wholly
owned, suggesting that the activities of such affiliates are incompatible with partial ownership.
The dynamics of organizational form decisions across time also yield insight into those
industries where propensities toward ownership modes are most fixed. While ownership
fractions are relatively unchanging in wholesale trade, services, and other industries, a variety of
subgroups within manufacturing – particularly transportation equipment and electronics – have
undergone significant shifts toward whole ownership.
Associated with the approximately 20,000 affiliates reporting in each benchmark year are
about 2,500 U.S. parents. In order to consider the distribution of the use of partial ownership
among parents, Figure 3 focuses on the set of parent systems with 5 or more affiliates and
classifies them by the share of their affiliates that are wholly owned. The 1997 figures indicate
that 38 percent of such parents own 100 percent of their affiliates, and only two percent fail to
own 100 percent of at least one affiliate. The dynamics over time illustrate that the preference
for whole ownership among larger multinationals is becoming much more pronounced over the
sample period. In 1982, 48 percent of parents used whole ownership in at least 80 percent of
their affiliates, and by 1997 that figure had risen to 65 percent.

15

This quest for more control by multinationals over the sample period is mirrored in the
histogram of ownership levels conditional on partial ownership in the three benchmark years, as
presented in Figure 4. While Figure 3 emphasizes the shift toward whole ownership, Figure 4
illustrates that majority control is becoming more and more important for those affiliates
structured under partial ownership. Common sense, along with much of the scholarly literature,
suggests that joint ventures are typically 50 percent owned by each of two partners, but Figure 4
shows that only 41 percent of all affiliates that are partially owned by American firms have
between 40 percent and 60 percent American parent ownership in 1997.
Figures 5a and 5b present descriptive evidence that levels of parent ownership are lower
for affiliates with higher fractions of their total sales in host countries, those that purchase small
fractions of their inputs from the United States, and affiliates that have fewer transactions with
other members of their parent system. Figure 5a displays the mean share of goods sold locally
for majority owned and wholly owned affiliates.13 In 1997, majority owned affiliates sold 7.0
percentage point higher fractions of their output to local markets than did wholly owned
affiliates. This pattern is consistent with the hypothesis that parents are more interested in
finding a local partner when access to local distribution is more important. The bottom part of
the top panel displays the mean value of the ratio of goods purchased from the United States by
an affiliate to the affiliate’s overall sales. Although minority owned affiliates purchase about 2
percent of the value of their sales from the United States over the sample period, this figure is
about 8 percent for majority owned affiliates and 10 percent for wholly owned affiliates. This
pattern is consistent with the hypothesis that a parent is more interested in finding a local partner
when its affiliate obtains fewer inputs from the United States, and is therefore more reliant on the
local market for inputs. It is also notable that the tendency of majority and wholly owned
affiliates to rely on imports from the United States has accelerated during the sample period,
while the same is not true for minority owned affiliates.
Figure 5b illustrates the variation, by level of ownership, in the extent of exchange within
parent systems. The evidence consistently suggests that parents engaging in extensive trade with
their affiliates own greater fractions of affiliate equity than do parents with little trade with
affiliates – and that this trend has accelerated over the sample period. The first part of this panel

13

A breakout of local sales is not available for minority owned affiliates.

16

indicates that affiliates that sell higher fractions of their output to their parents, or to other
affiliates in the same parent system, tend to be more closely held by parents. In 1997, wholly
owned affiliates sold an average of 28.7 percent of their output to affiliated parties, while
affiliates whose parents own a majority of the equity sold only 17.1 percent of their output to
affiliated parties. The second and third subpanels characterize reliance on trade with the United
States by depicting imports from, and exports to, the U.S. parent, as a fraction of affiliate sales.
In 1994, mean ratios of imports from the U.S. parent to total sales were 1.0 percent for minority
owned affiliates, 8.4 percent for majority owned affiliates, and 9.4 percent for wholly owned
affiliates. Similarly, minority owned affiliates exported 2.0 percent of sales to their parents, but
majority owned affiliates exported 6.9 percent, and wholly owned affiliates 7.6 percent, of sales
to their parents. The consistent evidence that related-party exchanges take place more
frequently under whole-ownership suggests that the degree to which affiliates are embedded
within a worldwide production process influences the desirability of partial ownership. This
evidence is also consistent with the theory that firms find it difficult to convince potential joint
venture partners that extensive transactions with other members of the parent system are likely to
take place on fair terms. In addition, the dynamics displayed in Figures 5a and 5b suggest that
these tensions may well have increased over the sample period.
5.

The Determinants of Ownership Decisions
The leading theories of joint ventures carry implications for the impact of observable

variables on the choice of whether to form a new venture with 100 percent, majority, or minority
parent ownership. Some of these implications bear on the characteristics of countries in which
affiliates are located, while others bear on the characteristics of firms that undertake the ventures.
Regulatory and tax policies of host countries have clear potential to influence the
desirability of forming new ventures as wholly owned and partially owned affiliates. While the
role of regulatory policies that implicitly or explicitly limit ownership percentages is selfevident, the impact of local tax policy is somewhat subtler. Differences between foreign tax
rates and the U.S. tax rate introduce tax planning opportunities that are most readily exploited by
wholly owned affiliates. The capital structures, payout policies, and transfer pricing practices of
wholly owned affiliates can be tailored to reduce the combination of foreign and U.S. tax
liabilities. Foreign partners may have their own objectives that differ from those associated with

17

avoiding U.S. tax liabilities. In cases in which the foreign tax rate just equals the U.S. tax rate,
the availability of foreign tax credits removes any U.S. tax liabilities on income earned by
affiliates, and U.S. tax considerations become unimportant in planning the operations of
affiliates. Consequently, significant differences between foreign tax rates and the U.S. tax rate
are likely to encourage firms to establish their affiliates as wholly owned ventures.
Firms without extensive experience in foreign markets are often hypothesized to benefit
the most from participation in international joint ventures, since it is possible to obtain valuable
information from foreign partners. The empirical implication of this relationship is that
companies with operations in large numbers of foreign countries should be the least likely to
form new ventures with partial ownership. Firms establishing affiliates in new industries stand
to benefit from the experience and information of foreign partners and are therefore more likely
to create affiliates of which they own less than 100 percent. Firms in research-intensive
industries can use foreign affiliates to exploit intangible assets developed with R&D activity in
home countries. The proprietary nature of these intangible assets complicates any transactions
with outside parties and therefore makes the use of wholly owned foreign affiliates particularly
attractive.
The production and trade patterns of foreign affiliates influence the desirability of 100
percent parent ownership, though the empirical identification of such effects is problematic given
the potential endogeneity of trade patterns to ownership. Theories of collaboration in local sales
markets suggest that firms are more likely to establish joint ventures with foreign partners when
these partners can provide information about, and access to, local distribution channels. As a
result, affiliates selling high fractions of their output locally are the most likely to be established
as joint ventures. By contrast, affiliates that trade extensively with their U.S. parents, or with
other related parties, are unlikely to be other than 100 percent owned by the parent company.
Such affiliates stand to learn little of value about foreign markets from potential foreign partners,
and benefit from the ability to adjust transfer prices and other aspects of their trade with related
parties.
5.1

Entry Decisions and Trade Patterns
Table II presents the results of estimating the determinants of whether new affiliates are

formed as wholly owned or partially owned ventures. The sample consists of observations of the

18

first appearances of any affiliates subsequent to 1982; since somewhat more than 18,000 new
affiliates appear in the data between 1983-1997 in the countries for which other explanatory
variables are available, the sample size slightly exceeds 18,000. The dependent variable is
defined to equal one if an affiliate is formed as a wholly owned venture and zero otherwise.
The empirical findings reported in Table II are consistent with the implications of some
theories of joint venture formation and are inconsistent with others. The regression reported in
column 1 has a large positive estimated coefficient on ownership restrictions, indicating that
wholly owned affiliates are more likely to be established in countries whose governments do not
restrict foreign ownership of local businesses.14 The regression reported in column 2 adds
country/industry and year fixed effects to the specification of the regression reported in column
one. As a result, the impact of ownership restrictions is identified only by changes in such
restrictions during the sample period that are not common to all countries. The impact of
ownership restrictions remains positive and statistically significant in this specification, though
its size is reduced to less than half the magnitude of the effect estimated in the regression
reported in column 1.
The regression results reported in column 3 of Table II suggest only an insignificant
impact of a multinational firm’s tax incentive to avoid joint ventures in countries whose tax rates
differ greatly from the U.S. tax rate, since the insignificant estimated coefficient on tax rate
differences indicates that affiliates located in countries with tax rates that differ from the U.S. tax
rate are no less likely to be wholly owned. Since omitted country attributes have the potential to
influence this coefficient, it is useful to consider a specification that includes country fixed
effects; in such a specification, the tax rate effects are identified by changes over time in the U.S.
tax rate and foreign tax rates. The results of estimating this equation with country/industry and
year fixed effects, reported in column 4, differ from those reported in column 3: tax rate
differences between foreign countries and the United States now are associated with significantly
greater likelihood of establishing wholly owned affiliates. Hence this regression supports the
notion that firms with tax planning opportunities are likely to establish their foreign affiliates as
wholly owned entities.

14

Ownership restrictions are coded as a dummy variable equal to one if both the “Acquisition Score” and the
“Sector Score” are above 3 for a particular country in a particular year, as classified in Shatz (2000).

19

The regressions reported in columns 5-10 of Table II add an explanatory variable that
proxies for parent experience. This variable is equal to the number of countries in which the
parent operated affiliates in the year before the entry of the affiliate, not including the country
that the affiliate enters. Estimated coefficients on this variable are uniformly negative and
significant, indicating that firms with extensive foreign experience are more likely than others to
establish new ventures with less than 100 percent parent company ownership. This pattern is
inconsistent with the hypothesis that firms undertake joint ventures in order to substitute the
expertise of foreign partners for their own incomplete knowledge of foreign business activity.
Alternatively, the results can be interpreted as suggesting that implementing shared ownership
requires significant expertise, at least on the part of the American parent.
The propensity to use shared ownership in the context of diversifying moves can
similarly shed light on the use of shared ownership to compensate for incomplete knowledge.
Affiliates in three-digit SICs other than those of the parent company are less likely than others to
be partially owned by the parent company, as indicated by the negative estimated coefficient on
the “Same Industry as Parent Dummy” variable in the regressions reported in column 7. With
the inclusion of country/industry and year fixed effects in the regression reported in column 8
this coefficient becomes positive and insignificant, but is again negative and significant in the
regression specifications reported in columns 9 and 10. This pattern is inconsistent with the
implications of theories suggesting that shared ownership facilitates knowledge transfers since
firms without such industry-specific knowledge would stand to benefit most from organizing
foreign affiliates as joint ventures.
The regression reported in column 9 of Table II adds an explanatory variable equal to the
R&D/sales ratio of an affiliate’s industry.15 The positive and significant estimated coefficient on
this variable confirms that companies operating in research-intensive industries are the most
likely to establish wholly owned ventures, presumably in response to the higher risks of
technology appropriation they might face under partial ownership. In order to consider the
possibility that these effects are being driven by country level variation in income or other
factors, column 10 reports the results of a regression that includes country fixed effects; the
results are similar to those reported in column 9.

20

The regressions presented in Table III repeat those in Table II, but do so with a dependent
variable that takes the value one if an affiliate is either wholly owned or majority owned by its
American parent company, and takes the value zero if the affiliate is minority owned by its
American parent. The results are qualitatively almost identical to those presented in Table II,
suggesting that the motivations for sharing ownership are common whether or not the parent
retains majority control of its affiliate.
The regressions reported in Table IV analyze the determinants of whether majority
owned ventures are 100 percent owned by parent companies at the time that they are formed.
The sample therefore omits observations of ventures that are formed with minority ownership on
the part of the American parent. There are two reasons to analyze the data in this way. The first
is that the choice between 100 percent ownership and majority ownership is an important
economic decision that is somewhat less the product of regulatory pressure than is the choice
between majority and minority ownership. The second, and perhaps less inspiring, reason is that
far more data are available on the operations of majority owned and 100 percent owned affiliates
than are available on the operations of minority owned affiliates.
The regression reported in column 1 of Table IV indicates (reassuringly) that ownership
restrictions reduce the likelihood of 100 percent American ownership. Affiliates for which sales
to local markets represent large fractions of their total sales are the most likely to be majority but
not 100 percent owned. Inclusion of country/industry and year fixed effects in the regression
reported in column 2 reduces the magnitude and statistical significance of this effect. Ownership
restrictions likewise have little impact on the extent of parent ownership in the specifications that
include country/industry and year fixed effects. The regressions reported in columns 3 and 4
indicate that affiliates obtaining goods (imports from the United States, scaled by total affiliate
sales) from the United States are the most likely to be 100 percent owned by their American
parents. These results suggest that reliance on the local market for inputs and as a destination for
outputs are important criteria in choosing to share ownership.
In addition to local market characteristics, trade with related parties may exert a distinct
effect on the ownership decisions of multinationals. Columns 5 through 8 of Table IV present

15

This ratio is computed as the mean ratio, within an industry, of R&D to sales for each multinational parent
company over the 1982-1997 period.

21

the results of estimating similar specifications in which the independent trade variables are
defined to be the ratio of related party sales to an affiliate’s total sales, and the ratio of imports
from the U.S. parent to an affiliate’s total sales. The results appearing in columns 5 and 6
suggest that affiliates that sell to their parent companies, or to other related affiliates, are more
likely than others to be wholly owned by their parents – although the effect is muted with the
inclusion of country/industry and year fixed effects. Similarly, the regressions presented in
columns 7 and 8 indicate that affiliates that rely heavily on imports from parents are most likely
to be wholly owned, and this statistically significant effect persists with the inclusion of
country/industry and year fixed effects.
Taken together, the results presented in Table IV suggest that affiliates that are embedded
within a worldwide production process are not as amenable to partial ownership as are other
affiliates. One possible interpretation of these results is that the costs of coordination with local
partners are much larger for those affiliates engaging in intrafirm trade. These costs could stem
from anticipated disputes over the selection of suppliers, transfer pricing for inputs and sales, and
whether overall production decisions should be driven by affiliate requirements or U.S. parent
motivations. The apparent conflicts associated with shared ownership appear large with respect
to intrafirm trade decisions. As operational and ownership decisions may or may not be jointly
determined, the analysis presented below employs exogenous shifts in the relative costs of
ownership forms to identify more precisely the relationship between these decisions.
5.2

Differential Coordination Costs over Tax Planning and Technology Transfer
As discussed above, the costs of joint ownership stem from the need to accommodate the

interests of multiple owners and the associated inability to tailor the activities of joint ventures to
meet the needs of any one of the owners. This cost is potentially large for U.S. parents that
would otherwise engage in sophisticated international tax avoidance, since doing so frequently
entails a large number of transactions between parent companies and foreign affiliates designed
to reallocate taxable income away from high-tax jurisdictions and into low-tax jurisdictions.
There is an extensive literature that analyzes patterns of reported profitability and intrafirm trade
by American multinational firms, finding that trade between members of controlled groups

22

appears to be structured in ways that reduce total tax liabilities.16 Very little is known, however,
about the extent to which minority ownership might impede a firm’s ability to reduce tax
liabilities in this way.
Table V analyzes the determinants of affiliate net income. The regression reported in
column one indicates that net income is an increasing function of affiliate assets, increasing at a
rate of 9.05 percent, and a negative function of the product of assets and local tax rates. The –
0.0804 coefficient on the interaction of assets and country tax rates implies that ten percent
higher tax rates reduce profitability by 8.9 percent (.804/9.05 = 0.089). This finding is consistent
with those of the transfer pricing literature, and it persists with the inclusion of industry and year
fixed effects, as reported in column 2.
The regressions reported in Table V are run on the whole sample, including minority
owned, majority owned, and 100 percent owned affiliates. Columns 3 and 4 interact dummy
variables for partial ownership with assets and asset-tax rate interactions, in order to distinguish
the net income determination of partially owned affiliates from that of wholly owned affiliates.
The results suggest that the net incomes of partially owned affiliates are considerably less
sensitive to local tax rates than are net incomes of wholly owned affiliates. The coefficient on
the country tax rate and asset interaction in the regression reported in column 3 is –0.099, while
the same interaction with a partial ownership dummy is 0.063, indicating that almost two thirds
of the tax rate effect disappears when affiliates are partially owned. Similar results appear when
industry and year fixed effects are introduced, in the regression reported in column 4. The
regressions reported in columns 5 and 6 distinguish between minority and majority ownership
and indicate that the reduced sensitivity of net income to local taxes is most pronounced for
minority owned affiliates. These findings therefore suggest that shared ownership, and minority
ownership in particular, comes at the cost of considerably reduced ability to fine-tune affiliate
operations to minimize taxes of the parent’s controlled group. That transfer pricing appears to be
constrained in the presence of minority ownership illuminates the coincident interests of local
owners and governments in constraining aggressive transfer pricing by U.S. multinationals and
provides an intriguing alternative possible justification for ownership restrictions.
16

See, for example, Grubert and Mutti (1991), Harris, Morck, Slemrod and Yeung (1993), Klassen, Lang and
Wolfson (1993), Hines and Rice (1994), Collins, Kemsley, and Lang (1998), and Clausing (2001); this literature is
critically reviewed in Hines (1999).

23

The use of proprietary technology and other intangible assets can be one of the most
difficult operational aspects over which joint venture partners must agree. It is difficult to attach
values to such assets, and it can be difficult for parent companies that own them to retain control
if they are used by joint ventures in which the parent company has only a minority ownership
stake. As a result, parent companies may be very reluctant to license their intangible properties
to joint ventures, despite the high-tech nature of many international joint ventures.
Consequently, it is reasonable to expect that foreign operations that are designed to exploit
intangible property developed in the United States will typically be organized as majority owned
or 100 percent owned affiliates.
Table VI explores the impact of these incentives by analyzing the determinants of royalty
payments to American parent companies. Foreign affiliates using intangible property developed
by their parent companies are required to remit royalties equal to the market value of the
technologies used. While there is some evidence that royalty rates are sensitive to tax planning
opportunities (and not surprisingly, given the inherent vagueness of the market value criterion), it
is believed that firms generally comply with the requirement to pay royalties when intangible
capital is used by foreign affiliates.17 Consequently, royalty payments can be used as indicators
of technology transfer.
Column 1 of Table VI reports the result of a simple logit specification in which the
dependent variable equals one if an affiliate pays a nonzero royalty to its American parent
company, and equals zero otherwise.18 The positive and significant coefficient on the dummy
variable for majority or 100 percent ownership indicates that these majority or wholly owned
affiliates are more likely than minority owned affiliates to receive intangible property from
parent companies. Omitted country, industry, and time attributes may influence the coefficient
on this dummy variable. In the specification reported in column 2, which includes
country/industry and year fixed effects, the coefficient on the majority or whole ownership
dummy increases substantially and remains statistically significant.
If a high degree of ownership particularly facilitates the transfer of intangibles in
industries in which the parent has developed technologies, then the effects of ownership should
17

See, for example, Hines (1995) and Grubert (1998).
Tobit specifications of the determinants of dollar volumes of royalty payments produce results that are similar to
those presented in Table VI.

18

24

be associated with the R&D intensiveness of the affiliate’s industry. Accordingly, column 3 of
Table VI adds a measure of an industry’s R&D intensiveness and this variable interacted with
the ownership measure. The positive and significant coefficients on the industry R&D/sales ratio
and its interaction with the majority or whole ownership dummy, and the reduced size of the
coefficient on the dummy alone, confirm that the likelihood of transferring intangibles is higher
in R&D intensive industries, and that the importance of majority or whole ownership is most
pronounced in R&D intensive industries. The results in column 4 indicate that the interaction
term remains significant when country/industry and year fixed effects are included.
The specifications reported in columns 5-8 repeat the analysis adding a dummy variable
for 100 percent ownership. In the absence of controls for country/industry and year fixed effects,
whole ownership appears to be associated with a slightly reduced probability of paying royalties.
This finding is not robust to the inclusion of these fixed effects, as displayed in column 6, but the
results in columns 7 and 8 indicate that the interaction of whole ownership and R&D
intensiveness has a smaller effect on royalty payments than does the interaction of majority
ownership and R&D intensiveness. Taken together, this evidence is consistent with reluctance
on the part of parent firms to establish joint ventures with minority ownership in situations in
which it would be valuable to exploit intangible capital developed by the parent, and, should a
joint venture be established, to permit the joint venture to use intangible capital owned by the
parent company.
The dimensions upon which conflicts appear to make shared ownership most costly – the
intrafirm trade required for integrated worldwide production processes, the coordination of
international activity to reduce tax obligations, and the transfers of proprietary technology – are
precisely those activities that have risen over the last two decades. Figures 6 and 7 provide
evidence of the changing nature of the relationship between parents and their affiliates for
intrafirm trade and technology transfer, respectively. Figure 6 plots the share of a parent’s
overall exports and imports that are sent to, or received from, their foreign affiliates. In 1982,
U.S. parents relied on their foreign affiliates as a destination for 30.6 percent of their exports, and
that figure rose to 45.8 percent by 1997. Figure 7 illustrates that the ratio of aggregate royalty
payments to sales of foreign affiliates rose from 0.4 percent to 1.0 percent between 1982 and
1994. That trend is consistent across all industries with the exception of industrial machinery
and equipment. In order to isolate the relationship between these aggregate phenomena – the

25

heightened requirements to trade internally, transfer knowledge internally, and take advantage of
tax arbitrage opportunities – and the declining propensity to share ownership, the following
section considers two exogenous changes in the relative costs of sharing ownership.
5.3

Two Experiments
The link between the pattern of increased levels of activities that require coordination,

and the declining use of shared ownership, can be identified through exogenous shifts in the
ability to undertake such activity or the relative costs of using different ownership forms. The
analysis that follows uses two changes in the costs of minority ownership to identify whether, in
fact, at least some of the reduced willingness to share ownership, and the greater incidence of
activities that appear to be associated with higher coordination costs, reflect the same underlying
phenomenon. Specifically, the regressions reported in Tables VII and VIII analyze the impact of
two dramatic policy shifts: the liberalization of host country ownership restrictions during the
1980s and 1990s, and the “10-50 basket” provisions of the U.S. Tax Reform Act of 1986
(TRA86). Both policy shifts encouraged greater majority and whole ownership, the first by
permitting it, the second by penalizing minority ownership after 1986.
Table VII reports regressions that capture the effect of changes in local ownership
restrictions. These complex restrictions are reviewed and summarized by Shatz (2000), which
considers restrictions on the acquisition of majority ownership of local enterprises, and
limitations on the creation of greenfield majority owned enterprises in certain sectors, by
multinational firms for 54 countries from 1986 to 1995.19 From these detailed data, we identify
16 significant liberalizations in our sample and are able to use these liberalizations to explore
their ownership effects at the industry level. Ownership responses to liberalization then
represent the first stage in identifying the link between greater intrafirm trade and increased
internalization through whole ownership.20

19

Specifically, a country is defined to have liberalized ownership restrictions when both the "Acquisition Score" and
the "Sector Score" are both at least 3 (on a scale from 1 to 5). The countries experiencing a liberalization during this
period are Argentina (1990), Australia (1987), Colombia (1992), Ecuador (1991), Finland (1990), Honduras (1993),
Japan (1993), Malaysia (1987), Mexico (1990), Norway (1995), Peru (1992), Philippines (1992), Portugal (1987),
Sweden (1992), Trinidad and Tobago (1994), and Venezuela (1990).
20
In order to address the possible serial correlation in the error terms that may arise in this setting, the OLS
regressions reported in Table VII were also performed with standard errors that were clustered at the
country/industry level. Clustering of the standard errors in this manner did not materially reduce the significance
level of any of the coefficients in these regressions.

26

The first four columns of Table VII present estimated regression coefficients from
specifications in which the dependent variable is the share of all sales attributed to wholly owned
affiliates in each country/industry pair. The sample is restricted to country/industry pairs in
countries that experience ownership liberalizations between 1986 and 1995. In column 1, the
positive and significant coefficient on the post-liberalization dummy variable reflects the impact
of increased adoption of whole ownership subsequent to liberalizations. The inclusion of
country/industry fixed effects in column 2 restricts the estimated effects of liberalizations to
those arising from changes over time; the estimated magnitude of the impact of liberalizations is
reduced only slightly. Columns 3 and 4 consider the differential reaction of industries based on
the intensity of R&D activity in that industry. With and without country/industry fixed effects,
the coefficients reported in columns 3 and 4 indicate that industries with above sample median
R&D-intensity responded most aggressively to the liberalization of ownership restrictions,
suggesting the greater importance of whole ownership to such industries.
The link between changed ownership patterns and changed trade patterns is the focus of
the regression reported in column 5 of Table VII, in which the dependent variable is the share of
affiliates sales made to related parties. The positive and significant coefficient on the share of
affiliate sales made through wholly owned affiliates offers a simple correlation between the
degree of intrafirm trade and internalization through ownership in country/industry pairs. The
inclusion of country/industry fixed effects in column 6 allows for the identification of that
relationship through temporal changes in the reliance on whole ownership. The positive and
significant coefficient reported in column 6 indicates that those country/industry pairs
experiencing greater internalization through ownership also experience greater intrafirm trade.
In part, this result suggests that the increased reliance on whole ownership is not associated with
greater arms-length trade to subcontractors, but rather with greater intrafirm trade.
Columns 7 and 8 of Table VII present instrumental variables (IV) estimates of the link
between intrafirm trade and the establishment of 100 percent owned foreign affiliates. The
method is to use the specification presented in column 4 as the first stage of an IV equation in
which liberalizations are instruments for ownership levels. IV estimation of this relationship,
reported in columns 7 and 8, yields positive and significant coefficients on the predicted values
of shares of sales through wholly owned affiliates; the magnitude of the coefficient is robust to
the inclusion of year-effects as reported in column 8. These IV results confirm that an

27

exogenous change in the ability to own 100 percent of local affiliates is accompanied by a
greater reliance on intrafirm trade. The 0.76 coefficient reported in column 8 is more than ten
times the size of the corresponding coefficient in column 6, suggesting that the presence of
correlated omitted variables reduces the estimated impact of ownership on related party trade in
OLS regressions. This coefficient implies that ten percent greater sales through wholly owned
affiliates increases affiliate sales to related parties by 7.6 percent.
Table VIII employs the increased tax penalties imposed by TRA86 in an analogous
manner to the ownership liberalizations, with the difference that the tax instrument exploits
heterogeneity at the parent level.21 In particular, the segregation of foreign source income
associated with minority ownership positions would penalize minority ownership
disproportionately for those parents facing high average worldwide foreign tax rates for income
generated by their majority and wholly owned affiliates.22 Accordingly, the specifications
presented in columns 1 and 2 of Table VIII establish the link between increased reliance on
whole ownership by American multinationals and their tax positions prior to TRA86. The
positive and significant coefficient on the interaction of the post-TRA86 dummy and the high
average foreign tax rate dummy in column 2 indicates that parents facing the greatest relative tax
costs associated with joint venture activity were those that employed whole ownership most
aggressively.
At the parent level, it is possible to identify the link between ownership decisions and
intrafirm transfers by examining a parent company’s propensity to export to, or import from,
related parties. The regressions reported in columns 3 through 6, and 7 through 10, of Table VIII
explore the degree to which U.S. parents export to related parties and import from related parties,
respectively, as a function of the degree to which they choose to operate through wholly owned
affiliates. Columns 3 and 7 identify a simple positive correlation between intrafirm trade (either
exports to related parties or imports from related parties) and 100 percent ownership of affiliates.

21

As with the results reported in Table VII, standard errors for the OLS regressions in Table VIII were also
calculated allowing for clustering at the parent level to address possible serial correlation. This procedure did not
reduce the significance level of any coefficient except for the coefficient on the interaction term reported in column
2, which loses its statistical significance.
22
Such parents would be most likely to be faced with excess foreign tax credits subsequent to TRA86. Accordingly,
the segregation of foreign source income from lightly taxed minority ownership positions would reduce the
attraction of minority ownership for such parents as they would no longer be able to utilize foreign tax credits
generated from other activities through worldwide averaging. Desai and Hines (1999) elaborate on this point.

28

The inclusion of parent fixed effects in the regressions reported in columns 4 and 8 of Table VIII
permits the effect of whole ownership to be identified only through its temporal variation, but the
estimated impact remains positive and significant in the export equation, if rather less so in the
import equation. This result provides further evidence that increased ownership over affiliates is
associated with greater intrafirm trade and puts to rest one potential concern about the results
presented in Table VII. If firms are shifting from the use of affiliates to contracts with unrelated
parties, the results in Table VII could be confounded by censorship as firms that historically used
joint ventures exit the sample because they shift to exclusively using contractual relations.
Given the results with parent fixed effects, however, this kind of censorship does not appear to
be problematic.23
Columns 5 and 9 of Table VIII present IV estimates of the link between intrafirm trade
and affiliate ownership by using the right hand side variables of column 2 as instruments for
ownership in trade equations. The estimated effect of sales by wholly owned affiliates is positive
and significant in the export equation, and positive but insignificant in the import equation. The
inclusion of year effects in these specifications, the results of which are reported in columns 6
and 10, reduces the magnitude and statistical significance of the coefficient on whole ownership
in the export equation, while having the opposite effect on the coefficient in the import equation.
Firms have incentives to select ownership levels and intrafirm trading patterns that
correspond to profit maximizing combinations. Assuming that observed behavior is in fact
generated by profit maximization, then it follows from the analysis reviewed in section 3 that the
impact of ownership on trade is identical to the effect of trade on ownership. Consequently, the
IV trade results reported in Tables VII and VIII are consistent with the OLS ownership results
reported in Table IV. Hence, the OLS pattern that affiliates that trade with related parties are
more likely to be wholly owned is not merely the byproduct of correlated omitted variables.
Indeed, the opposite appears to be the case, since all of the IV results in Table VIII – those
reported in columns 5, 6, 9, and 10 – indicate much stronger effects of 100 percent ownership
than do their OLS counterparts reported in columns 3, 4, 7, and 8. This is consistent with the
23

As long as a multinational firm has any affiliates abroad, they remain in the sample further attenuating this
concern. More generally, there is no reason to believe that the propensity to exit the sample in this manner is
correlated with the instrument used in Table VII. Finally, logit analysis of the propensity of parent company exit
reveals that those firms that leave the BEA sample exhibit neither larger growth in the share of arm’s length trade in

29

results reported in Table VII, obtained in a very different way, indicating that omitted variables if
anything tend to make simple OLS regressions understate the effect of ownership on intrafirm
trade, and intrafirm trade on ownership.
5.4

Managing Risk through Ownership Shares
While it is infeasible to consider every possible alternative motivation for establishing an

international joint venture rather than a wholly owned foreign affiliate, it is useful to analyze the
role of joint ventures in attenuating local risk by reducing the investment exposure of parent
firms. If shared ownership is driven by the desire to mitigate business risks, then the declining
incidence of shared ownership could be traced to the reduction in environmental risks over the
last two decades. In order to identify the link between risk management and the choice of
organizational form, Table IX analyzes the relationship between affiliate size and ownership
forms and a measure of the expropriation risk.24 If risk management motivates ownership
decisions, then interactions between measures of expropriation risk and ownership form should
exhibit predictable signs.
Columns 1 and 2 of Table IX report regressions in which the dependent variable is
affiliate assets at time of entry. The estimated coefficient on the majority or wholly owned
dummy variable, reported in column one, indicates that the assets of minority owned affiliates
exceed those of majority or wholly owned affiliates by $50.9 million. The inclusion of
country/industry fixed effects in the regression reported in column 2 reduces the estimated size
difference to $43.0 million. The regressions reported in columns 3 and 4 indicate that wholly
owned affiliates are smaller than majority owned affiliates, and that these differences are robust
to the inclusion of country and industry fixed effects.
The apparent larger size of minority owned affiliates can be interpreted in multiple ways.
In particular, the larger size could be interpreted as reflecting the decision to split ownership for
larger projects in an effort to manage the attendant risks. In order to test this hypothesis, the
specifications in columns 5 through 8 include a measure of the risk of expropriation, and interact
that measure with ownership form dummies. In these specifications, there is no significant
the year before exit, nor larger growth in the use of joint ventures in the year before exit, than do firms that remain in
the data.

30

differential responsiveness of investment levels to expropriation risk based on ownership levels,
suggesting that risk management is not a primary motivator in choosing ownership forms. The
analysis presented in Appendix Table I replicates this analysis with paid-in-capital owned by the
U.S. parent as the dependent variable and similarly finds no systematic relationship between
investment levels, ownership forms, and expropriation risk.
6.

Conclusion
International joint ventures offer multinational firms the opportunity to make profitable

use of market-specific capabilities of joint venture partners, may facilitate cooperation with
foreign governments, and offer the prospect of generating knowledge that could be valuable in
future business operations. These advantages may be offset by the costs implicit in split
ownership of the same assets, and the resulting inability to exploit fully certain fixed assets
developed by parent firms, as well as any opportunities to coordinate worldwide operations
through financial and other exchanges.
The evidence indicates that American firms were decreasingly likely to establish their
foreign affiliates as joint ventures over the 1982-1997 period. In part, this trend reflects
changing U.S. tax policies and legal requirements in foreign countries – but the evidence
provided in the paper suggests a deeper unease with international joint ventures that stems from
their higher associated coordination costs. The evidence indicates that, in settings characterized
by close coordination between foreign affiliates and American parent companies, firms are much
less likely than in other settings to establish new ventures with minority parent ownership.
Specifically, it appears that international production coordination, tax planning, and the use of
intangible property are all much more easily executed with majority or wholly owned foreign
affiliates and that firms establish their foreign affiliates cognizant of this difference. This
conclusion is strengthened by evidence that regulatory and tax changes that encourage whole
ownership of affiliates are accompanied by greater trade between affiliates and related parties.
The reduced significance of distance and nationality that accompanies globalization
creates opportunities but also strong competitive pressures for multinational enterprises. While
opportunities to trade and communicate between continents more reliably and quickly, and at
24

The index employed in Table IX measures the risk of “outright confiscation” or “forced nationalization” and is
produced by the International Country Risk Guide. This index is the average of the April and October monthly

31

reduced cost, enhance the attractiveness of international alliances, they likewise increase the
return to coordinating operations within multinational firms. The impact of globalization on
international joint venture activity depends, therefore, on the relative strength of these two
forces. The evidence to date indicates that American firms respond to recent developments by
reducing their joint venture activity, preferring instead to strengthen control over their foreign
affiliates.
The reduced willingness of multinationals to share ownership also carries implications
for countries considering policies related to foreign direct investment. The results in the paper
regarding the transfer pricing activities of multinational firms suggest that local owners reduce
the aggressive relocation of profits in response to tax incentives. Consequently, policies related
to ownership restrictions have indirect implications for the degree to which multinational firms
adjust transfer prices to move profits out of a country. In addition, many of the presumed
benefits of foreign direct investment - direct economic linkages and indirect spillovers - may be
attenuated by the reduced desire of multinationals to share ownership and by the underlying
trend to decentralize production processes around the world. As such, the quest for control by
multinationals over their worldwide operations may fundamentally alter the nature of the benefits
of these investments to host countries.

index over the 1982-1995 period. The index is scaled between 0 and 10, and lower scores reflect higher risks.

32

References
Aghion, Philippe and Jean Tirole, 1994, “The Management of Innovation,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 109, 1185-1209.
Anand, Bharat and Tarun Khanna, 2000, “The Structure of Licensing Contracts,” Journal
of Industrial Economics 48, 103-135.
Anderson, Erin, 1990, “Two Firms, One Frontier: On Assessing Joint Venture
Performance,” Sloan Management Review 31, 19-30.
Asiedu, Elizabeth and Hadi Salehi Esfahani, 2001, “Ownership Structure in Foreign
Direct Investment Projects” Review of Economics and Statistics 83, 647-662.
Balakrishnan, Srinivasan and Mitchell P. Koza, 1993, “Information Asymmetry, Adverse
Selection, and Joint-Ventures: Theory and Evidence,” Journal of Economic
Behavior and Organization 20, 99-117.
Beamish, Paul W. and John C. Banks, 1987, “Equity Joint Ventures and the Theory of the
Multinational Enterprise,” Journal of International Business Studies 18, 1-16.
Bhattacharya, Sudipto, Jacob Glazer and David E. M. Sappington, 1992, “Licensing and
the Sharing of Knowledge in Research Joint Ventures,” Journal of Economic
Theory 56, 43-69.
Blomström, Magnus and Mario Zejan, 1991, “Why Do Multinational Firms Seek Out
Joint Ventures?,” Journal of International Development 3, 53-63.
Caves, Richard E., 1996, Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis (second
edition) (Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press).
Clausing, Kimberly A., 2001, “The Impact of Transfer Pricing on Intrafirm Trade,” in
James R. Hines Jr., ed., International Taxation and Multinational Activity
(Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press), 173-194.
Collins, Julie, Deen Kemsley and Mark Lang, 1998, “Cross-Jurisdictional Income
Shifting and Earnings Valuation,” Journal of Accounting Research 36, 209-230.
Contractor, Farok J., 1990, “Ownership Patterns of U.S. Joint Ventures Abroad and the
Liberalization of Foreign Government Regulations in the 1980s: Evidence from
the Benchmark Surveys,” Journal of International Business Studies 21, 55-73.
Contractor, Farok J. and Peter Lorange, 1988, Cooperative Strategies in International
Business (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books).
Crampton, Peter, Robert Gibbons and Paul Klemperer, 1987, “Dissolving a Partnership

Efficiently,” Econometrica 55, 615-632.
Curhan, Joan P., William H. Davidson and Rajan Suri, 1977, Tracing the Multinationals
(Cambridge, MA: Ballinger).
Desai, Mihir A. and James R. Hines Jr., 1999, “Basket Cases: Tax Incentives and
International Joint Venture Participation by American Multinational Firms,”
Journal of Public Economics 71, 379-402.
Feenstra, Robert C, 1998, “Integration of Trade and Disintegration of Production in the
Global Economy,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 31-50.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson, 1996a, “Globalization, Outsourcing, and
Wage Inequality,” American Economic Review 86, 240-245.
Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson, 1996b, “Foreign Investment, Outsourcing
and Relative Wages,” in Robert C. Feenstra, Gene M. Grossman and Douglas A.
Irwin, eds., Political Economy of Trade Policy: Essays in Honor of Jagdish
Bhagwati (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 89-127.
Franko, Lawrence G., 1971, Joint Venture Survival in Multinational Corporations (New
York: Praeger).
Franko, Lawrence G., 1989, “Use of Minority and 50-50 Joint Ventures by United States
Multinationals During the 1970s: The Interaction of Host Country Policies and
Corporate Strategies,” Journal of International Business Studies 20, 19-40.
Gandal, Neil and Suzanne Scotchmer, 1993, “Coordinating Research through Research
Joint Ventures,” Journal of Public Economics 51, 173-194.
Gatignon, Hubert; and Erin Anderson, 1988, “The Multinational Corporation's Degree of
Control over Foreign Subsidiaries: An Empirical Test of a Transaction Cost
Explanation,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 4, 305-36.
Geringer, J. Michael and Louis Herbert, 1991, “Measuring Performance of International
Joint Ventures,” Journal of International Business Studies 22, 249-263.
Ghemawat, Pankaj, Michael E. Porter and Richard A. Rawlinson, 1985, “Patterns of
International Coalition Activity,” in Michael Porter, ed., Competition in Global
Industries (Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Publishing), 345-365.
Gomes-Casseres, Benjamin, 1989, “Ownership Structures of Foreign Subsidies: Theory
and Evidence,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 11, 1-25.
Gomes-Casseres, Benjamin, 1990, “Firm Ownership Preferences and Host Government
Restrictions: An Integrated Approach,” Journal of Economic Behavior and

Organization 21, 1-22.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart, 1986, “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership:
A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economics 55,
279-306.
Grubert, Harry, 1998, “Taxes and the Division of Foreign Operating Income Among
Royalties, Interest, Dividends and Earnings,” Journal of Public Economics 68,
269-290.
Grubert, Harry and John Mutti, 1991, “Taxes, Tariffs and Transfer Pricing in
Multinational Corporate Decision Making,” Review of Economics and Statistics
73, 285-293.
Hanson, Gordon H., Raymond J. Mataloni, Jr. and Matthew J. Slaughter, 2001,
“Expansion Strategies of U.S. Multinational Firms,” NBER Working Paper No.
8433.
Harris, David, Randall Morck, Joel Slemrod and Bernard Yeung, 1993, “Income Shifting
in U.S. Multinational Corporations,” in Alberto Giovannini, R. Glenn Hubbard
and Joel Slemrod, eds., Studies in International Taxation (Chicago, IL: The
University of Chicago Press), 277-307.
Hart, Oliver and John Moore, 1990, “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,”
Journal of Political Economy 98, 1119-1158.
Hart, Oliver and John Moore, 1998, “Cooperatives vs. Outside Ownership,” NBER
Working Paper No. 6421.
Henisz, Witold J., 2000, “The Institutional Environment for Multinational Investment,”
Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 16, 334-364.
Hennart, Jean-François, 1991, “The Transaction Costs Theory of Joint Ventures: An
Empirical Study of Japanese Subsidiaries in the United States,” Management
Science 37, 483-497.
Hines, James R., Jr., 1995, “Taxes, Technology Transfer, and the R&D Activities of
Multinational Firms,” in Martin Feldstein, James R. Hines Jr., and R. Glenn
Hubbard, eds., The Effects of Taxation on Multinational Corporations (Chicago,
IL: The University of Chicago Press), 225-252.
Hines, James R., Jr., 1999, “Lessons from Behavorial Responses to International
Taxation,” National Tax Journal 52, 305-322.
Hines, James R., Jr. and Eric M. Rice, 1994, “Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax and Havens
and American Business,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 149-182.

Hladik, Karen J., 1985, International Joint Ventures: An Economic Analysis of U.S.
Foreign Business Partnerships (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books).
Holmstrom, Bengt, 1982, “Moral Hazard in Teams,” Bell Journal of Economics 13, 324340.
Horst, Thomas, 1971, “The Theory of the Multinational Firm: Optimal Behavior under
Different Tariff and Tax Rates,” Journal of Political Economy 79, 1059-1072.
Kamien, Morton I., Eitan Muller and Israel Zang, 1992, “Research Joint Ventures and
R&D Cartels,” American Economic Review 82, 1293-1306.
Kant, Chander, 1990, “Multinational Firms and Government Revenues,” Journal of
Public Economics 42, 135-147.
Klassen, Kenneth, Mark Lang and Mark Wolfson, 1993, “Geographic Income Shifting by
Multinational Corporations in Response to Tax Rate Changes,” Journal of
Accounting Research 31, 141-173.
Klein, Benjamin, Robert Crawford and Armen A. Alchian, 1978, “Vertical Integration,
Appropriable Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process,” Journal of Law
and Economics 21, 297-326.
Kogut, Bruce, 1991, “Joint Ventures and the Option to Expand and Acquire,”
Management Science 37, 19-33.
Legros, Patrick and Steven A. Matthews, 1993, “Efficient and Nearly Efficient
Partnerships,” Review of Economic Studies 68, 599-611.
Neary, J. Peter and K. Roberts, 1980, “The Theory of Household Behaviour under
Rationing,” European Economic Review 13, 25-42.
Ohmae, Kenichi, 1989, “The Global Logic of Strategic Alliances,” Harvard Business
Review 67, 143-152.
Oxley, Joanne E., 1997, "Appropriability Hazards and Governance in Strategic Alliances:
A Transaction Cost Approach,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 13,
387-409.
Ramachandran, Vijaya, 1993, "Technology Transfer, Firm Ownership, and Investment in
Human Capital,” Review of Economics and Statistics 75, 664-670.
Rey, Patrick and Jean Tirole, 1999, “Divergence of Objectives and the Governance of
Joint Ventures,” Working Paper, Institut d’Economie Industrielle, University of
Toulouse.

Shatz, Howard, 2000, “The Location of U.S. Multinational Affiliates,” Harvard
University Ph.D. Thesis.
Stopford, John M., and K. Haberich, 1978, “Ownership and Control of Foreign
Operations,” in Michel Ghertman and J. Leontiades, eds., European Research in
International Business (Amsterdam: North-Holland), 141-167.
Stopford, John M. and Louis T. Wells, 1972, Managing the Multinational Enterprise
(New York: Basic Books).
Whinston, Michael D., 2002, “On the Transaction Cost Determinants of Vertical
Integration,” Working Paper, Northwestern University.
Williamson, Oliver, 1975, Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications
(New York: The Free Press).
Zeile, William J., 1997, “U.S. Intrafirm Trade in Goods,” Survey of Current Business
February, 23-38.

Figure 1a
Percent Of Affiliates, By Ownership Restriction And Year

Figure 1b
Percent Of Affiliates, By Per Capita Income And Year

Minority Owned

Minority Owned

35%

40%

30%

35%
30%

25%

25%

20%

20%
15%

15%

10%

10%

5%

5%

0%

0%
Most illiberal quartile

Second quartile

Third quartile

Lowest

Most liberal quartile

Majority Owned

Second

Third

Highest

Third

Highest

Third

Highest

Majority Owned

35%

35%

30%

30%

25%

25%

20%

20%

15%

15%

10%

10%

5%

5%

0%

0%
Most illiberal quartile

Second quartile

Third quartile

Most liberal quartile

Lowest

Wholly-Owned

Second
Wholly-Owned

90%

90%

80%

80%

70%

70%

60%

60%

50%

50%

40%

40%
Most illiberal quartile
1982

Second quartile
1989

Third quartile
1994

Most liberal quartile
1997

Notes: For each panel, countries are sorted into quartiles based on the nature of their ownership restrictions as measured in Shatz
(2000) and described in the text. The "most illiberal quartile" consists of countries imposing the most stringent restrictions on
foreign ownership (particularly whole ownership) of local enterprises. The "most liberal quartile" consists of countries imposing
the fewest (or no) restrictions on foreign ownership (particularly whole ownership) of local enterprises. The three panels represent
the share of all affiliates with minority ownership, majority ownership and whole ownership by U.S. parents, respectively, for 1982,
1989, 1994 and 1997. Wholly owned affiliates are those affiliates that are 100 percent owned by an American parent company.
Majority owned affiliates are those affiliates in which the largest ownership claim by an American parent exceeds 50 percent and is
less than 100 percent; minority owned affiliates are those affiliates in which the largest ownership claim by an American parent
company is at least 10 percent but not more than 50 percent.

Lowest
1982

Second
1989

1994

1997

Notes: For each panel, countries are sorted into quartiles based on their average GNP per capita from 1982 to 1997. The "lowest"
quartile consists of countries with the lowest average GNP per capita from 1982 to 1997. The "highest" quartile consists of
countries with the highest average GNP per capita from 1982 to 1997. The three panels represent the share of all affiliates with
minority ownership, majority ownership and whole ownership by U.S. parents, respectively, in 1982, 1989, 1994 and 1997.
Wholly owned affiliates are those affiliates that are 100 percent owned by an American parent company. Majority owned affiliates
are those affiliates in which the largest ownership claim by an American parent exceeds 50 percent and is less than 100 percent;
minority owned affiliates are those affiliates in which the largest ownership claim by an American parent company is at least 10
percent but not more than 50 percent.

Figure 2: The Use of Ownership Forms by Industry, 1982, 1989, 1994
100%
90%
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%

Petroleum

Food
Chemical
Primary and
Industrial
Electronic and Transportation
Other
Manufacturing Manufacturing Fabricated Machinery and Other Electric Equipment Manufacturing
Metal
Equipment
Equipment Manufacturing
Manufacturing
Manufacturing

1982

1989

Wholesale
Trade

Other Finance,
Insurance, and
Real Estate

Services

Wholly

Majority

Minority

Wholly

Majority

Minority

Wholly

Majority

Minority

Wholly

Majority

Minority

Wholly

Majority

Minority

Wholly

Majority

Minority

Wholly

Majority

Minority

Wholly

Majority

Minority

Wholly

Majority

Minority

Wholly

Majority

Minority

Wholly

Majority

Minority

Wholly

Majority

Minority

0%

Other
Industries

1994

Notes: The bars represent the share of affiliates with minority, majority and whole ownership by U.S. parents by industry for 1982, 1989 and 1994. Wholly owned affiliates are those affiliates
that are 100 percent owned by an American parent company. Majority owned affiliates are those affiliates in which the largest ownership claim by an American parent exceeds 50 percent and
is less than 100 percent; minority owned affiliates are those affiliates in which the largest ownership claim by an American parent company is at least 10 percent but not more than 50 percent.

Figure 4: The Changing Distribution of Partial
Ownership, 1982, 1989, 1994

Figure 3: The Changing Use of Ownership Levels
by Parents with more than 5 affiliates

0.3

45%

0.25

40%

0.1

20%

0.05

15%

0

100%

>=40% and <50%

>80%
and
<100%

>=30% and <40%

>0% and >20%
>40%
>60%
<=20%
and
and
and
<=40% <=60% <=80%

>=20% and <30%

0%

>=10% and <20%

0%

1982

5%

1989

1994

10%

Ownership Level

Share of Parents with Affiliates that are Wholly Owned
1982

1982

1989

1994

>=90% and <100%

25%

>=80% and <90%

0.15

>=70% and <80%

30%

>=60% and <70%

0.2

>=50% and <60%

35%

1989

1994

1997

Notes: Each bar represents the share of parents in a given year that wholly own a
particular fraction of their affiliates. The sample is restricted to those parents with at
least five affiliates.

Notes: For each year, the histogram depicts the distribution of partial ownership shares of
the largest U.S. parent claim. The bars represent ratios in which the numerator is the number
of affiliates owned within the indicated range of ownership by American parents, and the
denominator is the total number of affiliates owned less than 100 percent by American
parents in that year.

Figure 5a
Sources of Inputs and Destination of Sales by Organizational Form

Figure 5b
Related Party Exchanges

Average Ratio of Local Sales to Total Sales

Average Share of Total Sales Made to Related Parties

80%

35.0%
30.0%

75%

25.0%
20.0%

70%

15.0%
65%

10.0%
5.0%

60%

0.0%
Wholly Owned Affiliates

55%

Majority Owned Affiliates

Minority Owned Affiliates

Average Ratio of Goods Imported from U.S Parent to Total Sales
50%

12.0%
10.0%

45%
Wholly Owned Affiliates

Majority Owned Affiliates

Minority Owned Affiliates

8.0%
6.0%

Average Ratio of Goods Imported from U.S. to Total Sales

4.0%

12%

2.0%
10%

0.0%
Wholly Owned Affiliates

8%

Majority Owned Affiliates

Minority Owned Affiliates

Average Ratio of Goods Exported to U.S Parent to Total Sales
12.0%

6%

10.0%
8.0%

4%
6.0%
4.0%

2%

2.0%
0%

0.0%
Wholly Owned Affiliates
1982

Majority Owned Affiliates
1989

1994

Minority Owned Affiliates
1997

Notes: The top panel displays, by ownership form, the ratio of local sales to total sales for affiliates for 1982, 1989, 1994, and 1997.
The bottom panel displays, by ownership form, the ratio of imports from the U.S. to total sales for affiliates for 1982, 1989, 1994,
and 1997. Wholly owned affiliates are those affiliates that are 100 percent owned by an American parent company. Majority
owned affiliates are those affiliates in which the largest ownership claim by an American parent exceeds 50 percent and is less than
100 percent; minority owned affiliates are those affiliates in which the largest ownership claim by an American parent company is
at least 10 percent but not more than 50 percent. Data on the destination of affiliate sales are unavailable for minority owned
affiliates.

Wholly Owned Affiliates
1982

Majority Owned Affiliates
1989

1994

Minority Owned Affiliates
1997

Notes: The top panel displays, by ownership form, the ratio of sales to related parties to total sales for affiliates for 1982, 1989,
1994, and 1997. The middle panel displays, by ownership form, the ratio of imports from the U.S parent to total sales for affiliates
for 1982, 1989, 1994, and 1997. The bottom panel displays, by ownership form, the ratio of exports to the U.S. parent to total sales
for affiliates for 1982, 1989, 1994, and 1997. Wholly owned affiliates are those affiliates that are 100 percent owned by an
American parent company. Majority owned affiliates are those affiliates in which the largest ownership claim by an American
parent exceeds 50 percent and is less than 100 percent; minority owned affiliates are those affiliates in which the largest ownership
claim by an American parent company is at least 10 percent but not more than 50 percent. Data on the destination of affiliate sales
are unavailable for minority owned affiliates and data on related party trade are unavailable for minority owned affiliates in nonbenchmark years.

Figure 6: The Reliance on Intrafirm Trade for
U.S. Multinational Parents, 1982-1997

Figure 7: Ratio of Royalty Payments to Sales of
Multinational Affiliates, by Industry and Year

55%
Industrial Machinery and Equipment

Services

50%

Chemical Manufacturing

45%

Other Manufacturing

Wholesale Trade
40%
Food Manufacturing

Electronic and Other Electric Equipment
Manufacturing

35%

Primary & Fabricated Metal Manufacturing

30%

Other Industries

Transportation Equipment Manufacturing

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

25%

1994
1989

Petroleum

1982
All Industries

Share of U.S. Parent Exports Sent to their Foreign Affiliates
Share of U.S. Parent Imports Sent from their Foreign Affiliates

Notes: The lines depict shares of U. S. parent exports and imports associated with their
foreign affiliates.

0.0% 0.5% 1.0% 1.5% 2.0% 2.5% 3.0% 3.5% 4.0% 4.5%

Notes: The bars represent the ratio of royalty payments from affiliates to their U.S. parents to sales
by those affiliates, by industry, for 1982, 1989, and 1994.

Table I
Descriptive Statistics by Organizational Form
Benchmark Years
1982
Number of Affiliates
Wholly Owned Affiliates
Majority Owned Affiliates
Minority Owned Affiliates

1989

13,429
1,830
3,319

1994

14,661
1,596
2,637

1997

16,495
1,961
2,441

10,642
1,192
1,396

Median Sales
Wholly Owned Affiliates
Majority Owned Affiliates
Minority Owned Affiliates

$
$
$

10,267
12,982
12,476

$
$
$

12,511
13,448
14,120

$
$
$

13,489
16,839
16,572

$
$
$

41,058
44,892
46,653

Median Assets
Wholly Owned Affiliates
Majority Owned Affiliates
Minority Owned Affiliates

$
$
$

9,445
10,413
11,544

$
$
$

13,091
12,442
13,684

$
$
$

14,045
16,369
15,382

$
$
$

44,202
46,515
58,786

Median Employees
Wholly Owned Affiliates
Majority Owned Affiliates
Minority Owned Affiliates

70
155
87

59
117
70

61
116
94

1982-1989

1989-1994

Entry Rate
Wholly Owned Affiliates
Majority Owned Affiliates
Minority Owned Affiliates

75.1%
60.5%
54.2%

57.7%
71.1%
54.0%

Exit Rate
Wholly Owned Affiliates
Majority Owned Affiliates
Minority Owned Affiliates

64.8%
64.4%
79.0%

45.2%
48.3%
52.7%

124
258
182

Notes: The top panel provides the number count, median sales, median assets and median employees for all affiliates of U.S.
multinationals in the sample by ownership form of the affiliate for 1982, 1989, 1994 and 1997. In 1982, 1989, and 1994,
Benchmark Surveys were conducted and, consequently, the cutoff for inclusion in the sample is lower than other years as
discussed in the text. Wholly owned affiliates are those affiliates that are 100 percent owned by an American parent company.
Majority owned affiliates are those affiliates in which the largest ownership claim by an American parent exceeds 50 percent and
is less than 100 percent; minority owned affiliates are those affiliates in which the largest ownership claim by an American parent
company is at least 10 percent but not more than 50 percent. The bottom panel reports entry rates and exit rates between
Benchmark Surveys by ownership form. Entry rates are defined as the ratio of affiliates appearing for the first time during the
period but not in the beginning year to all affiliates appearing in the beginning year. Exit rates are defined as the ratio of affiliates
leaving the sample during the period to all affiliates appearing in the beginning year.

Table II
Determinants of Ownership at Entry: Whole vs. Partial Ownership
Dependent Variable: Dummy for Whole Ownership vs. Partial Ownership
(1)
Constant

0.4482
(0.0348)

Ownership Restrictions Dummy

0.8874
(0.0403)

(2)

(3)

(4)

0.4461
(0.0453)
0.3502
(0.1181)

Absolute Value of Difference of
Median Country Tax Rates from U.S.
Statutory Rate

(5)

(6)

0.7106
(0.0494)

(7)

(8)

0.8956
(0.0534)

(9)

(10)

0.8307
(0.0550)

1.3237
(0.5764)

0.8882
(0.0427)

0.3565
(0.1182)

0.8097
(0.0432)

0.3097
(0.1188)

0.7972
(0.0433)

0.3089
(0.1189)

0.7931
(0.0437)

0.2274
(0.0919)

0.0154
(0.2073)

2.3781
(0.7518)

0.1573
(0.2090)

2.3580
(0.7530)

0.1461
(0.2097)

2.3561
(0.7529)

0.2113
(0.2108)

1.7744
(0.5556)

-0.0145
(0.0010)

-0.0113
(0.0015)

-0.0172
(0.0011)

-0.0110
(0.0016)

-0.0157
(0.0011)

-0.0139
(0.0012)

-0.3601
(0.0380)

0.0430
(0.0548)

-0.3778
(0.0382)

-0.3285
(0.0395)

2.2000
(0.4814)

3.0577
(0.5063)
N
Y
Y

Number of Other Countries Operated
in by Controlled Group
Same Industry as Parent Dummy

R&D/Sales Ratio for Industry

Country/Industry Fixed Effects?
Country Fixed Effects?
Year Fixed Effects?

N
N
N

Y
N
Y

N
N
N

Y
N
Y

N
N
N

Y
N
Y

N
N
N

Y
N
Y

N
N
N

No. of Obs.

18,108

14,016

18,106

14,015

18,106

14,015

18,106

14,015

17,989

17,989

Log Likelihood

-9,809

-5,229

-9,808

-5,223

-9,710

-5,196

-9,665

-5,196

-9,582

-9,197

Notes: The dependent variable equals one if an affiliate is wholly owned at entry and equals zero if an affiliate is partially owned at entry. The specifications in columns 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 are estimated as
logits while the specifications in columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 are conditional logits with country/industry and year fixed effects. The specification in column 10 is estimated as a logit using dummies to
control for country and year fixed effects. "Ownership Restrictions Dummy" equals one if two of the measures of restrictions on foreign ownership as measured by Shatz (2000) are above three on a
scale of one to five and is zero otherwise. "Absolute Value of Difference of Median Country Tax Rates from U.S. Statutory Rate" is the absolute value of the difference between the median tax rate
faced by an affiliate in a country and the U.S. statutory rate in a given year. "Number of Other Countries Operated in by Controlled Group" for an affiliate is the number of other countries in which the
affiliate's parent has an affiliate. "Same Industry as Parent Dummy" equals one if the affiliate is in the same industry group as the parent and zero otherwise. "R&D/Sales Ratio for Industry" is the
average ratio of R&D expenditures to sales for the parents in the industry of the affiliate as measured by domestic parent spending on R&D and domestic parent sales. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table III
Determinants of Ownership at Entry: Majority vs. Minority Ownership
Dependent Variable: Dummy for Whole Ownership and Majority Ownership vs. Minority Ownership
(1)
Constant

1.0643
(0.0389)

Ownership Restrictions Dummy

0.9295
(0.0465)

(2)

(3)

(4)

1.0511
(0.0519)
0.4265
(0.1352)

Absolute Value of Difference of Median
Country Tax Rates from U.S. Statutory
Rate

(5)

(6)

1.4401
(0.0575)

(7)

(8)

1.6259
(0.0630)

2.9607
(1.0452)

0.8233
(0.0501)

0.3542
(0.1367)

0.8094
(0.0503)

0.3547
(0.1368)

0.8052
(0.0508)

0.2277
(0.1045)

0.0945
(0.2465)

1.6714
(0.9044)

0.3027
(0.2502)

1.5888
(0.9106)

0.2954
(0.2510)

1.6037
(0.9108)

0.3934
(0.2534)

1.3604
(0.6518)

-0.0202
(0.0012)

-0.0174
(0.0018)

-0.0228
(0.0012)

-0.0164
(0.0018)

-0.0206
(0.0013)

-0.0202
(0.0013)

-0.3569
(0.0465)

0.1430
(0.0681)

-0.3750
(0.0467)

-0.3455
(0.0483)

1.9785
(0.5914)

3.0430
(0.6214)

N
N
N

N
Y
Y

R&D/Sales Ratio for Industry

Y
N
Y

1.5561
(0.0651)

0.4348
(0.1354)

Same Industry as Parent Dummy

N
N
N

(10)

0.9356
(0.0493)

Number of Other Countries Operated in
by Controlled Group

Country/Industry Fixed Effects?
Country Fixed Effects?
Year Fixed Effects?

(9)

N
N
N

Y
N
Y

N
N
N

Y
N
Y

N
N
N

Y
N
Y

No. of Obs.

18,108

11,902

18,106

11,901

18,106

11,901

18,106

11,901

17,989

17,964

Log Likelihood

-7,342

-3,509

-7,342

-3,507

-7,198

-3,460

-7,168

-3,458

-7,079

-6,750

Notes: The dependent variable equals one if the affiliate is wholly owned or majority owned at entry and equals zero if an affiliate is minority owned at entry. The specifications in columns 1, 3, 5, 7 and
9 are estimated as logits while the specifications in columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 are conditional logits with country/industry and year fixed effects. The specification in column 10 is estimated as a logit using
dummies to control for country and year fixed effects. "Ownership Restrictions Dummy" equals one if two of the measures of restrictions on foreign ownership as measured by Shatz (2000) are above
three on a scale of one to five and equals zero otherwise. "Absolute Value of Difference of Median Country Tax Rates from U.S. Statutory Rate" is the absolute value of the difference between the
median tax rate faced by an affiliate in a country and the U.S. statutory rate in a given year. "Number of Other Countries Operated in by Controlled Group" for an affiliate is the number of other countries
in which the affiliate's parent has an affiliate. "Same Industry as Parent Dummy" equals one if the affiliate is in the same industry group as the parent and zero otherwise. "R&D/Sales Ratio for Industry"
is the average ratio of R&D expenditures to sales for the parents in the industry of the affiliate as measured by domestic parent spending and domestic parent sales. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table IV
Determinants of Ownership at Entry: Reliance on Local Markets and Related Party Trade
Dependent Variable: Dummy for Whole Ownership vs. Majority Ownership
(1)

(2)

(3)

Constant

1.6677
(0.0768)

Ownership Restrictions
Dummy

0.6800
(0.0599)

0.1199
(0.1879)

0.6732
(0.0607)

Ratio of Local Sales to
Total Sales

-0.2466
(0.0720)

-0.0219
(0.1004)

1.5984
(0.0784)

Ratio of Goods Imported
from U.S. to Total Sales

Country/Industry Fixed
Effects?
Year Fixed Effects?

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Constant

1.4275
(0.0535)

0.1146
(0.1928)

Ownership Restrictions
Dummy

0.6873
(0.0600)

0.1306
(0.1879)

0.6928
(0.0603)

0.1563
(0.1916)

-0.2456
(0.0727)

-0.0180
(0.1013)

Ratio of Related Party Sales to 0.3103
(0.0877)
Total Sales

0.1999
(0.1156)

0.3334
(0.0887)

0.1965
(0.1166)

0.8857
(0.1579)

0.7509
(0.2074)

Ratio of Imports from Parent
to Total Sales

0.8911
(0.1510)

0.6801
(0.1833)

N

Y

N

Y

N

Y

N

Y

No. of Obs.

14,484

8,673

14,291

8,534

Log Likelihood

-5,181

-2,510

-5,096

-2,458

Country/Industry Fixed
Effects?
Year Fixed Effects?

1.3489
(0.0547)

N

Y

N

Y

N

Y

N

Y

No. of Obs.

14,484

8,673

14,418

8,629

Log Likelihood

-5,180

-2,509

-5,131

-2,484

Notes: The dependent variable equals one if an affiliate is wholly owned at entry and equals zero if the largest ownership claim by an American parent is between 50 and 100 percent at entry.
The specifications in columns 1, 3, 5, and 7 are estimated as logits while the specifications in columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 are conditional logits with country/industry fixed effects. "Ownership
Restrictions Dummy" equals one if two of the measures of restrictions on foreign ownership as measured by Shatz (2000) are above three on a scale of one to five and equals zero otherwise.
"Ratio of Local Sales to Total Sales" is the ratio of local sales to total affiliate sales. "Ratio of Goods Imported from U.S. to Total Sales" is the ratio of imports from the U.S. to total affiliate
sales. "Ratio of Related Party Sales to Total Sales" is the ratio of sales to related parties to total affiliate sales. "Ratio of Imports from Parent to Total Sales" is the ratio of imports from the U.S.
parent to total affiliate sales. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table V
Organizational Form, Profitability and Coordination of Tax Activity
Dependent Variable: Net Income
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Assets

0.0905
(0.0046)

1.0479
(0.0845)

0.1048
(0.0060)

1.0509
(0.0862)

0.1048
(0.0060)

1.0502
(0.0849)

Country Tax Rate Interacted with Assets

-0.0804
(0.0120)

-0.0951
(0.0124)

-0.0991
(0.0170)

-0.1181
(0.0165)

-0.0991
(0.0170)

-0.1181
(0.0165)

Partial Ownership Dummy Interacted
with Assets

-0.0459
(0.0097)

-0.0221
(0.0108)

Partial Ownership Dummy Interacted
with Assets and Country Tax Rate

0.0627
(0.0235)

0.0569
(0.0244)

Majority Ownership Dummy Interacted
with Assets

-0.0336
(0.0105)

-0.0144
(0.0118)

Majority Ownership Dummy Interacted
with Assets and Country Tax Rate

0.0352
(0.0280)

0.0304
(0.0304)

Minority Ownership Dummy Interacted
with Assets

-0.0517
(0.0120)

-0.0245
(0.0130)

Minority Ownership Dummy Interacted
with Assets and Country Tax Rate

0.0751
(0.0270)

0.0663
(0.0280)

N
N

Y
Y

Industry Fixed Effects?
Year Fixed Effects?

N
N

Y
Y

N
N

Y
Y

No. of Obs.

160,777

160,777

160,772

160,772

160,772

160,772

R-Squared

0.2582

0.3417

0.2675

0.3423

0.2677

0.3425

Notes: The dependent variable is the net (after-tax) income of an affiliate. The regressions are estimated using OLS, and the
specifications in columns 2, 4, and 6 include industry and year fixed effects. "Assets" are affiliate assets. "Country Tax Rate Interacted
with Assets" is product of "Assets" and the median country tax rate as calculated in the text. The remaining terms are interactions of
ownership dummies with "Assets" and "Country Tax Rate Interacted with Assets." Partial ownership dummies equal one for any affiliate
not wholly-owned by the U.S. parent. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.

Table VI
Organizational Form and Coordination of Intellectual Property
Dependent Variable: Dummy for Payment of Royalties
(1)
Constant

-1.5236
(0.0312)

Majority or Whole Ownership
Dummy

0.1599
(0.0335)

(2)

(3)

(4)

-1.5951
(0.0377)
0.3760
(0.0468)

0.0361
(0.0407)

R&D/Sales Ratio for Industry

4.1531
(0.8708)

Majority or Whole Ownership
Dummy Interacted with R&D/Sales
Ratio for Industry

2.2715
(0.9140)

(5)

(6)

-1.5236
(0.0312)
0.1881
(0.0615)

0.2533
(0.0470)

(7)

(8)

-1.5951
(0.0377)
0.4015
(0.0613)

0.0973
(0.0578)

0.1077
(0.0807)

4.1531
(0.8708)
6.1457
(1.3690)

Whole Ownership Dummy

-0.1059
(0.0376)

-0.0312
(0.0485)

Whole Ownership Dummy
Interacted with R&D/Sales Ratio for
Industry

4.2797
(1.2298)

9.6020
(1.7429)

-0.0709
(0.0468)

0.0929
(0.0633)

-2.1925
(0.9167)

-3.9922
(1.2511)

Y
Y

Country/Industry Fixed Effects?
Year Fixed Effects?

N
N

Y
Y

N
N

Y
Y

N
N

Y
Y

N
N

No. of Obs.

48,053

36,574

47,847

36,574

48,053

36,574

47,847

36,574

-24,036

-15,288

-23,730

-15,277

-24,032

-15,288

-23,721

-15,272

Log Likelihood

Notes: The dependent variable equals one if positive royalties are paid from the affiliate to its American parent; the dependent variable equals zero otherwise. The specifications in
columns 1, 3, 5 and 7 are logits, and the specifications in columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 are conditional logits that control for country/industry and year fixed effects. "Majority or Whole
Ownership dummy" equals one if an affiliate is whole or majority owned, and equals zero otherwise. "Whole Ownership dummy" equals one if the affiliate is wholly owned, and
equals zero otherwise. "R&D/Sales Ratio for Industry" is the average ratio of R&D expenditures to sales for the parents in the industry of the affiliate as measured by domestic

Table VII
Trade and Ownership: Effects of Liberalizations
Dependent Variable: Share of Sales through
Wholly Owned Affiliates
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Constant

0.6020
(0.0057)

0.6132
(0.0038)

0.6286
(0.0083)

0.6141
(0.0038)

Post Liberalization Dummy

0.0873
(0.0080)

0.0640
(0.0062)

0.0398
(0.0117)

0.0389
(0.0094)

High R&D Intensity Dummy

-0.0506
(0.0115)

Post Liberalization Dummy
Interacted with High R&D
Intensity Dummy

0.0919
(0.0161)

0.0466
(0.0124)

N

Y

Country/Industry FE?

N

No. of Obs.
R-Squared

11,053
0.0106

Y
11,053
0.7039

10,953
0.0135

10,953
0.7031

Dependent Variable: Share of Affiliates Sales to
Related Parties
(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

Constant

0.0612
(0.0043)

0.0710
(0.0060)

-0.3211
(0.0591)

-0.4287
(0.1679)

Share of Sales through
Wholly Owned Affiliates

0.0774
(0.0060)

0.0641
(0.0081)

0.6018
(0.0809)

0.7582
(0.2220)

Country/Industry FE?

N

Y

Y

Y

IV w/ Predicted
Ownership from (4)?

N

N

Y

Y

Year Effects?

N

N

N

Y

No. of Obs.
R-Squared

9,726
0.0145

9,726
0.7380

9,657

9,657

Notes: The dependent variable in the left panel is the share of all affiliate sales within a country/industry pair that are sold through wholly owned affiliates. The sample is restricted to those countries
experiencing a liberalization of ownership restrictions between 1986 and 1995 as described in the text. The equations reported in columns 1-4 are estimated by OLS; the specifications in columns 2 and 4 include
country/industry fixed-effects. "Post Liberalization Dummy" equals one for years after a liberalization of ownership restrictions and equals zero otherwise. "High R&D Intensity Dummy" equals one if the
industry has an R&D/Sales ratio above the median and equals zero otherwise. "Post Liberalization Dummy Interacted with High R&D Intensity Dummy" is the product of "Post Liberalization Dummy" and
"High R&D Intensity Dummy." The dependent variable in the right panel is the ratio of sales to related parties to total sales within a country/industry pair. "Share of Sales through Wholly Owned Affiliates" is
the share of all sales within a country/industry pair that is sold through wholly owned affiliates. The equations reported in columns 5 and 6 are estimated by OLS; the specification in column 6 includes country/
industry fixed effects. The specifications in columns 7 and 8 use the predicted value from the specification in column 4 as an instrument, and the specification in column 8 adds year effects. Standard errors are
in parentheses.

Table VIII
Trade and Ownership: Effects of the U.S. Tax Reform Act of 1986
Dependent Variable: Share
of Sales through Wholly
Owned Affiliates

Dependent Variable: Share of Exports to
Related Parties

(1)

(2)

Constant

0.7566
(0.0029)

0.7584
(0.0027)

Constant

Post TRA86 Dummy

0.0193
(0.0036)

0.0015
(0.0078)

Post TRA86 Dummy
Interacted with High
Average Foreign Tax
Rate Dummy

0.0231
(0.0087)

Parent Fixed Effects?

Y

No. of Obs.
R-Squared

22,558
0.7791

Y

17,146
0.7489

Dependent Variable: Share of Imports from
Related Parties

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

(9)

(10)

0.2717
(0.0068)

0.3828
(0.0087)

-0.3430
(0.1676)

0.0264
(0.2418)

0.4053
(0.0092)

0.4928
(0.0135)

0.3129
(0.1525)

-0.0886
(0.2514)

Share of Sales
0.1811
through
(0.0082)
Wholly Owned
Affiliates

0.0389
(0.0110)

0.9751
(0.2157)

0.4988
(0.3079)

0.1401
(0.0110)

0.0275
(0.0172)

0.2662
(0.1978)

0.7748
(0.3218)

Parent Fixed
Effects?

N

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

IV w/
Predicted
Ownership
from (2)?

N

N

Y

Y

N

N

Y

Y

Year Effects?

N

N

N

Y

N

N

N

Y

No. of Obs.
R-Squared

15,699
0.0290

15,699
0.7152

12,384

12,384

12,941
0.0123

12,941
0.6984

10,313

10,313

Notes: The dependent variable in the left panel is the share of all affiliate sales within a parent system that are sold through wholly owned affiliates. The specifications in columns 1 and 2 include parent
fixed effects. "Post-TRA86 dummy" equals one for years after 1986 and equals zero otherwise. "High Average Tax Rate Dummy" equals one if the average foreign tax rate faced by majority owned
affiliates is greater than the U.S. statutory rate in a given year and equals zero otherwise. "Post-TRA86 dummy interacted with High Average Foreign Tax Rate Dummy" is the product of "Post-TRA86
dummy" and "High Average Foreign Tax Rate Dummy." The dependent variable in columns 3 through 6 is the ratio of parent exports to related parties to total parent exports. The dependent variable in
columns 7 through 10 is the ratio of parent imports from related parties to total parent imports. "Share of Sales through Wholly Owned Affiliates" is the share of all affiliate sales within a parent system that
are sold through wholly owned affiliates. Specifications presented in columns 3 and 7 are OLS, those presented in 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, and 10 include parent fixed effects, and those in columns 6 and 10 include
year fixed effects. The specifications in columns 5, 6, 9, and 10 use the predicted value from the specification in column 2 as an instrument. Standard errors are in parentheses.

Table IX
Organizational Form and Risk Management
Dependent Variable: Affiliate Assets

Constant

Majority or Whole Ownership
Dummy

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

(8)

106,785.40
(8,198.85)

51,312.54
(12,288.82)

106,785.40
(8,199.03)

51,402.55
(12,270.11)

68,891.11
(69,822.92)

60,050.46
(13,304.33)

68,891.11
(69,826.38)

60,115.37
(13,355.66)

-50,936.23
(8,455.46)

-43,004.45
(9,646.47)

-39,200.77
(10,942.38)

-17,984.26
(12,772.67)

-126,969.60
(70,778.83)

-146,304.30
(88,779.83)

-121,029.40
(86,122.40)

-121,206.60
(102,678.00)

-13,316.59
(7,553.82)

-29,531.19
(10,544.58)

-12,310.38
(51,532.04)

-41,109.15
(85,178.95)

Whole Ownership Dummy

Expropriation Risk Measure

4,849.80
(7,758.05)

Majority or Whole Ownership
Dummy Interacted with
Expropriation Risk

7,384.41
(7,887.62)

4,849.80
(7,758.43)
11,047.01
(9,737.46)

Whole Ownership Dummy
Interacted with Expropriation Risk

8,815.11
(9,937.58)

10,944.55
(11,700.11)

-996.11
(6,353.17)

1,408.52
(9,770.99)
Y
Y

Country/Industry Fixed Effects?
Year Fixed Effects?

N
N

Y
Y

N
N

Y
Y

N
N

Y
Y

N
N

No. of Obs.
R-Squared

23,135
0.0031

23,135
0.2053

23,135
0.0032

23,135
0.2058

20,185
0.0049

20,185
0.1981

20,185
0.0053

20,185
0.1985

Notes: The dependent variable is affiliate assets. Equations are estimated using OLS; the specifications in columns 2, 4, 6 and 8 include country/industry and year fixed effects. "Majority or Whole
Ownership dummy" equals one if an affiliate is owned more than 50 percent by its American parent and equals zero otherwise. "Whole Ownership dummy" equals one if the affiliate is wholly owned
and equals zero otherwise. "Expropriation Risk Measure" is an index of the risk of "outright confiscation" or "forced nationalization" produced by the International Country Risk Guide. This index is
the average of the April and October monthly index over the 1982-1995 period. The index is scaled between 0 and 10, and lower scores reflect higher risks. The remaining terms are interactions of
ownership dummies with "Expropriation Risk Measure." Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.

Appendix Table I
Organizational Form, Equity Investments and Risk Management
Dependent Variable: Paid-in-Capital Owned by U.S. Parent
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

Constant

5,336.76
(484.52)

24,460.83
(6,633.55)

13,218.66
(5,025.55)

24,154.18
(6,862.14)

Whole Ownership Dummy

188.30
(584.28)

2,238.09
(1,275.39)

-10,947.51
(5,461.37)

-6,064.79
(11,368.17)

Expropriation Risk Measure

-1,192.98
(512.76)

Whole Ownership Dummy Interacted
with Expropriation Risk

1,249.80
(579.43)

895.58
(1,179.42)

Country/Industry Fixed Effects?
Year Fixed Effects?

N
N

Y
Y

N
N

Y
Y

No. of Obs.
R-Squared

14,580
0.0000

14,580
0.3097

13,159
0.0002

13,159
0.3054

Notes: The dependent variable is the paid in capital of an affiliate owned by the U.S. parent. Equations are estimated using
OLS; the specifications in columns 2 and 4 include country/industry and year fixed effects. "Whole Ownership dummy"
equals one if the affiliate is wholly owned and equals zero otherwise. "Expropriation Risk Measure" is an index of the risk
of "outright confiscation" or "forced nationalization" produced by the International Country Risk Guide. This index is the
average of the April and October monthly index over the 1982-1995 period. The index is scaled between 0 and 10, and
lower scores reflect higher risks. The remaining terms are interactions of the ownership dummy with "Expropriation Risk
Measure." Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.

