                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




       WHEN ECONOMIC REFORM GOES WRONG: CASHEWS IN MOZAMBIQUE


                                           Margaret McMillan
                                             Dani Rodrik
                                           Karen Horn Welch


                                          Working Paper 9117
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9117


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      August 2002



We would like to thank Dr. Raimundo Matule (Deputy Director of INCAJU) for meeting with us in New
York and commenting on an earlier draft. We also thank Jehan Arulpragasam, Sidney Bliss, Ewen Cobban,
Jaikishan Desai, John Fynn, Joe Hanlon, Nicholas Kottak, Ana Machalela, Graham Mann, Paulo Mole, Peter
Moll, Timothy Mooney, Patrick Nicholson, Dan Owen, Jean Penvenne, Phyllis Pomerantz, Pankaj Sampat,
Arnold Sowa, Finn Tarp, German Vegarra, Michael Weber and Johannes Zutt for taking the time to
communicate with us and for providing us with data and documentation. We thank William Masters for
extensive comments on an earlier draft and Lynne Pepall for several helpful conversations. Needless to say,
we alone are responsible for remaining errors of fact, interpretation, and judgment. The authors are grateful
to the Ford and Rockefeller Foundations for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


© 2002 by Margaret McMillan, Dani Rodrik and Karen Horn Welch. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
When Economic Reform Goes Wrong: Cashews in Mozambique
Margaret McMillan, Dani Rodrik and Karen Horn Welch
NBER Working Paper No. 9117
August 2002
JEL No. O10, O50, F10


                                            ABSTRACT

       Mozambique liberalized its cashew sector in the early 1990s in response to pressure from the
World Bank. Opponents of the reform have argued that the policy did little to benefit poor cashew
farmers while bankrupting factories in urban areas. Using a welfare-theoretic framework, we analyze the
available evidence and provide an accounting of the distributional and efficiency consequences of the
reform. We estimate that the direct benefits from reducing restrictions on raw cashew exports were of
the order $6.6 million annually, or about 0.14% of Mozambique GDP. However, these benefits were
largely offset by the costs of unemployment in the urban areas. The net gain to farmers was probably no
greater than $5.3 million, or $5.30 per year for the average cashew-growing household. Inadequate
attention to economic structure and to political economy seems to account for these disappointing
outcomes.




Margaret McMillan                  Dani Rodrik                         Karen Horn Welch
Department of Economics            JFK School of Government            87 Hulme Court, Apt. 5c
304 Braker Hall                    Harvard University                  Stanford, CA 94305
Tufts University                   79 JFK Street                       horn_karen@yahoo.com
Medford, MA 02155                  Cambridge, MA 02138
margaret.mcmillan@tufts.edu        and NBER
                                   dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
              WHEN ECONOMIC REFORM GOES WRONG: CASHEWS IN MOZAMBIQUE

1. Introduction
        In a case that has become a cause celebre for the anti-globalization movement, the World
Bank prevailed on Mozambique’s government in the early 1990s to liberalize the cashew sector
and to remove restrictions on exports of raw cashews. The Bank hoped that resources would be
allocated more efficiently and the incomes of cashew farmers would be boosted. The policy was
met with fierce opposition from the domestic cashew-processing industry, which ironically had
just been privatized. After a decade of political strife, international controversy, and ongoing if
hesitant reform, the consequences remain hotly contested. Each side in the debate has its
favorite statistics: the World Bank points to the rise in farmgate prices, while its opponents point
to the processing plants in urban areas which have been shut down and the thousands of workers
that remain unemployed.

        Historically, the cashew sector has constituted a significant part of Mozambique’s
economy, providing income to several million individuals across the country. In the 1960s,
Mozambique produced as much as half of the world’s total. The sector went into a long decline
thereafter, as a combination of adverse policies and civil war (1982-1992) brought new tree
plantings to a halt. Following independence in 1975, the government had banned the export of
raw cashew nuts to stimulate domestic processing. Mozambique became the first African
country to process cashews on a large scale. By 1980, the country had 14 processing factories.
Following World Bank advice, the government began to loosen restrictions on raw cashew
production in the late 1980s. The ban on exporting raw cashews was lifted in 1991/92 and
replaced with an export quota and export tax. The quota was subsequently removed, and the
export tax on raw nuts came down from 60% in 1991/92 to 14% in 1998/99.

         From the vantage point of textbook economics, the analysis of the export restriction and
its removal is a straightforward exercise. A ban (or tax) on exports depresses the domestic price
of raw cashews, effectively subsidizing the domestic processors for whom raw cashews is the
chief input. The policy results in an inefficient allocation of resources: raw cashew production is
discouraged, and labor and capital are pulled into cashew processing where, absent externalities,
their social value marginal product is lower than in other activities. The relaxation of the
restrictions is therefore expected to create a double benefit. First, an efficiency gain, arising
from the reversal of the adverse resource pulls mentioned above. And second, a distributional
gain, resulting from the rise in farmgate prices for the poorest households in Mozambique. This
is the sort of analysis that underlies, for example, Paul Krugman’s (2000) New York Times
column on the subject, which took the anti-World Bank crowd to task for overlooking the pro-
poor bias of the export liberalization.

        As we shall show in this paper, many of the textbook implications of export liberalization
were indeed realized. Farmgate prices rose, raw cashew exports increased, and resources were
pulled out of cashew processing. However, even under the most favorable assumptions, the
magnitude of the benefits generated by these effects were quite small—both in economic terms
and in relation to the amount of time and energy that Mozambique’s government spent on this
question over the years. We estimate that the efficiency gains generated by the removal of the
export restrictions could not have amounted to more than $6.6 million annually, or about 0.14%
                                                 2

of Mozambique GDP. The additional income accruing to the farmers was probably no greater
than $5.3 million, or $5.30 per year for the average cashew-growing household. These are puny
amounts for a policy that was a key plank in the World Bank’s reform agenda, and that became a
serious bone of contention between the Bank and Mozambique, requiring the personal attention
of both of their presidents.

        Moreover, small as they are, these numbers overstate the benefits involved. The standard
gains from the liberalization have to be set against the efficiency losses that have resulted from
the idling of processing plants. In theory, the workers employed in these plants should have
found alternative sources of employment after a reasonable time, perhaps suffering some wage
losses in the process. In reality, a large number seems to have remained unemployed, perhaps
because of the expectation that the liberalization would be eventually reversed. One account
claims that 90% of the sector’s 11,000 workers were unemployed in 2001. Even if we take a
fraction of this number, the loss in real output (equivalently, loss of real income of workers) that
is involved is of the order of $6.1 million, or 0.12% of GDP. Note that this amount is roughly
equivalent to the direct efficiency gain generated by the liberalization (as noted above). In all
likelihood, therefore, the aggregate static gains produced by the liberalization were a wash.

        These disappointing outcomes are due in part to wrinkles that the textbook analysis sets
aside. First, there are complications that arise from imperfect market structures. We highlight
two of those in the analysis below. Domestically, there are several layers of intermediaries that
separate cashew farmers from the export trade, creating a situation analogous to double-
marginalization in the analysis of vertical relationships in industrial organization. The chief
implication of this is that we cannot expect increases in export prices to be passed one-for-one on
to the farmers. The pass-through coefficient is much smaller than unity—more of the order of
40-50%--reducing the gains that accrue to the poorest households. In other words, traders
capture much of the benefits from the liberalization. Externally, we have the complication that
the world market for raw cashew is significantly less competitive than that for processed cashew.
In effect, India is a monopsony buyer of raw cashew from Mozambique. Mozambique’s
transformation from an exporter of processed cashews to an exporter of raw cashews can be
expected therefore to produce a terms-of-trade loss for the country, which diminishes both the
efficiency and distributional gains from liberalization.

        The real hope for the liberalization strategy might, and should, have been placed on the
dynamic effects. We emphasize two dynamic consequences in particular. First, the
liberalization could have reinvigorated the rural sector over the medium- and long-run by
reversing the dramatic collapse in cashew tree planting. Second, in the urban sector it could have
heralded a restructuring of production by promoting a more rational investment pattern. The key
in both instances was a credible commitment to a new pricing regime—possibly complemented
with compensatory programs—that would have made it worthwhile for farmers, entrepreneurs,
and workers to undertake investments that would be at least in part irreversible. The main failing
of the cashew liberalization policy, in our view, was that it did not send sufficiently credible
signals about the pricing regime. The result was that farmers refused to plant trees, cashew
processors refused to take their resources elsewhere, and urban workers refused to look for other
jobs. Had these adjustments taken place instead, the static losses would have been minimized,
while the efficiency gains would have grown over time.
                                                 3



        The Mozambique cashew story illustrates several themes that have become increasingly
central in the analysis of reform. One theme has to do with the importance of credibility and the
need for expectations management. The supply responses that will make reform successful are
likely to be forthcoming only when there is sufficient credibility attached to the change in the
policy regime. That in turn requires creative thinking on credibility enhancing mechanisms as an
integral part of reform. The second theme is that reform is a “political” problem as well as a
“technical” one. Had the political opposition of the urban groups been anticipated, or factored
in, compensatory mechanisms and side bargains could have been worked out beforehand. Third,
policy reform via conditionality is rarely conducive to desirable outcomes. The credibility
problems noted above were created in part because the liberalization of the cashew sector was
viewed as a “World Bank policy”—something that the government was doing not because it was
a priority but because it was required to qualify for World Bank (and IMF) lending. Not having
full ownership of the reform, the government was poor at selling it.

        There are also implications for the acrimonious turn that the debate on globalization has
taken of late. We have little doubt that most of the activists that have attacked the World Bank
over its handling of the Mozambique cashew issue have their hearts in the right place. But few
have carefully scrutinized the question that one would think they would have been most
interested in: are the poorest farmers getting a better price for their product, and are they better
off as a result? But the economists are not without blame either. They have relied on a priori
generalizations and textbook expositions instead of figuring out what has really transpired on the
ground.

         Beyond Mozambique are there also implications for the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa
(SSA), where 75% of the labor force still depends entirely on agriculture for its livelihood?
Recent evidence suggests that—as in Mozambique—the supply response to price liberalization
throughout most of SSA has been disappointing (UNCTAD, 1998). Over-reliance on price
reforms is likely to be one reason for this. Most policymakers would agree that price and non-
price incentives are both important determinants of supply. In practice however, it is price
reforms that have been carried out most often. It is far easier to stop regulating producer prices
than it is to remove structural constraints like poor roads, lack of access to credit, or monopsony
power on the part of domestic traders. The problem with price reforms is that they can be also
reversed with the stroke of a pen. As our analysis of Mozambique suggests, a significant supply
response is unlikely unless there is a sharp break in farmers' expectations about the future. Since
non-price reforms are harder to reverse, they may be more effective in increasing the expected
profitability of investment from the farmers' point of view, thus eliciting the elusive supply
response.

        The plan of the paper is as follows. Section 2 provides a capsule history of the cashew
industry and of recent developments. Section 3 presents an analytical framework and a
decomposition of the welfare effects of cashew liberalization into various channels. In section 4,
we provide quantitative estimates of the efficiency and distributional implications of the
liberalization. Sections 5 and 6 deal with domestic and international market structure
complications, respectively. Section 7 focuses on the domestic processing industry and presents
estimates of the unemployment loss. Section 8 speculates on the reasons behind the
                                                         4

disappointing supply response. Section 9 concludes. A synopsis of the debate surrounding the
case is presented in Appendix A.

2. History of cashew industry and background1
        Cashew production has been extremely important to Mozambique throughout much of
the 20th century.2 The Portuguese promoted cashew cultivation during the colonial period and
by the 1960s Mozambique had established itself as the world leader in cashew production.
Shortly after Mozambique gained independence from Portugal, cashew production went into a
long period of decline (as illustrated in Figure 1). Cashew production is still depressed in spite of
efforts to revive the sector. Nevertheless, cashew remains one of Mozambique’s leading exports
and a source of income to more than one million peasant farm families or approximately 5
million people.

         Mozambique’s early success in the production of raw nuts was accompanied by a boom
in its cashew processing industry (see Figure 1). Mozambique became the first African country
to process cashews on an industrial scale as small, manual processing systems were replaced by
large, mechanized factories (Deloitte and Touche, 1997). The first industrial plant was
established in 1950 and two decades later there were 14 processing factories with a total
processing capacity of approximately 150,000 tonnes of raw nuts. Processing of cashew peaked
in 1973 when 149,800 tonnes of cashew were processed for export. Since this time, the industry
has declined dramatically and in 1999/00 Mozambique processed a total of only 8,000 tonnes of
raw cashew (INCAJU, 2001).

       In an attempt to stem the decline in processed cashew exports, the Mozambican
government banned the export of raw cashew in 1978. But in 1982, a decade long civil war
broke out and - as illustrated in Figure 1 – this long period of political turmoil took a toll on both
cashew production and processing. Cashew production peaked in 1973 at 240,000 tonnes and has
never since achieved that level. At the same time, world cashew production increased steadily
and by the late seventies Mozambique had lost its dominant position in cashew production to
India and Brazil. By 1989/90, Mozambique produced only 22,106 tonnes (INCAJU 2001) and its
share of world raw cashew nut production had dropped to 5% (Desai, 2001a). Since that time,
the range of cashew production has become much smaller, fluctuating only between 22,106 and
66,510 tonnes.

        Even during its most successful years, the cashew industry in Mozambique has been
highly regulated. Prior to independence, the Portuguese government established producer prices
and marketing margins throughout the cashew marketing chain (Tarp, 1990)3. During the post-

1
  Appendix B provides a detailed timeline of the events surrounding the cashew industry since 1950.
2
  The cashew tree is not indigenous to Mozambique, but was initially imported from Brazil by Portuguese colonists
in the 16th century (Nomisma, 1994). The tree is well-suited to the Mozambican climate, particularly in the northern
region of the country. Beginning in the 1930s, cashew cultivation in Mozambique expanded dramatically, primarily
on small and medium scale African farms (Newitt, 1995).
3
  The prices for traders and producers were based on the world kernel price and the domestic industry’s processing
costs rather than the world price for raw cashew nuts in order to ensure that the processing factories could remain
competitive in the processed cashew market. According to Deloitte and Touche (1997), the producer price was 50%
of the government-established factory gate price. Of the traders’ 50% margin, 15% was allocated to the retailer and
35% to the wholesaler.
                                                         5

colonial period, Frelimo (The Front for Liberation of Mozambique) continued to regulate the
cashew industry. Around the time raw cashew exports were banned, the State Secretariat of
Cashew (SSC), the central body controlling the cashew industry, and Caju de Moçambique, the
holding company for the state-owned processing factories, were established (Nomisma, 1994).

         During the colonial period, internal marketing was performed primarily by Portuguese or
Asian traders. Like producer prices, traders’ margins were highly regulated. As a result, the
marketing system was very stable. However, according to Tarp (1990), with Independence in
1975, the existing marketing system broke down as most of the Portuguese traders or
“cantineiros” left the country and the Asian traders migrated to urban areas and gave up trading
activities. Consequently, the cashew export trade was brought under control of ENACOMO, a
state trading company, although private traders continued to act as buying agents (Jaffee, 1995
and Tarp, 1990). Producer prices and trading margins continued to be established by the
government and—as previously mentioned—a ban on exporting raw cashews was imposed.

        Relaxation of government control of the cashew sector began in the late 1980s when
Mozambique entered into its first structural adjustment program with the World Bank.4 This
program (the 1987-1990 Economic Rehabilitation Program or ERP) was aimed at decreasing
overall administrative controls in order to restore market incentives to promote production and
trade (Tarp, 1990). While it was not specifically focused on the cashew industry, it covered the
cashew sector along with other products and sectors of the economy (Pomerantz, 2001b). Among
other things, the program called for a substantial increase in the government-established
producer price and the establishment of the minimum producer price system that was
implemented in the early 1990s.

         In its 1995 Country Assistance Strategy (CAS) Report, the World Bank required
Mozambique to liberalize cashew marketing and exporting in order to satisfy the “base case”
conditions and qualify for approximately $400 million of loan assistance (World Bank, 1995a).5
However, according to the World Bank’s former Mozambique Country Director Phyllis
Pomerantz, there was no specific “conditionality” (Pomerantz, 2001a). In addition to
recommending that Mozambique liberalize cashew marketing, the World Bank also
recommended as a subsequent step that it privatize the processing industry. According to
Pomerantz (2001a), the government did not follow this advice and privatized the industry before
it liberalized cashew marketing.

        The World Bank’s advice to liberalize Mozambique’s cashew industry was based on a
1995 report by Hilmar Hilmarsson, a World Bank consultant (Pomerantz, 2001a and
Arulpragasam, 2001). This report was included as a chapter in the 1995 World Bank Report
entitled, “Mozambique: Impediments to Industrial Sector Recovery” (World Bank, 1995b).6
Based on the comparison with other countries and the technology employed, the chapter


4
  Mozambique became a member of the Bretton Woods Institutions in 1984.
5
  The World Bank’s proposed lending program for FY96-00 included low and base scenarios. Liberalizing the
cashew industry was a condition for the latter, in which it would receive a loan package of $665 million. Under the
former, the loan package would be reduced to $240 million.
6
  When citing World Bank (1995b) we are also referring to the findings of the Hilmarrson Report.
                                                6

concluded that the Mozambican processing industry, as structured in 1994, was unviable (World
Bank, 1995b). It assumed that liberalization would increase the producer share of the FOB price
to 50-70% and increase cashew production, export value, and farmers’ income, as illustrated in
Table 1. While the report outlined several policies for improving cashew production and
increasing producers’ incomes, the World Bank focused on eliminating the export tax on raw
cashews. According to World Bank official Johannes Zutt, the World Bank’s strategy in
advising the Government to eliminate the export tax was to “increase the poverty reducing
potential of the cashew industry in Mozambique…and this was one of the few pro-poor things
the World Bank could implement at the time” (Zutt, 2001). According to former World Bank
Country Director Pomerantz, the World Bank hoped that there would be sufficient competition at
the marketing level to ensure that reducing the export tax would increase the export price and
therefore the producer price.

         While the Bank and the government agreed that liberalization and privatization were
appropriate, they disagreed on the extent and the time horizon for the liberalization. The Bank
favored immediate and complete elimination of the tax, while the industry favored a gradual,
partial reduction in the tax (World Bank, 2000a). Table 2 illustrates the different proposals, the
schedule agreed by the government and the World Bank, and the actual tax rates implemented.
We discuss some of the specific reforms below.

Price reforms
        In 1991/92, the export ban on raw cashew nuts was lifted and limited quantities of raw
nuts were allowed to be exported. However, a 60% tax on the difference between the FOB and
factory gate prices and a quantitative restriction of 10,000 tonnes were imposed (Desai, 2001).
In 1992/93, the tax (on the difference between the FOB and factory gate prices) was lowered to
30%, but the quantitative restriction was maintained at 10,000 tonnes. In 1993/94, the export tax
was maintained, but the quantitative restriction was loosened. While the initial export quota
remained fixed at 10,000 tonnes, additional quantities were auctioned off in 5,000-tonne lots to
registered exporters. In 1994/95, the quantitative restriction was lifted and the export tax was
reduced to 20% of the FOB value in 1995/96 and then 14% in 1996/97 and 97/98 (Deloitte and
Touche, 1997 and Desai, 2001a). Faced with domestic opposition to the reductions of the export
tax, Mozambique’s parliament passed a bill in 1999 that increased the tax to between 18 and
22%, the exact amount to be determined each year, depending on market conditions. (EIU,
March 2000). In both the 1999/00 and 2000/01 seasons, the export tax was 18% (Desai, 2001a).

         Producer prices were significantly increased in 1987/88 from 10 Meticais/kg to 105
Meticais/kg. Also at this time, the government announced that a minimum producer price would
replace the fixed producer price as the liberalization program progressed (Tarp, 1990). As
illustrated in Figure 2, the government continued to significantly increase the minimum producer
price throughout the 1990s until 1998/99 when it was fully liberalized. During this period, there
was near parity between the actual nominal producer price and the government-established
minimum price. During the period of the export ban, the government also fixed the "factory gate
price" or the price processors paid for their raw nuts. Government control over prices paid by
the processing industry for raw nuts were eliminated at the time of privatization, 1991.

Marketing reforms
                                                          7

        Liberalization of the cashew industry also led to significant changes in the marketing
system. The state trading company, ENACOMO, was privatized in the late 1980s. Additional
marketing channels opened in 1991/92 when the ban on exporting raw cashews was lifted.
According to the current Mozambique Country Economist for the World Bank, Peter Moll, the
rationing arrangement for export licenses was eliminated. Under that rationing arrangement,
individuals had been required to apply for export licenses and one of the criteria for obtaining a
license was that the individual “had previously been a recipient of such a license” (Moll, 2001).
Exporters are, however, still required to be licensed by the State Secretariat of Cashew (Desai,
2001a).

Privatization
        Privatization of Caju de Mozambique—the holding company of the state-owned
processing factories—began in 1991 when a privatization unit (UTRE) was created within the
Ministry of Finance (World Bank, 1995b). By the end of 1994, all of the formerly state-owned
factories had been privatized. As shown in Table 3, the majority of factories were sold to local
entrepreneurs and not to foreign investors (as suggested by Krugman, 2000). In 1995, the only
disappointing aspect of the privatization appeared to be the revenue generated. According to
Deloitte and Touche (1997) the factories were all sold at below asking price and payments made
totalled $850 thousand (compared with the $13.5 million the government had asked for).
Between 1995 and 1998 six new factories were established, with an installed capacity of 8,950
tonnes and full-capacity employment of approximately 1,200 workers.7 These newer factories
supply the domestic and regional market, and not the traditional international market.8

        The fact that the government privatized the factories under a regime of protection and
subsequently began to remove that protection put the industry up in arms. On James
Wolfensohn’s first visit to Mozambique in 1997, he was approached by angry industrialists who
claimed that the World Bank was responsible for the problems the industry was having procuring
raw cashew. Wolfensohn responded by authorizing another study of the cashew industry in
Mozambique (Deloitte and Touche, 1997), which came out in favor of protecting the processing
factories for some period of time. Subsequently, at least two additional studies have been
commissioned by the government, also paid for by the World Bank. Abt Associates performed a
third analysis of the processing industry (Abt Associates, 1999) and Jaikishan Desai performed
an analysis of cashew farmers (Desai, 2001a).

3. A Simple Analytical Framework
        We present here a simple conceptual framework to facilitate the evaluation of the
liberalization. The framework tracks the incomes of the following distinct groups: (i) raw
cashew producers (farmers); (ii) traders and other intermediaries; (iii) owners of the cashew
processing factories; (iv) workers employed in the factories; and (v) the government.

       Raw cashew producers face the farmgate price p1 and produce both for home
consumption and for the market. We denote own consumption by z and the marketed production
by q. Since total output is q+z, total costs are given by c(q+z). Farmers also consume an

7
  Based on 130 workers per tonne of raw nuts processed and 2 shifts per day (Abt, 2000).
8
  Cabo Caju is an exception to this domestic and regional focus. It has a contract to supply Delta Café, an
international distributor.
                                                  8

“outside good” z’, whose price we fix to unity. Let farmers have the quasi-linear utility function
given by uf = u(z, z’) = z’ + v(z). They select z, q, and z’ by maximizing this subject to the
budget constraint p1q = z’ + c(q+z). Substituting the budget constraint into the utility function,
the farmers’ utility can also be expressed as uf = v(z) + p1q - c(q+z), which is an expression
involving only z and q. We shall use this expression below to summarize cashew growers’
welfare. The associated first-order conditions are v’ = c’ and p1 = c’.

        The world (FOB) price of raw cashew is p*, and the after tax FOB price is p*(1-t).
Domestic intermediaries earn the rents that arise between the farmgate price and the after tax
FOB price, [p*(1-t) - p1]q. Domestic processors use raw cashew and labor to produce processed
cashews for the world market. Let P* and w stand for the world price of processed cashews and
the wage earned by factory workers, respectively. Then the profits of the domestic processors
                                                                                               ∂π
can be expressed using the profit function π( P*, w, p*(1-t)), with the standard properties:        =
                                                                                               ∂P *
                                                   ∂π                                ∂π
X (total supply or exports of processed cashew), -     = l (labor demand), and - *            = qd
                                                   ∂w                             ∂p (1 − t )
(input demand for raw cashew nuts). Exports of raw cashew (x) are the difference between the
total marketed supply and the demand from domestic processors: x = q – qd.

        Urban workers earn the wage bill wl. We let wo denote the social opportunity cost of
their labor. If unemployment is their next best alternative, wo will be approximately zero. The
social surplus generated by employment in the domestic processing industry is therefore given
by (w – w0)l.

       We are now ready to express the total social surplus generated by the cashew industry,
which is the sum total of the incomes that accrue to each of these groups (plus the government,
which receives export tax revenues). We write this as follows:

(1)    U = π( P*, w, p*(1-t)) + (w – w0)l + [p*(1-t) - p1]q + [v(z) + p1q – c(q + z)] + tp*x

The five terms on the right hand side represent owners of the processing factories, urban
workers, traders/intermediaries, cashew growers, and the government respectively. Note that
since π( P*, w, p*(1-t)) = P*X – wl - p*(1-t)qd,, this expression can also be written as

(2)                    U = (P*X - p*qd) – w0l + p*q + v(z) – c(q+z).

This shows that the total surplus consists of value added in the processing industry at world
prices (the term in parentheses) net of the social opportunity costs of the labor employed there,
plus the total value added generated by the raw cashew sector (again at world prices). We
emphasize that this framework is perfectly general; in particular, it can handle the possibility that
the processing factories were generating negative value added at world prices (as some observers
have claimed), in which case the first term on the right-hand side would be negative, but
otherwise the analysis would remain unchanged.
                                                           9

       Consider now a small perturbation that arises, say, from a change in the export tax t.
Differentiating equation (1) totally, rearranging terms, and simplifying,9 we get the following
expression:

         dU                       dx
                 =         tp *                                 (export-quantity effect) [1]
          dt                      dt

                                  dp *
                           + x                                  (terms-of-trade effect) [2]
                                   dt

                                          dl
                           + ( w − w0 )                         (unemployment effect) [3]
                                          dt

                                               dq
                           + [p*(1-t) – p1]       .             (traders’ margin effect) [4]
                                               dt

The welfare change associated with the reduction in t can be decomposed into the four
components shown above. First, we have the standard efficiency gain arising from the increase
in the quantity of raw cashew exports (channel [1]). Since the export restriction artificially
represses such exports, a reduction in t enhances welfare insofar as it spurs exports of raw
cashew nuts (i.e., as long as dx/dt <0). In the absence of any other market distortions, policy-
imposed or otherwise, this would be the only operative channel and the only term on the right-
hand side.

        The remaining three terms capture additional complications that are relevant to the
Mozambique case. The terms-of-trade effect (channel [2]) tracks the possibility that increased
exports of raw cashew may depress the FOB price received by the exporters (dp*/dt > 0). While
Mozambique has only a small share of the world market for raw cashews, it faces a monopsony
buyer in India. (India or any other country does not have similar market power vis-à-vis
Mozambique in processed cashew. Therefore we have assumed dP*/dt = 0.) We shall discuss
this issue further in section 6.

        The possible unemployment costs of the liberalization are depicted in the third term on
the right-hand side (channel [3]). As long as there is a gap between wage earnings in the
processing industry and the social opportunity cost of employing labor, a reduction in factory
employment associated with the reduction in the export restriction (dl/dt > 0) is welfare reducing.
(Of course, the framework does not rule out the possibility that these losses are more than offset
by the income gains that result from reorienting raw cashews to export markets.)

       Finally, channel [4] is the consequence of imperfect competition at home, namely the
bargaining leverage that traders and other intermediaries may have on cashew growers. This
leverage creates a gap between the after tax FOB price of raw cashew and the farmgate price.
The cost is an undersupply of raw cashew to the market. The (partial) undoing of this as a result

9
  Note in particular that the terms in dz, dw, dp1 and dt drop out, either because of market-clearing conditions or
first-order conditions associated with utility and profit maximization.
                                                10

of the reduction in the export restriction represents an independent source of efficiency gain for
the economy (dq/dt < 0).

        These effects relate to the aggregate efficiency costs and benefits, and sweep aside
distributional outcomes. In other words, all the components of income are weighted equally in
the overall balance sheet. However, the impact on farmers is of particular concern, as a key
objective of the liberalization policy was to reduce poverty in rural areas. To trace the effect of
the policy on farmers, we can use the expression developed above for farmers’ utility: uf = v(z) +
p1q - c(q+z). From the envelope theorem, duf/dt = q(dp1/dt). This represents the standard result
that the cashew growers become better off when the farmgate price of raw cashews rises (dp1/dt
< 0), and that the increase in their welfare is proportional to the net quantity supplied to the
market. Note that the benefits are proportional to the commercialized part of cashew
production—not the total harvest.

        We shall discuss each of these effects in greater detail below, presenting evidence on the
extent to which the channels in question were operative. We shall also provide, where possible,
some rough estimates of the quantitative magnitudes involved (using non-infinitesimal versions
of the expressions above). In particular, section 4 provides an estimate of the aggregate effect of
channels [1], [2], and [4], while section 7 provides an estimate for channel [3]. Sections 5 and 6
provide a more extended discussion on the likely significance of domestic and external imperfect
competition (channels [2] and [4]).

4. Evaluating the Efficiency Gains from Reducing Export Restrictions
        The policy environment surrounding the cashew industry has evolved significantly since
the liberalization process began in 1987. Controls on raw cashew exports have been gradually
removed. The government no longer fixes producer prices or factory gate prices. More traders
have been licensed and the state-owned cashew factories have been privatized. In what follows,
we evaluate and estimate the direct efficiency gains and distributional consequences associated
with these reforms.

        Results of these reforms have so far been mixed. The real producer price nearly doubled
between 1990/91 and 1999/00, but then dropped sharply in 2000/01 to its lowest level since
1994/95. As Figure 3 shows, the producers’ share of the FOB price also increased throughout the
1990s. But in spite of the increase in producer prices, the supply response has been weak and
sporadic (see Figure 1). Average output since the time price reforms began has increased relative
to the previous decade but only by around 10,000 tonnes – half the 20,000 tonnes envisaged in
the World Bank’s base case scenario. As for exports, the quantity of raw cashews exported
peaked in 1995/96 at 35,320 tonnes.

         What about new planting? Cashew is a perennial and Mozambique's cashew trees are
reported to be old and in need of replacement. Perhaps farmers have been planting new trees and
it is just a matter of time before we observe a vigorous supply response. However, this does not
seem to be the case. Less than one quarter of all households are reported to have planted any
new cashew trees, and among these households the average number of new trees planted was 3.6
(Desai 2001a). This puts new plantings at roughly one million trees per year, just enough to
replace the reported one million trees that die each year (AIM, April 19, 2001). At this rate,
                                                        11

Mozambique’s cashew orchard will never be as it was in the early 1970s when 45 million trees
were reported to be productive.10

        One important bit of evidence related to the supply response is the fact that farmers
appear to retain a fairly large proportion of cashew for home consumption. A great deal of
uncertainty exists regarding the difference between the quantity of raw nuts produced and
commercialized. Deloitte and Touche (1997) estimates that 70% to 90% of raw cashews are
commercialized and that the remainder is retained for domestic consumption. Regional
differences contribute to the uncertainty regarding overall raw cashew production and
commercialization. Desai (2001a) found that about 85% of farmers in the province of Nampula
sell some part of their harvest, and that only about 64% of what they harvest is commercialized.
In the southern provinces of Inhambane and Gaza, he found a different pattern: only 14% and
29% of harvested cashews are commercialized in these two provinces respectively. Furthermore,
in Inhambane, less than one-third of cashew producers sell any part of their harvest, and in Gaza,
only about 47% market any of their harvest. The fact that cashew serves both as a food crop and
as a cash crop has important implications for the poverty impact of export liberalization: it
indicates that the positive income effect of an increase in raw cashew prices on farmers is
substantially smaller than it would have been with full commercialization of the harvest (as
shown analytically in the previous section).

        Marketing seems to have become more competitive. The number of exporters has more
than tripled from 3 in 1990/91 to 11 in 1996/97 (Deloitte and Touche, 1997).11 In addition, it
appears that a number of informal or unlicensed traders began operating. Prior to the
liberalization, the trading system was characterized by more formal, established relations in
which farmers sold raw nuts at trading posts to licensed traders. The trader generally had a
relationship with a factory or larger traders to whom he would sell the raw nuts. During this
period, supply chain credit was common (Owen, 2001). Following liberalization, the marketing
system became more competitive and supply chain credit became less common. Producers
increasingly traded with itinerant, informal traders who move into the rural areas earlier in the
season and buy in smaller quantities at producers’ households. The formal traders have objected
to the informal traders who are unlicensed and therefore avoid paying taxes (Owen, 2001).

        Although farmers are earning more and output has risen, these results are disappointing
and certainly fall short of World Bank projections. The Bank's study of the cashew industry
indicated expectations that under the worst case scenario (see Table 1) liberalization of cashew
marketing would allow farmers to earn $0.38/kg for raw nuts (50% of the projected FOB price),
which would increase supply by 20,000 tonnes (to 54.3 from a base of 35 thousand tonnes) and
raise farmers' incomes to six times their level at the time of the study or $24.5 million. In
practice, the average price actually received by farmers since the ban was lifted has been
$0.27/kg (40% of the annual average FOB price over 91/92-00/01). Average annual marketed
output since the ban was lifted amounts to 44,300 tonnes or roughly 10,000 tonnes more than the
annual average in the previous decade (during which the ban was in effect and the country was at
civil war). Marketed output still remains much lower than its level immediately following

10
   Replanting is reported to have stopped somewhere around 1965 and current estimates put the stock of trees around
27 million (Nomisma 1994, Desai 2001).
11
   More recent estimates put the number of exporters at between 8 and 10 (Matule, 2001).
                                                12

independence (approximately 90,000 tonnes). Average annual income earned by farmers from
selling raw cashew since the export ban was lifted amounts to $13 million (only half the amount
used in the World Bank’s worst case medium-term scenario). This compares with an annual
average income earned by farmers during the period of the civil war (1982-1992) of $7.0
million. In addition, over the last two seasons, the nominal farmgate price has dropped by more
than 50% (from $0.45/kg to $0.20/kg) and in 2000/01 the real farmgate price was no higher than
it was during the last year in which the ban was in effect.

        To gauge the overall impact of these reforms on the economy of Mozambique, we
compute rough estimates of the net economic-surplus gains associated with these reforms, using
observed levels of prices and quantities. We make several assumptions in developing our
estimates. We assume that had the ban remained in effect, processors would have continued to
pay traders no more than 40% of the FOB price for raw cashew. This is a very conservative
estimate and is based on the original World Bank study of the cashew sector in Mozambique
which states that "the factory gate price has also remained low, at about 40 percent of the border
price, as traders must first sell the raw nuts to local factories at a "negotiated" price, with the
government acting as a referee" (World Bank, 1995b). We also assume that had the ban
remained in effect, the quantity of marketed raw cashew would have remained equal to the
annual average of marketed surplus during the period of the civil war or 35,000 tonnes. For
post-reform prices and quantities, we use the observed averages for the period 1991/92 through
2000/01. Specifically, we take $671 and $584 as the FOB and after-tax FOB prices of raw
cashew, respectively. The quantities of raw nuts processed and marketed are 21,500 and 44,300,
respectively.

        To compute the increase in farmer surplus, we assume that had the ban remained in place,
farmers would have received no more than 20% of the FOB price for raw cashew. Again, this is
a conservative estimate based on a trader's margin of 50% and the ability of the trader to obtain
40% of the FOB price from the factory. At the time the ban was lifted, farmers received
approximately 25% of the FOB price and they currently receive 45% of the FOB price (see data
table in Appendix C). As before, we use the data in Appendix C to compute annual averages of
observed prices and quantities for the period 91/92-00/01. A graphical representation of our
calculations is provided in Figure 4.

        We can approximate the standard efficiency gain from the removal of the ban with the
sum of the areas ibc and mnib in Figure 4, the latter being the tax revenue that accrues to the
government. This yields $5.57 million (=0.5*[584-269]*[44.3-21.5]+[671-584]*[44.3-21.5]).
Of this, $1.98 million is government revenue. Note that this $5.57 million figure captures both
of the channels [1] and [2] discussed in the previous section, insofar as any induced reduction in
the FOB price is already reflected in the observed post-ban average price of 671. To this
number, we must then add the additional income that accrues to domestic traders/exporters due
to the margin between the after tax FOB price and the farmgate price (see channel [4]). This gap
is shown in the Figure as the difference between the “supply” curve of the traders/exporters and
the marginal cost schedule of farmers. The relevant area is cbfg, which is approximately equal to
$2.14 million (=0.5*134*9.5+0.5*315*9.5). Of course, not all of this gap is pure profits or rents.
We assume that half of it represents real resource costs (transport, wastage and other real
expenses). So we add half of the area cbfg to the number above, for a total efficiency gain (net
                                                        13

of unemployment costs) of $5.57 + $1.07 = $6.64 million, or 0.14% of Mozambique’s GDP in
2000.

        How much of the surplus generated by the liberalization do the farmers get? The total
surplus accruing to the farmers, traders, and exporters of raw nuts is approximately equal to
$13.51 million--the increase in the price times an average of ban and post-ban quantities (or
[584-269][44+35]*0.5 = $12.44 million) plus one half the traders’ margin ($1.07 million). Of
this only a part goes to the farmers themselves. The change in farmer surplus associated with the
removal of the ban is approximately equal to the increase in the producer price times an average
of ban and post-ban quantities. The resulting annual average increase in producer surplus for
farmers amounts to $5.29 million--([268-134]*[35+44]*0.5)--or roughly $5.29 per cashew
growing household per year. This is less than four days’ wages at the minimum Mozambican
wage of $1.65 per day.

         The result that the gains to farmers are so small, despite our generous assumption that
farmgate prices have doubled, is the product of two factors. First, raw cashew production is and
remains quite depressed, relative to historic norms. Second, farmers retain part of their harvest
for own consumption. These two factors together imply that the share of cash income form raw
cashew in household budgets is on average quite small—less than 5 percent.12 Of course, there
are important regional variations that need to be taken into account when assessing the impact on
farmers’ welfare. Cashew is a much more important source of income for farmers in Nampula
than it is in other regions. So farmers in Nampula have benefited more than farmers elsewhere.
The overall impact, however, seems to have been quite small.

       Finally, the loss in consumer surplus that accrues to industrialists is equal to $8.90
million or the price increase times an average of ban and post-ban quantities (-(584-
269)(35+21.5)*.5). Note again that this does not take into account the losses associated with
unemployment. We discuss this in detail in section 7 of the paper.

        Therefore, the bottom line is as follows. Even assuming all unemployment away, the
liberalization of raw nut exports has cost cashew processors $8.9 million on an annual basis. The
bulk of the benefits have accrued to traders and exporters of raw cashew, who have gained about
$8.2 million (=13.5 - 5.29). The government itself has gained about $2.0 million in export tax
revenue. The farmers themselves have received only $5.3 million.

5. The Role of Market Structure: Internal Marketing
       The calculations above suggest that the gain accruing to the farmers has been quite small.
One reason for this is that cashew growers receive only around 40-50 percent of the after tax
border price, with much of the rest going to local and regional traders. Despite the increase in
competition among traders in recent years, it is clear that the marketing channels for raw cashew



12
  In the three provinces that he surveyed, Desai (2001) found that cash income from cashew nuts averaged 230,000
Mts. per household (Table 3.27). According to his estimates, total real consumption expenditures per capita stood at
around 1,800,000 Mts. (Table 3.13). Assuming five persons per household, the share of cash income from nuts in
total consumption expenditures is about 2.6%.
                                                         14

remain imperfectly competitive. Farmers’ income are depressed not only by transport and
marketing costs, but also by the market power exercised by traders.

        The internal marketing of cashew is performed through a multi-tiered trading system.
While the system is currently evolving in response to market and regulatory changes, there is
essentially three layers of intermediation between cashew farmers and world markets: (a) local
buyers and small retail traders;13 (b) larger wholesale traders; and (c) exporters and the domestic
processing factories. This is shown schematically in Figure 5, which summarizes the key players
and the flow of cashews through the marketing system in 1997/98. The producers who
marketed approximately 52,000 tons of raw cashews in 1997/98 sit at the bottom of the system.
They sold 27,000 tons of raw cashews at formal local posts, 15,000 tons to local intermediate
cashew collectors, and 10,000 tons to small/retail traders. From the local posts and intermediate
local traders, the majority of cashews were then sold to agents informais (informal traders) or
agents retalhistas (formal retail traders). Empresas comerciais (large/wholesale traders) and
processadores (processors) make up the next tier.

        Entry barriers at each of these levels are sustained by a combination of setup costs and
regulatory restrictions. For example, an export license is required to export raw nuts, and this
requirement is apparently enforced rather strictly (Kottak 2001). For mid-range traders, the
licensing requirements are not as significant. While technically one must be licensed, as long as
someone is working under an exporter, a license is not actually necessary. However, at the
small/retail trader level, one must obtain a license in order to set up a trading post and scales
within a given district. Small traders have to purchase this license from the district administrator
for a fee of approximately $2014 (Kottak, 2001). In addition, the elimination of the government-
set reference price may have aggravated asymmetric information. Prior to liberalization, the
government reference price was apparently clearly communicated. Since then, according to Dan
Owen (2001), there has often been “massive” confusion regarding prices.15 Producers perceive
that they had to sell their raw nuts early in the season. As a result, the itinerant traders who
approach the producers can have significant market power (Owen, 2001).

        For both small and large traders, cashews represent only a limited portion of their trading
activities. According to Deloitte and Touche (1997), USAID found that cashew accounts for
some 10% of retailers’ overall business. Cashew trade is concentrated during the months of
November through February. Like producer prices, traders’ prices vary within a season. See
Table 4 for a history of trading margins based on the Deloitte and Touche (1997) and World
Bank (1995b) reports. We provide more details on each tier of the marketing structure below.

Small rural trader/retailer
       There is generally one local post per village, if any, and therefore there is very little
competition at this level. While local informal and intermediate cashew collectors have
penetrated into some of the rural areas, there is still very limited competition and the majority of

13
   While the primary tiers in the trading system have remained the same, prior to liberalization, the small retail
traders were solely formal traders. Since liberalization, informal small traders have also entered the trading system.
14
   It is unclear whether this is per village/scale or 1 per district.
15
   According to Phyllis Pomerantz, World Bank Country Director, Mozambique did not announce the 5-year
schedule for eliminating the export tax, thereby increasing the level of uncertainty (Pomerantz, 2001a).
                                                      15

producers have only one trader to whom they can sell their raw nuts. The informal traders and
small retail traders generally buy cashews from approximately 5-8 local posts. They typically
handle 5-12 tonnes of cashews. They are licensed and are required to pay a 3% circulation tax
(Deloitte and Touche, 1997). Small traders purchase cashew through barter (exchanging basic
foodstuffs and required farming inputs for cashew nuts) and, increasingly, through cash
transactions.16

        According to Deloitte and Touche (1997), the informal/unlicensed traders (ambulantes)
have increased in number since liberalization. Informal/unlicensed traders are itinerant traders
who often have their own transport vehicles and therefore are able to travel to production areas
or posts located near production areas. It is difficult to estimate the number of informal traders.
However, in certain areas, they may exceed the number of formal traders. Informal traders will
usually only buy with a specific market in mind and are often connected with the larger traders
and exporters who may advance them the necessary money or goods to buy the cashews. They
have lower costs of business because they do not have to rent trading posts, do not pay the
licensing fee, and generally evade taxation. In the case of both the formal and informal traders,
the cost of transporting the raw nuts to the large trader/wholesaler is significant, due to the poor
rural infrastructure (Deloitte and Touche, 1997).

Large trader/wholesaler
        Large traders/wholesalers are located in larger towns or on key trading routes. In contrast
to the retailers, there are fewer wholesalers, but they are well organized and financially very
strong (World Bank, 1995b). The large traders do not compete against each other, but rather
seem to have an overall area of operation (Owen, 2001). Entry is primarily limited by the high
official cost of working capital that bears an interest rate of approximately fifty percent. Large
traders generally have long-established businesses with close working relationships with retailers
(Deloitte and Touche, 1997). Large traders or wholesalers vary greatly in size (trading between
50 and 400 tonnes of cashews), and scope of trading activity (Kottak, 2001).

Exporters
        According to Matule (2001), there are 8-10 cashew exporters in Mozambique who are all
based either in Maputo or Nacala, the primary port in Nampula Province. Each exporter
generally sources raw nuts through established relationships with mid to large-scale
traders/wholesalers (Kottak 2001). It appears that the main exporters attempt to roughly fix the
purchase price at the beginning of each year (Kottak, 2001, Mooney, 2001b).

      According to Deloitte and Touche (1997), the exporters have a great deal of market
power. They found that,

        In Nampula Province there is considerable overlap between the different levels of traders,
        especially at the wholesaler/exporter level, where the same companies are operating.
        This, combined with the long-term links between the wholesalers and some of the
        retailers places the exporter in a very strong position regarding the purchase of the raw
        nuts. This position has been weakened slightly over the last three years, especially by the

16
  Deloitte and Touche (1997) and Kottak (2001). Nicholas Kottak worked as a trader in Nampula during the
1998/99 season.
                                                      16

        arrival of the unofficial traders, but is still significantly stronger than the position held by
        the factories.

According to the World Bank (1995b), the trading margin between the farm-gate and factory
gate price is generally approximately 50%.17

Linkages among large traders, exporters, and processing factories
        Several trading corporations engage in large-scale trading, exporting raw cashews, and
also processing kernels. For example, Gani is a large trading company. It owns shares of
Angocaju, CC-Nacala, and Inducaju processing factories and has been one of the leading
exporters of raw cashew nuts for the past several years (Abt Associates, 1999). According to
Matule (2001), there are approximately 80-100 large traders and that the majority of these traders
are directly linked to the 8-10 exporters.18

The analytics of price pass-through in the presence of multi-tiered marketing
        It is a standard result in the theory of industrial organization that vertical relationships
magnify the costs of imperfect competition when the units within the relationship act
independently. This is the “double-marginalization” problem, arising from the piling of two
distortions on top of each other (see for example Tirole 1988, 173-176). In the cashew case, we
have at least three layers, and hence a case of triple-marginalization. Because of the
multiplicative nature of these distortions, the implications for prices received by farmers can be
particularly severe.

       To see this, consider the following simple model. Let there be three stages in the
marketing chain, with associated prices p1, p2, and p3. At each stage, we assume that buyers have
monopsony power while the sellers behave competitively. Hence in the first stage, farmers act
as competitive suppliers of raw cashew, with the positively sloped supply function Q = Q(p1)
and associated price elasticity of supply ε. They face n1 small traders who determine p1 in Nash-
Cournot fashion. Successive stages are analogous. Small traders face n2 large traders (who
determine p2), while large traders face n3 processors/exporters who determine p3. The
(exogenous) post tax world price is p*(1-t). We ignore transport and other costs, to focus purely
on imperfect competition. Under these assumptions, the ratio of farm-gate price to border prices
can be expressed simply as:




17
   However, as Table 4 illustrates, the trading margins increased in 1993/94 when exporters’ margins reached
482.3% (World Bank, 1995b). This report notes that in 1993/94 Caju de Moçambique was “being paralyzed
pending its privatization and only one private factory was operating” and “wholesalers were able to export nuts
directly to India where they could more than double the price obtained from Mozambican factories” (World Bank
1995b).
18
   Other trading companies involved in large-scale trading, exporting and processing include Joao Ferreira dos
Santos (JFS), which owns Cajeba processing factory; Has Nur, which owns Mocaju processing factory; and
Enacomo, the former state trading company which is currently a holding company that owns the Angocaju
processing factory. Further, Olam, Casa Salvador (Kottak 2001), C.C. Gordhandas Valabhdas, S.A.R.L., and
Ludwig Mueller (Mooney 2001b) participate in both trading and raw cashew exporting. The source for this data is
Abt Associates (1999), unless otherwise noted.
                                                         17


                                     p1             n ε  n ε  n ε 
                                                =  1  2  3  .
                                 p * (1 − t )       1 + n1ε  1 + n2ε  1 + n3ε 

        This expression clarifies the multiplicative nature of the distortion, and the steep discount
suffered by farmers as a result of the multi-tiered nature of the market. (Note that the price pass-
through increases with the degree of competition at each stage. In the limit, if n1 = n2 = n3 → ∞,
p1 = p*(1-t). It also highlights the fact that increasing the degree of competition at any one stage
of the marketing chain will not get farmers a much higher share of the world price. For example,
even if there are thousands of small and large traders, if these traders only have access to a
handful of exporters—say three—farmers will only get around 40% of the world price.
Similarly, if it were true that farmers only had access to one small trader (as suggested by the
Deputy Director of INCAJU), then farmers would never get more than 20% of the border price
irrespective of the number of large traders and exporters. (We take ε= 0.25, the supply elasticity
associated with the medium-term scenario reported in World Bank (1995b)).

         The expression also makes it clear that farmers’ welfare and hence the overall impact of
the liberalization is intricately tied to the number of traders. Note that the number of traders that
is relevant in determining the farmers’ share of the world price is the number of traders the seller
effectively has access to rather than the total number of traders in the country. This level of detail
is difficult to come by. However, using data on average actual margins for the 97/98 season and
a supply elasticity of 0.25, we compute the implied number of traders at each stage of the
marketing chain as: n1 = 11, n2 = 16, n3 =18 with farmers getting 48 percent of the final price.
Based on anecdotal evidence, these numbers appear somewhat on the high side. Part of the
explanation for this may be the fact that we are using a farmgate price average. According to
Desai (2001), farmgate prices within a given year vary widely. For example, during the 97/98
season, Desai (2001) found that roughly one-third of all farmers received no more than $0.26/kg
for raw cashew or 35% of the world price with some receiving as little as $0.17/kg or 24% of the
world price. Using these farmgate prices instead of the seasonal average brings the number of
effective traders faced by the farmer to between 2 and 5.

       A fuller evaluation of the impact of imperfect competition would need more detailed
information on prices, numbers of traders, and the nature of strategic behavior. Nevertheless, this
exercise illustrates the relative inefficacy of price reforms in poverty alleviation when these
reforms focus on markets far removed from those that farmers actually transact in.

6. The Role of Market Structure: International Trade
        Critics of the liberalization process in Mozambique have argued that because of “unfair
trade,” Mozambique must act strategically and devise an industrial policy aimed at promoting the
cashew sector.19 Claims of “unfair trade” can be boiled down to two: (1) India has monopsony

19
  For example, the Deloitte and Touche (1997) study argues that “if the disadvantages faced by Mozambique
because of India’s trade policy are not countered with an export tax on raw nuts, processors will be faced with unfair
competition that will have far reaching consequences for the economy of Mozambique.” According to UNDP (1998:
64, 72, 73) 'if Mozambique pursues a free trade policy in marketing raw nuts, within a short period it will cease to
have a competitive processing industry.' Instead, 'the Mozambican government should learn from the industry
supports offered to, for example, Indian cashew processors, and should adopt similar measures.' Similar concerns
are echoed by ordinary Mozambicans. In a recent study by Patrick Nicholson (2002) several interviewees expressed
                                                         18

power in the purchase of raw nuts; and (2) other countries including India subsidize processed
cashew exports. From an economic standpoint, the latter is an argument that strengthens the case
for liberalizing exports of raw nuts, unless one is prepared to make a case that there are
substantial rents in world trade in processed cashew. After all, if India is subsidizing its
processing industry, that can only be good news for suppliers of raw nuts such as Mozambique.
So we focus here on the claim that India has monopsony power in the market for raw nuts.

         Monopsony power on the part of India would lower the price that Mozambique earns for
its raw nut exports. On the assumption that the market for processed nuts is relatively
competitive, exporting raw nuts (instead of processed nuts) then entails a net terms of trade loss
for Mozambique. In addition, India’s monopsony power leaves Mozambique in a vulnerable
position vis-à-vis India should India’s need for raw nuts from Mozambique decline. In fact,
India’s eighth national development plan calls for self-sufficiency in the production of raw
cashew. Even if India does not achieve this goal, the concern is that the increase in supply will
push down the price that Mozambique can obtain for its raw nuts. In the event that India does
achieve this goal, Mozambique will have to look for another outlet for its raw nuts. We review
in this section the structure of international trade in raw and processed cashew. We also
document what we know about the Indian government’s policy vis-à-vis its cashew sector.

The world cashew market
        Purchases of raw cashew have historically been dominated by India. Between 1990 and
2000, India bought 84% of the world’s raw cashew, followed by China (4%) and Singapore (4%)
(see Table 5). The Hirschman-Herfindahl Index (HHI) on the buyer’s side of the market is 7,069,
indicating a very high degree of monopsony power. By contrast, sales of raw cashew are much
less concentrated. Throughout the 1990s, Tanzania sold 32% of the world’s raw cashew
followed by Guinea-Bissau (14%), Vietnam (14%), Indonesia (10%) and Cote d’Ivoire (9%).
The HHI on the seller side of the market is 1,671.20 Although Mozambique shows up as
exporting no raw cashew in the FAO statistics, several other sources (Deloitte and Touche 1997,
Abt 1999, INCAJU 2001) report that Mozambique exported approximately 10% of the world’s
raw cashew over the last decade.

       Table 6 indicates that there is much less asymmetry between buyers and sellers in the
world market for processed cashew. There are similar levels of concentration on the two sides of
the market, with the HHI for imports and exports at 2,377 and 3,443, respectively. Although the
market for processed cashews is moderately concentrated, neither side has the unilateral market
power that India has in the purchase of raw cashew. Imports of processed cashew over the
period 1990-2000 have been dominated by the United States (34%), with India following closely
(32%). India (52%) and Brazil (22%) dominate on the sellers’ side, with Mozambique’s share
standing at a paltry 2%.



concern over what they believed to be strategic behavior on the part of Indian traders. In their view, Indian traders
were out to close down factories in Mozambique by paying inordinately high prices thus making it impossible for
the Mozambican factories to compete. Now that virtually all of the factories have closed, the Indian traders can get
away with paying very low prices.
20
   According to the United States Department of Justice, an index between 1,000 and 1,800 indicates moderate
concentration while an index above 5,000 indicates highly concentrated.
                                                         19

         To better understand Mozambique’s position in these world markets, we examine
bilateral trade statistics for Mozambique (Feenstra, 2000). The main disadvantage of this dataset
is that it does not distinguish between raw and processed cashew. Nevertheless, we are able to
draw some conclusions from the data, since between 1980 (the start of the dataset) and 1991
Mozambique did not export any raw cashew.21 Table 7 suggests that India is the only outlet for
Mozambican raw cashew while there are several countries that import processed cashew from
Mozambique. According to these data, India did not import cashews from Mozambique until
1991 when the Government of Mozambique lifted the ban on exporting raw cashews. Until this
time, the United States and Western Europe were the largest importers of Mozambican cashews.
In 1990, the year just before raw cashew exports were allowed, Mozambique exported processed
cashew to 15 countries. The United States imported 76% of Mozambique’s processed cashew
while Europe accounted for the remainder. Table 7 also highlights the fact that the value of
exports peaked during the early 1980s (Feenstra, 2000).

        In contrast to India where a significant share of kernels produced are sold domestically,
nearly all of Mozambican processed cashews are exported. Although historically the United
States and Western Europe have been the largest outlets for Mozambique’s processed cashew,
this may be changing albeit slowly. New, smaller-scale cashew processing factories are
increasingly focusing their attention on the domestic and regional market, particularly Maputo
and South Africa (Mooney, 2001a). However, it is estimated that only 2-5% of kernels produced
are sold on this domestic and regional market (Abt Associates, 1999).

        These statistics make clear that by moving away from the export of processed cashew and
more heavily into the market for raw cashew, Mozambique has placed itself in the weakest
possible bargaining position. As an exporter of raw cashew, Mozambique faces essentially a
single buyer, India. By contrast, while the market for processed cashew is somewhat
concentrated, there is no single dominant player on either side of the market.

Indian cashew policy
        The cashew market in India is both highly complex and highly regulated. India imports
both raw and processed cashew and also exports processed cashew. Unlike Mozambique, India
has a large domestic market for processed cashews. Estimates regarding the percentage of
domestic production that is sold locally range from 25%-45%.22 Imports of processed cashew
have been increasing and in 1996, the value of imported kernels totaled $194.2 million
(UNCTAD, 2001). In addition, the hundreds of processors in India rely to a large extent on

21
  The value of exports based on the Feenstra data and the data from Desai (2001a), INCAJU (2001) and FAO
(2000) are quite different. During the period in which raw cashew exports were banned, from 1979/80 until 1991/92,
the FAO data for the value of kernel exports exceeded the values reported in the Feenstra data. In certain years, the
differences were significant. In 1988/89, the Feenstra value of exports was $9,902,000, while the FAO value was
$20,022,000. Differences in the data remain during the period of 1991/92 through 1996/97, the last year of the
Feenstra data. During this period, although the differences between sources were significant, for example $16.6
million in 1993/94, neither source consistently exceeded the others. Some of the differences in the data may be due
to differences in reporting the calendar year versus the seasonal year. However, that would not explain such
significant differences entirely.
22
  According to Sampat (2001), approximately 25-30% of Indian production is sold locally. According to Nomisma
(1994), 40-45% of Indian production is sold on the domestic market.
                                                        20

imported raw cashew. According to Desai (2001c), there are approximately twelve brokers
involved in importing and trading raw cashew nuts.

        Unlike Mozambique, producer prices in much of India are still regulated. The Indian state
of Kerala produces over 50% of the country’s raw cashews. In this state, producer prices and
marketing are controlled by the state. The State Cashew Development Corporation and the
Cashew Workers’ Apex Industrial Cooperative Society (CAPEX) have a monopoly on raw nut
procurement within Kerala. They fix producer prices and distribute raw cashews to processing
factories through a network of harvest and storage cooperatives (Nomisma, 1994). According to
Deloitte and Touche (1997), the state is “reputed to make a steady loss (due to the high prices
paid to the farmers which are not totally passed on to the factories) and this loss is periodically
written off, effectively representing a subsidy to both the farmers and the processors.” Raw nut
procurement and marketing are liberalized in the rest of India.

        The Indian domestic market for processed cashews is highly protected. India levies a
40% tariff on imported kernels (UNCTAD, 2001). As a result of this protection, Indian
processors sell kernels on the domestic market for a premium compared to the international
market rate23. This premium is approximately 20-25% at the retail level and 10-15% at the
wholesale level (Sampat, 2001). According to Deloitte and Touche (1997), Indian processors
who produce for export are indirectly subsidized via their ability to sell licenses to import goods
free of the normal duty.24 FAO data in Tables 5 and 6 confirm the fact that India is
simultaneously importing both raw and processed cashew and exporting processed cashew. This
raises the possibility (though difficult to verify) that India is using the proceeds from local sales
of processed cashew to subsidize their exports of processed cashew.

        Consider for example, the year 2000 in which India paid on average $0.79/kg for raw
nuts from Mozambique.25 India received on average $5.12/kg for exports of processed nuts.
Using a conversion factor of 4.2 (lower than the usual 5 for Mozambique because shelling by
hand has a higher yield), India therefore earned $1.79 per kg. of processed nuts before processing
costs ($5.12 minus 4.2 times 0.79). Deloitte and Touche (1997) estimates India’s processing
costs in 1997 at $1.82/kg. This implies that India would be losing about 3 cents per kg. of nuts
exported. One possibility is that all the raw nuts imported from Mozambique are processed to
sell domestically, while local nuts are purchased at a price lower than $0.79/kg and processed for
export. Alternatively, processors may be able to cross-subsidize exports with local sales. There
may be an incentive to do this because of the many perks awarded to exporters by the
government of India. Either way, the demand for Mozambique's raw cashew is artificially
inflated as a result of Indian trade policy.26

23
   According to Desai (2001b), Indian domestic sales of kernels are taxed while exports are not taxed. He also
asserts that there is a premium on domestic kernel.
24
   “Indian export incentives allow for access to import licenses free of the normal 27% duty for 50% of the value of
the exports. This right can be sold at 15%, effectively giving tax relief of 7.5% on imports to the full value of the
exports” (Deloitte and Touche, 1997, page 55).
25
   None of the following estimates include transport costs.
26
   It is not just India that protects its cashew industry. Brazil bans unshelled cashew nut exports unless special
circumstances prevail. And Vietnam and Indonesia have discouraged raw nut exports in order to encourage domestic
processing, by imposing export taxes of around 20% (Vietnam) and 30% (Indonesia) (Ministry of Tourism, Trade
and Industry, 1997).
                                                       21



        What about the concern that India may one day no longer need Mozambique’s raw
cashew? Figure 6 shows a steady increase in Indian raw nut production. In 1980, India produced
180,000 tonnes of raw cashew; in 2001 India’s production had reached 450,000 tonnes. In
contrast to the steady increase in India’s raw nut production, raw nut imports by India have been
extremely volatile. A complete picture would also study changes in industry capacity but these
figures are difficult to obtain. Nevertheless, the steady increase in India's raw nut production is
consistent with India's goal of self-sufficiency in raw nuts and the phasing out of raw nut imports
from Mozambique.

Summarizing the evidence - implications for Mozambique
        We have established that India has effective monopsony power in the purchase of raw
nuts from Mozambique. We have also shown that the market for processed cashew is more
competitive than the market for raw cashew. Thus moving from the export of processed nuts to
the export of raw nuts entails a terms of trade loss for Mozambique. Ironically, the liberalization
of the export market in Mozambique may have actually increased India’s monopsony power. The
countries exporting raw cashew to India do not collaborate with each other in setting prices or
quantities, and individually their market power vis-à-vis India depends on the number of
exporters per country. During the first year that Mozambique exported raw cashew to India, there
were only three exporters (Deloitte and Touche, 1997). As a consequence of market
liberalization, this number more than tripled and at last count ranged between 8 and 10. This
increase in competition at the export level–intended to benefit farmers–reduces Mozambique’s
bargaining power vis-à-vis Indian importers of raw cashew.27

        We have also discussed the possibility that India (as well as other countries) may be
subsidizing their processing industries. But to return to the point made at the beginning of this
section, this would not be in itself an argument for Mozambique doing the same. In fact, ceteris
paribus these subsidies, if they exist, raise the price received by Mozambique raw cashew
exporters, and increase the cost to Mozambique of discouraging raw cashew exports. Our
discussion of the world market for processed cashew suggests that this is not a market where
there are likely to be substantial rents. Therefore, on this argument alone, one cannot make a
case for Mozambique to encourage domestic processing. The case would have to rest instead on
India’s monopsony power in raw cashews.

7. The Domestic Processing Industry: Unemployment Costs
        Mozambique’s cashew processing industry is at a standstill. Although accounts vary,
most estimates put the total quantity of raw cashew processed in the last couple of years at close
to zero (INCAJU 2001; World Bank, 2002).

       By 1997, the existing factories employed a total of 10,086 workers (Deloitte and Touche,
1997, Abt 1999). These factories began closing thereafter, and by 2001 none of the highly


27
  Note that this may not be an isolated phenomenon. For example, Ghana sells cocoa to three large multinationals.
When the Ghana Cocoa Marketing Board was operating, it served as an effective monopolist in the sale of cocoa to
these multinationals. Now that the cocoa marketing board has been dissolved, Ghana’s bargaining power vis a vis
the multinationals has been reduced.
                                                        22

mechanized factories were still operational.28 However, it is not just the highly mechanized
factories that are having trouble. Cabo Caju, the first semi-mechanical factory to open in 1995 is
also reportedly having financial difficulty and Cajeba, another of the semi-mechanical facilities
is officially closed. The four factories that remain operational comprise a capacity of 2,450
tonnes and the ability to employ 625 people at full capacity. However, even the four factories
that are currently operating are not operating at capacity (World Bank, 2002).

        Factory closures have exacerbated a severe unemployment problem in Mozambique.
UNDP (2002) estimates that 45% of the population in Mozambique is currently “economically
inactive.” Furthermore, unemployment rates are expected to rise with the increase in population.
Recent interviews by CAFOD (2002) suggest that whole towns have literally shut down as a
result of the closure of the factories. Many of the unemployed are women. Of the 4,214 workers
employed by Caju de Mozambique at the time of privatization, 60% were women. As Penvenne
(1997) points out, these women are not the politically powerful urban constituents Krugman
refers to in his NYT piece. In addition to wages, many of the factories apparently provided
education and care for the children of working mothers (Penvenne, 1997).

        There are costs associated with this unemployment, especially since these workers are
likely to remain unemployed for some time. The broad societal and political costs of
unemployment are difficult to gauge. Easier to get a handle on are the narrower efficiency costs.
As long as these workers had a positive social marginal product—and as long as they have not
been reemployed—their unemployment entails an overall economic loss to the economy. Of
course, in the presence of export restrictions for raw cashews, the social product generated by
workers in the factories is uncertain, and can even have been negative. Their wages cannot be
used directly as indicators of their social marginal product. However, we have already estimated
the economic gains from the redirection of raw cashew away from the processors and toward
world markets (section 3). Therefore, any social gain resulting from the reduction in processing
activity has already been captured. The loss in the wage bill that is not made up by employment
gains elsewhere can then be appropriately treated as a component of the overall cost/benefit
calculus (see the analysis in section 3).

        To compute this loss, we need an estimate of the number of people who lost their jobs as
a result of the liberalization. For this, we use the number of employees on the payroll at the time
of privatization reported in Abt (1999): 8,09129. This is roughly equal to the number of workers
employed in 1997 (10,086) less those employed in the newer factories (1,500) or 8,586 reported
by Deloitte and Touche (1997). It also corresponds roughly with the number of workers that
would have been required to process all of the marketed raw cashew had it not been exported.30
It is somewhat lower than the 9,900 reported by AIM which likely included workers laid off



28
   As illustrated in Table 3, 14 of 18 factories have ceased operations since 1997. Four processing factories are
currently operational (Abt Associates, 1999, Mole and Weber, 1999, AIM, 2001, INCAJU, 2001b, World Bank
2002).
29
   This includes both employees on the payroll of the state-owned enterprises and those on the payroll of the
factories that were never officially "owned" by the government.
30
   Based on the "base case scenario" in Abt (1999) which reports the number of workers required to process 1,000
tonnes of raw nut by technology type, (130 impact, 175 Oltremare and 240 semi-mechanical).
                                                        23

from the newer factories. Assuming an annual average wage equal to $750 a year,31 the
efficiency loss associated with the loss of 8,091 jobs amounts to $6.07 million.

        We note that this understates the overall level of unemployment in the cashew processing
industry. Since several of the newer factories are currently not operating and because the workers
at the newer factories are hired on a temporary basis, when the factories are not operating the
workers don't get paid. Nevertheless, unlike the larger mostly mechanical factories, the hope is
that these newer factories will reopen. At any rate, conceptually it does not make sense to include
these workers in our calculation of the efficiency loss associated with liberalization since these
jobs were created post-liberalization.

Reasons cited for “failure” of the cashew processing industry
        To the owners of the large-scale processing factories, the export tax reduction is the
primary reason for the industry’s failure. But according to many others, these highly mechanized
factories were doomed to failure. In its original report, the World Bank asserted that the
Mozambican processing industry had a “fundamental structural competitive disadvantage
because of the technologies employed” (World Bank 1995b). In 1993, 97% of installed
processing capacity used either impact or Oltremare technology. According to the World Bank
(1995b), these highly mechanized processing technologies yielded a relatively low proportion of
whole kernels.32 Because of the technical limitations of the Mozambican processing system and
the substantial price differences between whole kernels and broken kernels (reaching as high as
50% per unit), the World Bank claimed that the value added by the Mozambican processing
industry was marginal or negative in the early 1990s, as illustrated in Table 8 (World Bank
1995b).33 The Bank concluded that more labor intensive technologies similar to those employed
in India would be more appropriate for Mozambique (also raising the possibility of temporary
protection using the “infant industry” argument).

       In India, processing is performed predominantly by home-based individual workers who
are compensated on the basis of whole kernel yield. Shelling is done by hand with a hammer or
with pedal-operated shears (Nomisma, 1994).34 While the manual technology employed in India

31
   Based on data in the Abt report suggesting that production workers make minimum wage per day plus 50% in
benefits, managers make approximately $5.00 a day including benefits, 85% of the workforce is production labor
and all workers are employed for 250 days a year.
32
   “Over the 1988-92 period, the kernel yield in Mozambique was 18.7%…well below the 23-25% results obtained
in India” (World Bank, 1995b). However, the type of processing technology employed is not the only reason for
this difference. According to Deloitte and Touche (1997), “Raw nuts purchased by factories in India are already
dried and usually graded by farmers or traders, allowing for higher out-turn or kernel recovery which is said to be
26.5%.”
33
   Note in Table 8 that the finding that the value added by the Mozambican processing industry has been marginal or
negative is highly dependent on the prices of raw and processed cashews, which are relatively volatile, and on the
kernel yield per ton of raw nuts that is assumed. As illustrated in Table 10, which is based on Deloitte and Touche
(1997), the value added by the Mozambican industry was positive between 1994/95 and 1996/97.
34
  In 1990, there were 638 processing factories in India, the majority of which were located in the state of Kerela
(Nomisma, 1994). However, it is unclear whether home-based processing operations are included in this figure.
Nomisma (1994) estimated that in 1990, 280,000 workers were employed in the Indian processing industry and 90%
of them were female.
                                                        24

yields a higher proportion of whole kernels, there are costs in terms of labor standards. Raw
cashews contain a corrosive and toxic liquid called cashew nut shell liquid35 (CNSL) that can be
harmful to workers’ hands, causing open sores, if they are not properly protected. The highly-
mechanized impact and Oltremare processing systems employed in Mozambique prevented
workers from coming in direct contact with CNSL. The semi-mechanical system currently
employed by Mozambican processing factories is located somewhere between the manual
system used in India and the highly mechanized systems previously used in Mozambique on the
continuum of workers’ exposure to CNSL. The hand and foot-operated semi-mechanical system
opens the raw cashew by “clamping two converging blades along a nut’s seam and prying it open
by cleaving one of the blades” (Abt Associates, 1999).

        Others within the World Bank apparently disagreed with the conclusions of the 1995
report. In 1996, the International Finance Corporation (IFC), the World Bank’s private-sector
financing arm, poured three million dollars into the highly mechanized factory purchased by
Anglo-American and Oltremare (IFC, 1996). The negative evaluation of the mechanized
factories was also not shared by the private entrepreneurs who purchased and reopened all of
these factories during the 1995/96 season. Some observers have suggested that the majority of
individuals who purchased the factories simply made poor business decisions and did not
accurately calculate the risks, costs, and benefits (of the cashew processing industry). However,
an IFC official, Ewen Cobban, asserts that Anglo-American, like many corporations and
individuals who purchased the factories, had previous experience operating in the Mozambican
cashew industry and therefore “poor business decisions” were not the likely causes of the
processing industry’s failure (Cobban, 2001). A more recent examination by Abt Associates
(1999) has also found that processing technology was not the key problem facing the processing
industry:
        the problems that confront the cashew processing industry have very little to do with
        processing per se. …(The factories) operate with reasonable efficiency. …The real
        problems that confront and constrain the rehabilitation and development of the cashew
        processing industry in Mozambique are poor procurement practices and the lack of more
        aggressive marketing. (Abt Associates 1999)

        The issue of appropriate technology hinges in part on the supply of raw nuts. As
discussed earlier, there is no longer a constant supply of high quality raw cashews sufficient to
meet the processing industry’s capacity. This has been particularly problematic for the large-
scale factories that employ impact and Oltremare technology. In the case of impact technology,
the raw nuts must be of a consistent size in order to minimize breakage and produce high quality
kernels. The Oltremare processing system produces higher quality kernels, but its high capital
cost necessitates large volumes of raw nut throughput (Deloitte and Touche, 1997). Conversely,
the semi-mechanical technology employed by the factories that remain operational can
effectively process nuts of varying size and it produces a higher quality kernels at a lower cost.
When the factories were privatized, there was an implicit assumption that the constant supply of
quality nuts that had existed in the past would continue (Abt Associates, 1999).36

35
  Historically, CNSL was a valuable product of the raw cashew nut until synthetic substitutes were developed.
36
  However, World Bank official Johannes Zutt asserts that the supply of raw nuts may not be as limited as the
processors imply, for the processors are “extremely opportunistic” (Zutt, 2001). Several large processing factories
are owned by trading companies. Such companies choose to process raw nuts when it is profitable and otherwise
                                                         25



        Finally, labor costs have been cited as a significant expense for the factories that were
privatized in 1995 and a factor in their inability to continue operating. Many owners of these
factories were forced to pay arrears for past labor when they purchased the factories. In addition,
under Mozambican law they were obligated to compensate workers for periods in which the
factories were not operational if the workers had not been formally given advance notice of a
plant closure and laid off. It is estimated that the total amount of severance and other payments
factories owe workers is approximately $5 million (Abt Associates, 1999).

        Whatever the reasons for the failure of the industry, it is clear that without an increase in
the supply of raw nuts, there will be no vibrant processing industry in Mozambique. The capacity
of the smaller firms pales in comparison to Mozambique’s potential. And although the reasons
remain unclear, even these small firms appear to be having trouble turning a profit.

8. Dynamic Effects: Why Hasn’t There Been a More Vigorous Supply Response?
        What does it take to get farmers to plant new cashew trees and market more raw
cashew?37 Output response to increases in producer prices in Mozambique has been
disappointing, and this is also true in much of the rest of Sub-Saharan Africa (UNCTAD, 1998).
In general, price and non-price incentives are both important in driving farmers’ decisions to
plant new cashew, and structural constraints can often be the determining constraint (Heltberg
and Tarp, 2001). We focus here on the credibility of policy reforms and farmers’ expectations
regarding future policies.

        Credibility of reforms is important because farmers in Africa have often gotten the short
end of the stick. Prior to independence, farmers were at the mercy of colonialists who often got
their way by physical means (Isaacman, 1996). Independence did not make things a whole lot
better for the farmers. For example, Mole (2000) suggests that the collapse of the rural marketing
system in Mozambique during the fight for independence and later civil war had a devastating
effect on farmers' expectations. They lost confidence in the marketing system as a source of
goods for which cashew income could be exchanged. In addition, the organizational structure of
the post-independence cashew sector excluded traditional authorities from discussions about the
development of the cashew sector. The result was that efforts at promoting cashew tree planting
did not succeed because farmers were suspicious and fearful that the government would later
nationalize the trees.

        Of course none of this would matter if the returns to investing in cashew occurred
instantaneously, so that current prices were all that farmers needed to know to make decisions.
But in fact there are large time lags, and investment in cashew entails significant sunk costs.
Under current conditions, the most important input to cashew production is labor. Approximately
50% of labor’s time is spent harvesting cashew during the period from September to January.
The remaining 50% of labor’s time is spent caring for the cashew trees prior to harvest (based on


they export the raw nuts. Therefore, the failure of the processing industry may simply demonstrate the relative
benefit of exporting the nuts and the costs of processing (Zutt, 2001).
37
   The majority of Mozambique’s cashew orchard was planted in the 1960s. Since these trees have a maximum
productive life of 40 years (and typically are considered unproductive after 25 years), the future of the cashew
industry in Mozambique depends critically on new planting.
                                                 26

Mole, Table A-1.2, 2000). Thus, 50% of the farmer’s cost associated with cashew production
from existing trees is a sunk cost, incurred before the harvest price is known. Once the farmer
has spent time tending the trees – the only way he can hope to recover some of those costs is by
harvesting the cashew even if the price he receives for the raw cashew doesn’t cover the costs of
maintaining the trees. Investing in new trees -- even using existing trees as planting material --
entails even greater sunk costs. Trees typically take from 3-5 years to bear any fruit at all and
take longer to bear enough fruit to make the investment worthwhile. The labor involved in
tending to these trees as well as the opportunity costs associated with planting new cashew trees
(not planting food crops) are all sunk costs.

         The sunk costs associated with planting new cashew trees make a credible pricing policy
both more important and more difficult to achieve. From the farmers’ point of view promises by
the government to cover the farmers’ sunk costs are not credible in the absence of a commitment
mechanism. This is because opportunistic governments have an incentive to cheat farmers out of
these sunk costs by paying them the minimum required for them to bring their crops to market –
that is, to pay them only their harvesting costs. Anticipating this eventuality, farmers will of
course have no incentive to plant in the first place. Therefore, if the government is unable to pre-
commit to an adequate price, the static, one-shot equilibrium in this game is one in which
farmers withdraw from production and the government gets no revenue.

        Repeated interaction between farmers and the government make a cooperative outcome
more likely but not inevitable. As discussed in McMillan (2001) and McMillan and Masters
(forthcoming), in order for a cooperative outcome to be sustained, the farmer’s share of sunk
costs in total costs must be relatively small (yielding a low potential payoff to exploitation by a
rent-seeking government), the government's discount rate must be relatively low, and the
revenue the government expects to earn from the crop in the future must be relatively high
(leading to a high value on the future costs of exploitation in the present). Surely the uncertainty
about the future generated by the long civil war was enough to ensure that Mozambique’s
cashew sector would end up in a high-tax equilibrium.

        One objection to this description of the situation in Mozambique might be the fact that
private traders (and not the government) have been purchasing cashew from farmers for over ten
years. However, privatization of the marketing sector is not enough to overcome the time-
consistency problem. Since competition among traders at the village level is minimal,
opportunistic traders have the same incentives as opportunistic governments to cheat farmers out
of sunk costs. Arguably, the traders face even more uncertainty about the future than the
government and hence will discount even more heavily future revenue relative to current
revenue. Thus, the privatization of the marketing system does not make this problem go way –
and possibly makes it worse.

        The situation is further complicated by the fact that the government is not undertaking the
reforms completely of its own volition. Reforms in the cashew sector have been – and still are - a
pre-condition for obtaining World Bank money. As Rodrik (1989) points out, this exacerbates
the time-consistency problem. Even if the government is not serious about reforms in the cashew
sector, it has an incentive to embark on the reform in order to gain access to foreign assistance.
But this increases the likelihood that an observed reform will later be reversed. Thus, the
                                                 27

question that remains is not just how to move from the bad state to the good state, but how to get
farmers to believe that the good state will last.

         The supply response depends, at a minimum, on communicating the reform and its
objectives to farmers. Even if the government fully intends to make good on its promises, this is
of little use if the farmers are actually unaware of the regime shift in pricing. In the cashew case,
it is astonishing how little communication there has been with farmers about the reforms in the
cashew sector. Not only were farmers not involved in designing the reform package, for the most
part they were unaware that substantial reforms were taking place. According to former World
Bank Country Director Phyllis Pomerantz, the government never officially announced the
outcome of its negotiations with the World Bank over the export tax. Given the critical
importance of the supply response, this has been a particularly important oversight.
Communication with farmers could also help overcome the time-consistency problem, if only by
increasing the costs of any later policy reversal. Increasing farmers’ awareness can also
strengthen their bargaining power vis-à-vis traders making it more difficult for traders to pay low
prices. By joining together to form a cohesive bargaining unit, they may even be able to put
pressure on traders to raise farmgate prices.

        Communicated policy must also be credible to be effective. Enhancing credibility might
take several forms. Institutions that increase the farmers' bargaining power -- such as unions --
could help increase credibility on several fronts. The option of cheating farmers out of sunk
costs becomes less attractive to traders when farmers have more effective means of retaliation for
low farmgate prices. Organizing farmers would also help increase their understanding of what to
expect and what to do when they don't get what they were expecting. Irreversible investments
and/or large up-front expenditures in the cashew sector by the government could enhance
credibility by making it costly for the government to allow things to go bad in the cashew sector.
Finally, changes that enable producers to escape taxation or retaliate against it, while not directly
affecting the credibility of reforms, diminish the importance of credibility by minimizing the cost
to farmers of a deceitful government.

         What kinds of irreversible investments might the government undertake? Some of the
non-price mechanisms highlighted by Mole (2000) and Heltberg and Tarp (2001) could be a
place to start. For example, bad roads and a lack of transportation help to keep the marketing
sector uncompetitive. By investing in these things, the government can help to make marketing
more competitive and cashew farming more profitable. Access to credit is an important deterrent
to competition in the marketing sector. Providing traders with access to trade credit at reasonable
rates is an important initiative that could make cashew marketing more competitive. To the
extent that these initiatives send a signal to traders that the government is serious about making
reforms in the cashew sector work, they could have the effect of lowering the traders’ discount
factors and making a cooperative outcome more likely. Credit is also a problem for farmers. The
more sophisticated technologies for cashew growing require substantial outlays of cash in the
early stages of development. Providing farmers with access to credit to undertake these new
improved techniques sends a signal to farmers that the government is serious about revitalizing
the cashew sector.
                                                28

       Technological improvements that lower sunk costs by reducing the long waiting period
between initial planting and fruition, could help to minimize the time-consistency problem by
reducing the incentive to cheat farmers out of sunk costs. Mole (2000) provides an example in
the context of increasing the overall productivity of the cashew orchard: top-working. Top-
working consists of using the rooting system of an old tree to graft on improved planting
material. This has the effect of pushing the initial production period up; with superior material,
production can begin within 18 months (compared with 3-5 years). This type of technological
advance substantially lowers the farmers’ sunk costs making predatory taxation less likely. The
obvious question is who is going to invest in this type of R&D, for that too involves sunk costs.
Government investment in this type of R&D might be one way to signal to farmers that the
government is serious about revitalizing the cashew sector.

9. Concluding Remarks
        In January 2001, suspecting that the exporters were under-invoicing their shipments in
order to avoid paying the export tax, the Mozambican government placed a temporary embargo
on the export of raw cashew nuts to India (AIM, February 7, 2001). It appears that the embargo
was lifted quickly when the government subsequently determined that the prices reflected the
decline in the world market price (Zutt, 2001). Nonetheless, the episode demonstrates the shaky
nature of the reform and the fragility of the pricing regime that governs cashew exports. After
more than ten years of attempted reform, there is little to show for it.

        Our analysis indicates that there were several reasons for this failure. On the economic
side, the reforms took little note of important market imperfections such as the multi-layered
marketing chain and the monopsony role of India that reduced the benefits to cashew farmers.
There was virtually no attention paid to the credibility of policy changes and how to enhance it.
The government made little effort to manage the political fallout that should have been quite
predictable ex ante. And the World Bank did not sufficiently appreciate the ineffectiveness of
buying reform through aid-cum-conditionality. In all these respects, Mozambican cashews
provide an illuminating case study of the misfortunes that have befallen the reforms that African
countries undertook in the last couple of decades.
                                                         29


Appendix A: The Debate
        The opposition to the World Bank’s policies in the cashew industry is multi-faceted.
Many opponents assert that decreasing the export tax would not have led to increases in producer
prices and cashew production as predicted by the World Bank (see Hanlon 2000). Hanlon and
others (including Carlos Cardoso, a journalist who was subsequently murdered) claim that the
peasant farmers did not gain from the liberalization of exports. They point to traders as the main
beneficiaries (Hanlon, 2000, Whewell, 2000). Fauvet (2001) asserts that the policy actually
harmed the producers, who had benefited from competition for raw nuts. He cites that the
producer price fell by 50% when the factories closed.38

Critics of the World Bank claim that owners who purchased the processing factories from the
government in 1995 required a period of protection in order to rehabilitate the factories following
the civil war and the period of government operation in which the equipment had deteriorated.
According to Hanlon (2000), “there was an informal agreement with the owners of the newly
privatized companies that they would be given a period of protection while they rehabilitated and
modernized the factories.” According to Fauvet, the agreement to continue protecting the
processing industry was even more explicit:

            AICAJU , the cashew processors association, argues that the government defaulted on the
            contracts signed with the new owners. The contract with Angocaju, for instance, clearly
            stated the government would guarantee the supply of raw nuts to the factories, and only
            nuts surplus to the factories’ requirements would be exported. (Fauvet, 2001)

Without a ban on exporting raw nuts or a prohibitively high tax, the processing factories could
not obtain enough raw cashew nuts to operate. According to Mondlane, the policy has
“effectively stimulated the export of raw nuts to India, starving the local processing industry of
its raw material” (Panafrican News Agency, 1999). Derek Higgo, managing director of Mocita,
claims that the inadequate supply of raw nuts was a key problem (Whewell,2001).

            Opponents also cite the financial costs of liberalizing the cashew industry:
            For every ton of raw nuts exported, Mozambique loses $150 that it would have earned
            had that same ton been converted into processed kernels. The Frelimo deputies estimate
            this loss over the past four years at $12 million. Businesses invested $25 million in
            cashew processing after 1994 – this risks being a total write-off. (AIM, 1999).

These opponents assert that Mozambique cannot compete with Indian cashew processors without
protection. They argue that protection is warranted given Indian labor standards and Indian trade
policies that we discussed in the paper.

       The critics argue that the World Bank did not consider the risk that Mozambican
producers would become dependent on India as a single buyer. Indian merchants are currently
paying the same prices the factories were willing and able to pay. According to Cobban (2001),
the World Bank’s policy effectively destroyed not only the Mozambican processing industry, but
also any competition that the Indian buyers faced. In addition, India has a policy of expanding
domestic cashew production in order to meet its processing capacity. Critics question who will
38
     The farm gate price fell by 50% in 2001, however the FOB price also decreased by 43% (Desai, 2001a).
                                                       30

buy Mozambican raw nuts if the Mozambican processing factories close and the Indian demand
for imported raw cashews decreases (Torcato, 1998).

        Owners and operators of the large-scale, capital-intensive processing factories that have
closed assert that they cannot and should not be forced to compete against an Indian industry
with lower labor standards. As discussed earlier, India’s cashew industry depends more on
manual labor to shell raw nuts. According to Jeter (2000), this system is cheaper, but exposes
workers to the toxic CNSL. According to Derek Higgo, workers at the Mocita processing
factory, which employed automated processing technology, did not come into direct contact with
CNSL, but that is not the case in the Indian industry (Whewell, 2000).

        Finally, opponents criticize the World Bank for infringing on Mozambique’s sovereignty
and forcing it to accept policies against its will (Hanlon, 2000). According to Mozambican
President Joaquim Chissano, Mozambique “had to liberalize the export of raw cashews in order
to obtain other benefits from the Bretton Woods institutions.” Specifically, he asserts that
Mozambique complied with the World Bank’s liberalization policy in order to qualify for HIPC
debt relief. However, he asserts that the cashew industry was sacrificed as a result (AIM, June
25, 2001).

         While the opposition has succeeded in drawing a great deal of attention to the World
Bank’s intervention in the Mozambican cashew industry, it has also been the subject of criticism
itself. In a New York Times editorial, Paul Krugman (2000) criticized the opposition,
particularly Robert Naiman of the Center for Economic and Policy Research, for not fully
understanding the case. He asserted that the rural peasant farmers, who lack political power,
were forced to bear the cost of the export tax which forced them to sell their crop cheaply to the
domestic processing industry. The export tax, according to Krugman, was a means of protecting
the processing industry and its relatively small number of politically influential factory owners
and workers. He concluded that the export tax had a net negative impact on Mozambique and
that World Bank was justified in making loans conditional upon reducing the export tax.

       Naiman responded to Krugman’s editorial in a New York Times letter to the editor. The
New York Times, however, published an abbreviated version of Naiman’s original letter. In the
unabridged letter, Naiman asserts that the Bretton Woods institutions exercise “colonial power
over developing countries” and that the “dogmatic trade liberalization” that they impose hurts
developing countries (Naiman, 2000a). Naiman also provides some figures to counter
Krugman’s claim that the World Bank policy has benefited the poor. In the published version,
Naiman cites the Deloitte and Touche Report (1997) which, Naiman asserts, found that
“Mozambique’s peasants did not gain anything from liberalized exports of raw cashews”
(Naiman, 2000b).39



39
   We have been unable to find this quotation in Deloitte and Touche (1997). The report does state that, “These
concessions to liberalization (reducing the export tax), with the assistance of the gradually increased minimum
farmer price, and the diminishing supply of raw nuts, have sharpened the competitive trade in the rural areas
resulting in a trend of increasing producer price, especially toward the end of the 1997 buying campaign. However,
it is only those large farmers with the ability and financial capacity to store nuts that have benefited.”
                                                 31

        Graham Mann (2001) has echoed Pual Krugman’s arguments. He criticizes Paul Fauvet,
an opponent of the World Bank, for not fully understanding the case. He asserts that reducing
the tax on raw cashew exports, as advocated by the World Bank, led to increases in farm-gate
prices between 1996 and 1999. He further asserts that the producer benefits would have
continued had the Government fully implemented the World Bank policy and completely
eliminated the export tax. Mann counters the opposition’s claims that the factories failed
because of an inadequate supply of high quality raw cashew nuts. He states that “more than half
of these factory owners who complain about having no nuts for their factories were also
exporting raw cashew nuts in all sorts of discounted arrangements with India.” Mann implies
that factories that did fail due to inadequate supplies of raw nuts made poor business decisions.
He states that Mocita was advised that it would only be viable if it could run at full capacity, yet
it proceeded to rehabilitate the factory despite the fact that the supply of high quality nuts at the
time was insufficient.

Recent Developments
        In 1999, a bill entitled “Proposed Bill for the Cashew Sub-Sector Reindustrialization in
Mozambique” was introduced in the Parliament. “The bill proposed to ban the export of raw
cashew nuts, that priority be given to first supplying the local processing industry, and that
market prices be set at the producer level” (Mole and Weber, 1999). However, this bill was not
passed in its original form. “In October, 1999, the National Assembly passed a law providing for
an increase in the export tax on raw cashew nuts from 14% to 18-22% and for a first right to
purchase raw nuts for the benefit of indigenous processors” (IMF, 2001).

         A national meeting on the cashew industry was held in Nampula on July 5, 2001. This
meeting focused primarily on ways to increase cashew production. According to Agriculture
Minister Helder Muteia, the government has introduced a program to expand and renew the
cashew orchard, increasing production to more than 100,000 tonnes within three years (AIM,
July 5, 2001). This is to be accomplished through improving planning and cashew farming
techniques, including chemically treating trees. The meeting also addressed issues of concern to
the processing industry. It recommended liquidating several inefficient processing factories that
are not currently operating, including Mocaju, Procaju Inhambane and Manjacaze, and Polycaju.
It also recommended terminating redundant workers’ employment and changing the labor laws
to facilitate hiring temporary labor.
                                                           32


                                                     References

Abt Associates, Inc. (1999). “Assessment of the Status of Competitiveness and Employment in
the Cashew Processing Industry in Mozambique.” Abt Associates, Bethesda, Maryland

AIM (Mozambique New Agency) (February 8, 1999). Report. No. 151

AIM (Mozambique New Agency) (February 7, 2001). Report. No. 200

AIM (Mozambique New Agency) (April 3, 2001). Report. No. 204

AIM (Mozambique New Agency) (May 15, 2001). Report. No. 207

AIM (Mozambique New Agency) (June 25, 2001)

AIM (Mozambique New Agency) (July 5, 2001)

Arulpragasam Jehan. (2001). Personal interview, July 2, 2001

Cobban, Ewen. (2001). Phone interview, July 25, 2001

Cramer, Christopher (1999). “Can Africa Industrialize by Processing Primary Commodities?
The Case of Mozambican Cashew Nuts,” World Development, Vol. 24, No. 7, pp. 1247-1266

Deloitte and Touche ILA (Africa) and Deloitte Touch Tohmatsu Sisteconta. (1997). Cashew
Marketing Liberalization Impact Study. Government of Mozambique, Maputo

Desai, Jaikishan (2001a). “Cashew Production and Marketing in the Smallholder Sector in
Mozambique.”40 Unpublished report for the World Bank

Desai, Jaikishan (2001b). Personal interview, July 2, 2001

Desai, Jaikishan (2001c). E-mail dated August 2, 2001. Based on his conversation with an
unnamed Indian cashew broker.

EIU (2000), Mozambique Country Memo. March

FAO (2000). FAOSTAT Agriculture Data

Fauvet, Paul. (2001). “World Bank Crushes Mozambique’s Cashew Industry.” Business
Report. May 23, 2001. South Africa

Feenstra, Robert (2000). World Trade Flows, 1980-1997. Institute of Governmental Affairs,
University of California, Davis. Davis, CA


40
     The World Bank did not classify this report as “Grey Cover.” I will ask Peter Moll how it should be cited.
                                             33

Hanlon Joseph (2000). “Power Without Responsibility: the World Bank and Mozambican
Cashew Nuts.” Review of African Political Economy. Volume 83, March 2000

Heltberg, Rasmus and Finn Tarp (2002). “Agricultural Supply Response and Poverty in
Mozambique,” Food Policy, 27 (2002) 103-124

Hilmarsson, Hilmar T. (1995). Cashew Pricing and Marketing in Mozambique. World Bank
Working Paper prepared for a seminar in June 1995, Maputo

International Monetary Fund (IMF). (2001). “Mozambique: 2000 Article IV Consultation and
Second Review Under the Poverty Reduction and Growth Facility – Staff Report; Staff
Statement; Public Information Notice and Press Release on the Executive Board Discuss; and
Statement by the Authorities of Mozambique.” January 17, 2001

INCAJU (Instituto de Fomento do Caju). (2001). Data obtained from Ana Machalela through
e-mail dated July 20, 2001

INCAJU (Instituto de Fomento do Caju). (2001b). Data obtained from R. Matule through e-
mail dated September 27, 2001

INCAJU (Instituto de Fomento do Caju). (1998). “Cashew Master Plan: Production
Component.” Maputo, Mozambique

Isaacman, Allen. (1996) Cotton is the Mother of Poverty: Peasants, Work and Rural Struggle in
Colonial Mozambique, 1938-1961 (Portsmouth: Heinemann,1996)

Jaffee, Steven and Morton, J. (1995). Marketing Africa’s High-Value Foods: Comparative
Experiences of an Emergent Private Sector. Kendall/Hunt, Dubuque

Jeter, Jon. (2000). “In Mozambique, a Less Than Helpful Hand: World Bank, IMF Blamed for
Fall of Mozambican Cashew Industry.” The Washington Post. October 18, 2000

Kottak, Nicholas. (2001). Phone interview, July 14, 2001

Krugman, Paul. (2000) “Reckonings; A Real Nut Case.” The New York Times. April 19, 2000

Mangwiro, Charles. (1999). “Mozambique Cashew Industry Close to Collapse” Daily Mail and
Guardian. Johannesburg, South Africa, January 29, 1999

Matule, Raimundo, Deputy Director INCAJU. (2001). Personal interview, October, 2001

McMillan, Margaret (2001) “Why Kill the Golden Goose? A Political-Economy Model of
Export Taxation," The Review of Economics and Statistics, vol. 83, issue 1, pp 170-184
                                              34

McMillan, Margaret and Masters, William (2001) "An African Growth Trap: Production
Technology and the Time-Consistency of Agricultural Taxation, R&D and Investment," Review
of Development Economics (forthcoming)

Mole, Paulo Nicua (2000). “An Economic Analysis of Smallholder Cashew Development
Opportunities and Linkages to Food Security in Mozambique’s Northern Province of Nampula.”
Ph.D. diss., Michigan State University

Mole, Paulo and Michael Weber (1999). “The Cashew Debate in Mozambique: Are There
Alternative Strategies?” Flash…Research Findings from the Food Security Project in
Mozambique. No. 16E

Moll, Peter. (2001). Phone interview, August 1, 2001

Mooney, Timothy. (2001a). Phone interview, June 21, 2001

Mooney, Timothy. (2001b). Personal interview, July 3, 2001

Mosca, João and Delgado, Felisa Ceña. (1994). “Ajustamento Estructural e Segurança
Alimentar: O Caso de Moçambique,” Extra, Maio/Agosto 1994, Centro de Formação Agrária e
de Desenvolvimento Rural, Maputo

Naiman, Robert. (2000a). Unpublished version of New York Times letter to the editor. April
20, 2000. http://www.fair.org/articles/naiman-krugman.html

Naiman, Robert. (2000b). “World Bank’s Power.” The New York Times. April 26, 2000

Newitt, M. (1995). A History of Mozambique. Hurst, London in Cramer, 1999

Nicholson, Patrick (2001) “Mozambique:The effects of trade liberalization,” unpublished report
for CAFod

Nomisma (1994). The World Cashew Economy. Edizioni L’inchiostroblu. Oltremare SpA..
Bologna, Italy

Nomisma (1987). The World Cashew Economy. Edizioni L’inchiostroblu. Oltremare SpA.
Bologna, Italy

Owen, Dan. (2001). Personal interview, July 3, 2001

Panafrican News Agency (PANA). (1999). Daily Newswire, December 29,1999

Penvenne, Jeanne. (1997) "Seeking the Factory for Women: Mozambican Urbanization in the
Late Colonial Era," Journal of Urban History, Vol. 23, No. 3 (March, 1997): 342-379

Pomerantz, Phyllis. (2001a). Personal interview, July 3, 2001
                                              35



Pomerantz, Phyllis. (2001b). E-mail dated September 25, 2001

Prasad, M. and Americo Uaciquete (1997). “Genetic Upgrading of Cashew in Mozambique.”
Proceedings of the International Cashew and Coconut Conference, 17th to 21st of February, Dar
Es Salaam, Tanzania

Rodrik, Dani. (1989) “Promises, Promises: Credible Policy Reform via Signaling,” The
Economic Journal, 99, September, 1989

Sampat, Harish. (2001). Information obtained from Harish Sampat, Samsons Trading
Company, Bombay in an e-mail dated October 13, 2001

Sowa, Arnold. (2001). Phone interview, July 24, 2001

Tarp Finn. (1990). “Prices in Mozambican Agriculture.” Journal of International
Development, Vol. 2, No. 2, 172-208

Tirole, Jean. (1988). The Theory of Industrial Organization. Cambridge, MA, MIT Press

Torcato, Maria de Lourdes. (1998). “Caju – há luz no fundo do túnel?” MoçAmbiente, Março-
Abril 1998, Maputo in Hanlon, 2000

UNCTAD. (1998). Trade and Development Report, United Nations, New York and Geneva,
1998

UNCTAD. (2001). Trade Analysis and Information System (TRAINS).
www.unctad.org/trains/index.htm

UNDP. (1998) National Human Development Report for Mozambique, UNDP, Maputo, 1998

Vegarra, German. (2001). Phone interview, July 18, 2001

Whewell, Tim. (2000). “Mozambique: Going Nuts About the World Bank.” BBC News,
August 18, 2000

World Bank (2002). (Email communication with Daniel Souza) April 5, 2002

World Bank (2000a). “Briefing Note on Cashew Policy” World Bank, Washington, D.C.

World Bank (2000b). Country Assistance Strategy. Report no. 20521-MOZ. World Bank,
Washington, D.C.

World Bank (1997). Country Assistance Strategy. Report no. 17180-MOZ. World Bank,
Washington, D.C.
                                            36

World Bank (1995a). Country Assistance Strategy. Report no. 15067-MOZ. World Bank,
Washington, D.C.

World Bank (1995b). Mozambique: Impediments to Industrial Sector Recovery. Report no.
13752-MOZ. World Bank, Washington, D.C.

Xinhua News Agency (1999). “Mozambican Cashew Workers Call for Protection.” September
3, 1999

Zutt, Johannes. (2001) Phone interview, September 20, 2001
                                Figure 1: Raw Cashews:Volumes Produced, Exported and Processed
                 300,000


                                                                                                                                             Raw Cashew
                 250,000                                                                                                                     Exports

                                                                                                                                             Processed
                                                                                                                                             Cashew
                                                                             Independence-1975
 Metric Tonnes


                 200,000                                                                                                                     Exports
                                                                                                                                             Total
                                                                                                                                             Production

                 150,000
                                                                                       War Begins-1982
                                                                                                                        War Ends-1992
                                                                                                                        Raw Cashew Exports
                 100,000
                                                                                                                        Resume 1991/92



                  50,000



                      0
                           61   63   65   67   69   71   73   75   77   79   81   83   85   87   89      91   93   95     97   99
Raw Cashew Exports Banned - 1978
Table 1
Hypothetical Supply Response for Raw Nuts
Source: World Bank (1995b)
                                Thousand Tons             Export Value (Million US$)         Farmers' Income (Million US$)
Producer Price US$ 0.375kg - Producer Share 50%
Short-term                                 46.6                                   34.9                               17.4
Medium-term                                54.3                                   40.9                               24.5
Long-term                                  96.7                                   72.5                               36.2

Producer Price US$ 0.45/kg - Producer share 60%
Short-term                                  49.9                                  37.4                               22.4
Medium-term                                 59.9                                  44.9                               29.9
Long-term                                 114.7                                     86                               51.6

Producer Price US$ 0.525/kg - Producer share 70%
Short-term                                 53.3                                   39.9                               27.9
Medium-term                                 65.5                                  49.1                               34.4
Long-term                                 132.6                                   99.4                               69.6

The table assumes an initial production of 35,000 tons of raw cashew nuts
Short term is 1-2 years
Medium term is within 5 years
Long term is within 10-15 years
Elasticities for scenario are: 0.15 (short term), 0.25 (medium term), and 0.80 (long term)

Source: World Bank, 1995b
Table 2
Schedule of Export Tax (Proposed and Actual)
Year                   Industry    WB/Industry       Actual
                       Proposal    Negotiated        Tax
                                   Schedule
1995/96                       25%              20%          20%
1996/97                       20%              12%          14%
1998/99                       16%               7%          14%
1999/00                       12%               5%          18%
2000/01 and                     8%              0%          18%
continuing
Source: Deloitte and Touche (1997) and Desai (2001a)
Figure 2                                                         Nominal Producer Price Trends

                                 8000                                                                                                                                        0.60
                                 7000
                                                                                                                                                                             0.50
                                 6000
                                                                                                                                                                             0.40
                                 5000




                  Meticais /kg




                                                                                                                                                                                    USD/kg
                                 4000                                                                                                                                        0.30

  Nominal                        3000
  Producer
                                                                                                                                                                             0.20
  Price (Mt/kg)                  2000
                                                                                                                                                                             0.10
                                 1000

  Nominal                          0                                                                                                                                         0.00
  Producer




                                                                                                                                                                     100
                                        75
                                             76
                                                  77
                                                       78
                                                            79
                                                                 80
                                                                      81
                                                                           82
                                                                                83
                                                                                     84
                                                                                          85
                                                                                               86
                                                                                                    87
                                                                                                         88
                                                                                                              89
                                                                                                                   90
                                                                                                                        91
                                                                                                                             92
                                                                                                                                  93
                                                                                                                                       94
                                                                                                                                            95
                                                                                                                                                 96
                                                                                                                                                      97
                                                                                                                                                           98
                                                                                                                                                                99
  Prices
  (usd/kg)




                                                                      Real Producer Price Trends

                                 700                                                                                                                                          0.8

                                 600                                                                                                                                          0.7

                                 500
                                                                                                                                                                              0.6
                                                                                                                                                                              0.5
                  Meticais /kg




                                 400




                                                                                                                                                                                    USD/kg
                                                                                                                                                                              0.4
                                 300
  Real                                                                                                                                                                        0.3
  Producer
  Price                          200
  (meticais/kg)                                                                                                                                                               0.2
                                 100                                                                                                                                          0.1
  Real
  Producer
                                   0                                                                                                                                          0




                                                                                                                                                                       100
                                        75
                                             76
                                                  77
                                                       78
                                                            79
                                                                 80
                                                                      81
                                                                           82
                                                                                83
                                                                                     84
                                                                                          85
                                                                                               86
                                                                                                    87
                                                                                                         88
                                                                                                              89
                                                                                                                   90
                                                                                                                        91
                                                                                                                             92
                                                                                                                                  93
                                                                                                                                        94
                                                                                                                                             95
                                                                                                                                                  96
                                                                                                                                                       97
                                                                                                                                                            98
                                                                                                                                                                 99
  Prices
  (usd/kg @
  par.rates)
Table 3
Summary of Cashew Processing Factories
                  Factory Name/(Original Name)                   Location        Year Est.          Status:                              Ownership                     Installed      Technology
                                                                                               Operational or Yr.                                                      Capacity
                                                                                               Operations Ceased                                                          (1)

                  Adil IC                                     Inhambane             1995      1997                       Mr. Vipino - 100%                               3000      impact
                  Africaju                                    Sofala                                                     (8)
                  Angocaju/(Angoche)                          Nampula               1971      1997                       Gani/Enacomo - 70%, State - 30%                10500      impact
                  Beira                                       Sofala                                                     (8)
                  Cabo Caju                                   Cabo Delgado          1995      Operates                   Juerg Reiser - 100% (8)                       2,000 (2) semi-mechanical
                                                                                              intermittently (6)
                  Cajeba                                      Nampula               1995      Officially closed (7) Grupo JFS - 100% (Portuguese) (8)                    3500      semi-mechanical

                  Inducaju-1                                  Nampula               1973      1999 (2,4)                 Gani/Grupo AGT- 95%, State - 5%                 2500      oltremare-hand
                  Inducaju-2                                  Nampula               1973      1999 (2,4)                 Gani/Grupo AGT- 95%, State - 5%                 1250      semi-mechanical
                  Invape                                      Gaza                  1998      Operational (2,4)          V. Mufemane - 100% (8)                           375      semi-mechanical
                  Madecaju                                    Maputo                1998      Operational (4)            Alvaro Martins - 100%                            200      semi-mechanical
                  Mocaju (Machava)                            Maputo                1965      1998 (4)                   Has-Nur - 85%, State - 15%                     12500      impact
                  Mocita (in Xai Xai)                         Gaza                  1965      2001 (3)                   Anglo-American - 60%, Oltremare,                8750      oltremare-auto
                                                                                                                         ED&FM (8)
                  Monapo                                      Nampula               1971      1999                       Entreposto - 100% (8)                           9000      oltremare-hand
                  Nacala/(Antenes)                                                  1969      1999 (5)                   Entreposto/Grupo AGT-43%, State-                9375      oltremare-hand
                                                              Nampula                                                    31% (8)
                  Polycaju/(Caju Industrial )                 Maputo                1950      1999 (2,4)                 Mr. Cassamo - 95%, State - 5%                   3750      impact
                  Polycaju-Procaju                            Maputo                1950      1999 (2,4)                 Mr. Cassamo - 95%, State - 5%                   1400      hammer
                  Procaju-Inhambane/(Inhambane)                                     1966      1998                       Sara Daude - 90%, State - 10%                   3750      impact
                                                              Inhambane
                  Procaju-Manjacaze                           Gaza                  1965      1998                       Sara Daude - 80%, State - 20%                   3750      impact
                  Socaju/(Korean-Moz. Cashew)                 Inhambane             1995      Operational (4)            Antonio Viriato - 100% (8)                      1250      manual

                  Notes
                  (1) 1999 - 3 shifts/day -mechanical shelling; 1 shift/day - manual/pedal shelling; operating 250 days/year.
                  (2) State Secretariate of Cashew in Mole and Weber, 1999
                  (3) AIM, 2001
                  (4) Abt Associates, 1999
                  (5) INCAJU, 2001b
                  (6) Due to financial problems, operates intermittently, World Bank, Maputo, April, 2002.
                  (7) Officially declared closed for "political reasons." Some evidence suggests factory is operating at very low capacity, WB, Maputo, April, 2002.
                  (8) Includes foreign ownership, otherwise, exclusively domestic ownership
                  (9) Hilmarsson (1995)
                  (10) Deloitte and Touche (1997)
                  (11) According to Hilmarsson (1995), only one factory was operational in 1994 (p. 18)
Table 3
Summary of Cashew Processing Factories
       Factory Name/(Original Name)                  Reference Price Purchase Price Downpaymen Cost of Equipment Workers Workers Workers Workers Processed Processed
                                                     at Privatisation      at        t at time of      in US$       Employed, Employed, Employed, Employed, in 1993  in 1994
                                                        (US$) (9)     Privatisation   purchase                      1995 (10) 1996 (10) 1997 (10)   early             (9,11)
                                                                       (US$) (9)      (US$) (9)                                                    90s(4)
     Adil IC                                                                                      700,000/1000 tons       140       399       430       500
     Africaju                                                                                               80,000        150       150       150
     Angocaju/(Angoche)                                     4,210,000    3,000,000        600,000 700,000/1000 tons       419       436       436       975      113      -
     Beira                                                  1,140,000      535,000        100,000 700,000/1000 tons       217       215       219
     Cabo Caju
                                                                                                                                    20,000                -       40      250
     Cajeba
                                                                                                                                    80,000                250    500      700
     Inducaju-1                                                                                                                     80,000                446    496      550     548      280      -
     Inducaju-2                                                                                                                                           629    633      786
     Invape                                                                                                                     20,000
     Madecaju                                                                                                                   20,000
     Mocaju (Machava)                                         3,230,000                                               700,000/1000 tons                   906    906      906    1,078    3,517     -
     Mocita (in Xai Xai)
                                                                                                                      750,000/1000 tons                  92       113      502   1,220    1,319     -
     Monapo                                                                                                           750,000/1000 tons               1,290     1,344    1,406   1,088    5,655   6,000
     Nacala/(Antenes)
                                                                                                                      750,000/1000 tons               1,118     1,325    1,400   1,021
     Polycaju/(Caju Industrial )                              1,710,000                                               700,000/1000 tons                 -       1,051    1,051     765    1,091     -
     Polycaju-Procaju
     Procaju-Inhambane/(Inhambane)
                                                              1,800,000               900,000              90,000     700,000/1000 tons                 471       555      555    570     1,328     -
     Procaju-Manjacaze                                        1,200,000               600,000              60,000     700,000/1000 tons                 563       625      625    326       311     -
     Socaju/(Korean-Moz. Cashew)                                                                                      700,000/1000 tons                  80        80      120
                                                             13,290,000            5,035,000             850,000                                      6,771     8,868   10,086   8,091   13,614   6,000
     Notes
     (1) 1999 - 3 shifts/day -mechanical shelling; 1 shift/day - manual/pedal shelling; operating 250 days/year.
     (2) State Secretariate of Cashew in Mole and Weber, 1999
     (3) AIM, 2001
     (4) Abt Associates, 1999
     (5) INCAJU, 2001b
     (6) Due to financial problems, operates intermittently, World Bank, Maputo, April, 2002.
     (7) Officially declared closed for "political reasons." Some evidence suggests factory is operating at very low capacity, WB, Maputo, April, 2002.
     (8) Includes foreign ownership, otherwise, exclusively domestic ownership
     (9) Hilmarsson (1994)
     (10) Deloitte and Touche (1997)
     (11) According to Hilmarsson (1994), only one factory was operational in 1994 (p. 18)
                                    Figure 3: Trend in Producers' Share of World Price
         1.40                                                                                                              80%


         1.20                                                                                                              70%


                                                                                                                           60%
         1.00

                                                                                                                           50%
         0.80
usd/kg




                                                                                                                           40%
         0.60
                                                                                                                           30%

         0.40
                                                                                                                           20%

         0.20                                                                                                              10%


         0.00                                                                                                              0%
            66

                 68

                      70

                           72

                                74

                                       76

                                             78

                                                   80

                                                         82

                                                               84

                                                                     86

                                                                            88

                                                                                  90

                                                                                        92

                                                                                              94

                                                                                                    96

                                                                                                           98


                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                10
                      Price Paid by India for Raw Cashew Imports (usd/kg)        Producer's Share of Indian Import Price
       Figure 4
$/tonne


               m                                     n           “supply” curve for
671                                                              traders/exporters

584    a       i                                     b




                                                                              marginal cost of
269     d                           c                                         farm production
268    e                            k                    f

134    h                            g




            21.5                     35              44.3         ‘000 tonnes
                                                                   raw cashew




Notes: 671 is the average FOB price received for the 91/92-00/01 period. 584 is the
average after tax FOB price received for the 91/92-00/01 period. 268 is the average
price received by farmers for the 91/92-00/01 period. 269 is 40% of the average FOB
price (671), and is based on World Bank (1995) which states that factories could pay
no more than this for raw nuts. 134 is the price farmers would have received had the
ban remained in effect and equal to 20% of the FOB price the lowest share of the
world price received by farmers prior to liberalization. 44.3 is the average annual
tonnes of marketed surplus for the 91/92-00/01 period. 35 is the average annual tonnes
that would have been marketed had ban the remained in effect and is equal to the
average annual tonnes marketed during the period the ban was in effect. 21.5 is the
average annual tonnes of raw nuts processed for the 91/92-00/01 period.
                    Figure 5: Canais de Distribuição

                      Exportação                                                                  Processamento
                               31                                                                        21


                                                               39                        Processadores        21
                             Empresas comerciais
                                                                              8
                               14                                19                       3              10


          3          Agentes (informais)            17              3                 Agentes           29
                                                                                    (retalhistas)

                               17                                                  15         4

                                                                           Intermediários
                      Postos locais            35                                                        10
                                                                                       15
                                                                    8      locais
                               27                                                        15


                                Pequenos produtores (ca. 52 toneladasde castanha)


Fonte: Dados compilados a partir de nú meros obtidos junto do Gr
                                                               upo de Trabalho do cajú
  Table 4
  History of Trade Margins and Pricing Structure

                           1988/89          1989/90        1990/91        1991/92       1992/93        1993/94       1994/95                  1995/96         1996/97
  A. History of Trade Margins, 1988-1997
  Source: Deloitte and Touche (1997)
                                ($/ton)         ($/ton)        ($/ton)        ($/ton)        ($/ton)       ($/ton)       ($/ton)                   ($/ton)          ($/ton)
  Typical Farm Price               284             269            399            309            237           186           340                       321              349
  Factory Gate Price               433             390            636            429            271           335           423                       413              480
  Trade Margin (%) (1)            52%             47%            59%            39%            14%           80%           24%                       29%              38%
  FOB Value Exports                                                              585            689           697           675                       790              713
  Trade Margin (%) (2)                                                          36%           154%          108%           60%                       91%              49%
  Based on inteviews conducted as part of the Rapid Rural Appraisal of Cashew Growing Areas in Gaza, Inhambane, and Nampula

  B. Farm and Factory Gate Prices for Raw Cashew Nuts
  Source: World Bank (1995b)
                         (Mt/kg) ($/ton) (Mt/kg) ($/ton) (Mt/kg) ($/ton) (Mt/kg) ($/ton) (Mt/kg) ($/ton) (Mt/kg) ($/ton)
  Farm Gate Price            165     222     200     215      380    265      480    191      550     142       700    116
  Factory Gate Price         251     337     295     318      606    422      639    254      803     207 1792         297
  Trade Margin (%) (1)      52%             48%              60%             33%             46%             156%
  Data source: Secretary of State for Cashew, World Bank (1995b)
  Note: The farm gate price used is the government-set price. As illustrated in Table 3.5, this price differed from the actual producer price beginning in 92/93.
  The factory gate prices reflect government-set prices in 88/89-90/91; liberalized prices in 91/92 -92/93, and prices proposed by traders in 93/94.




 1- (fac p/farm p) -1
2- (FOB p/fac p) -1
3- (retail p/farm p)-1
4- [(wholesale p-retail p)/farm p]
5- Error. Based on X price of 4500 (Hilmarsson, 1994), [(X p-wholesale price)/farm p] = 482.3%
6- (sm tdr p/prod p) - 1
7- (lg trdr p/sm trdr p) -1
                            1988/89        1989/90       1990/91                    1991/92      1992/93   1993/94     1994/95     1995/96      1996/97
  C. Price Structure and Trade Margins for 1993/94
  Source: World Bank (1995b)
  Farm-Gate Price (Mt/kg)                                                                                        700
  Farm-Gate Share of World Price                                                                               15.5%
  Farm-Gate Trade Margin (%)
  Retailer to Warehouse Gate Price (Mt/kg) (3)                                                                  1124
  Retailer to Warehouse Gate Share of World Price (3)                                                          24.9%
  Retailer to Warehouse Gate Trade Margin (%) (3)                                                              60.6%
  Wholesaler to Factory Gate Price (Mt/kg) (4)                                                                  1792
  Wholesaler to Factory Gate Share of World Price (4)                                                          39.8%
  Wholesaler to Factory Gate Trade Margin (%) (4)                                                              95.4%
  Wholesaler to Border Price (Mt/kg) (5)                                                                        4200
  Wholesaler to Border Share of World Price (5)                                                               100.0%
  Wholesaler to Border Trade Margin (%) (5)                                                                   482.3%
  Source: Secretary of State for Cashew, World Bank, 1995b

  D. Selling Prices at Trader Level, 1994-1997
  Source: Deloitte and Touche (1997)
  Small Trader Min. (Mt/kg)                                                                                                2500         4000         4000
  Small Trader Max. (Mt/kg)                                                                                                4000         5500         6000
  Typical Average (Mt/kg)                                                                                             3000-3500    4500-5000    4500-5000
  Small Trader Price Found (c/kg)                                                                                           52.9         41.3         43.6
  Trade Margin (6)                                                                                                        55.6%        28.7%        24.9%
  Large Trader Min. (Mt/kg)                                                                                                3000         4000         5000
  Large Trader Max. (Mt/kg)                                                                                                5000         6000         6500
  Typical Average (Mt/kg)                                                                                                  4000         5000         5500
  Large Trader Price Found (c/kg)                                                                                           60.4         45.8         48.0
  Trade Margin (7)                                                                                                        14.2%        10.9%        10.1%
  Producer Price Found (c/kg)                                                                                               34.0         32.1         34.9
  Based on inteviews conducted as part of the Rapid Rural Appraisal of Cashew Growing Areas in Gaza, Inhambane, and Nampula




 1- (fac p/farm p) -1
2- (FOB p/fac p) -1
3- (retail p/farm p)-1
4- [(wholesale p-retail p)/farm p]
5- Error. Based on X price of 4500 (Hilmarsson, 1994), [(X p-wholesale price)/farm p] = 482.3%
6- (sm tdr p/prod p) - 1
7- (lg trdr p/sm trdr p) -1
Table 5
World Market for Raw Cashew

       1. Imports - Volume in Metric Tonnes Raw Cashews
       Country                                 1990     1991     1992     1993     1994     1995    1996     1997     1998      1999     2000
       World                                 123931   169309   174299   226978   253397   244811   37027    33050    48444    264074   263183
       India                           84%    82639   106080   134985   191322   228109   222819   19129    19431    38894    245106   249319
       China                            4%     7639    18538    20431    16454     7191     3065    1214     2764     1240       367      651
       Singapore                        4%    24606    26680     8447     5272     3150     3648     913      140      222       120      106
       China, Hong Kong SAR             3%     4651    12827     8455     9665     5434     7205     240      823      393       551      313
       Other                            5%     4396     5184     1981     4264     9512     8074   15531     9891     7695     17930    12793
       Brazil                           1%        0        0        0        0     4548     1840       0       11        0      9639     6434
       United States of America         1%        0        0        0        0        0        0    2855     3102     1515      1141      988
       Canada                           1%      355       80      116      447      648      409    1403     1601     1407      1457     1332
       HHI                            7,069
       2. Imports - Value in USD '000 Raw Cashews
       Country                                 1990     1991     1992     1993     1994     1995    1996     1997     1998      1999     2000
       World                                 135297   197414   198136   214173   291847   315580   85280    63232    70030    310411   246111
       India                           70%    75041   109340   143006   154464   221099   235625   17027    15722    36599    267529   213965
       China, Hong Kong SAR             6%    13518    22189    18151    22996    21886    32624     330      718      201       423      139
       Singapore                        5%    22999    27411    12922     9693    12391    13833    1411      280      455       271      172
       China                            3%     5693    14482    16270    12856    13661     6033     589     2224      407        74      161
       United States of America         2%        0        0        0        0        0        0   13277    14233     7473      7173     5646
       Israel                           2%     3880     4429     3818     5083     6201     6838    6793     6868     6760       113        0
       Canada                           2%      998      263      401     1716     2684     2033    5137     7143     6573      8020     6983
       Brazil                           1%        0        0        0        0     3348     1382       0       22        0      8197     5470
       Saudi Arabia                     1%        0     2498     2501     2344     2803     1790    1852     2892     3205      3205     3205
       Other                            6%      759     1802     1067     5021     7774    15422   38864    13130     8357     15405    10372
       HHI                            5,022
       3. Exports - Volume in Metric Tonnes Raw Cashews
       Country                                 1990     1991     1992     1993     1994     1995     1996     1997     1998     1999     2000
       World                                 110115   154126   166231   172279   283951   220223   232007   329762   327785   288637   327056
       Tanzania, United Rep of         32%     4197    19000    29300    32200    65000    75560   118360   121920   164680    99990    99990
       Guinea-Bissau                   14%    16409    18250     3650    16990    46460    29280    13000    58080    38800    64050    73210
       Viet Nam                        14%    24749    30600    51700    47700    81300    19800    16500    33299    25700    18400    26400
       Indonesia                       10%     3218    14602    19278    18156    38620    28105    27206    15359    28603    31639    25621
       Côte d'Ivoire                    9%     6325     7415     7675    16862    16327    26345     9739    36968    26553    25000    63379
       Nigeria                          6%    12415    12600    12109    13238    14785    15581    16829    16900    11357    11357    11357
       Singapore                        3%    26116    26401    11403     6185     4837     3010      920     2462     2631     1260     1044
       Benin                            3%     1200     2085     3378     3378     3378     8940    15000    20000     8940     8940     8940
       China, Hong Kong SAR             2%     2948    10383     8023     7782     4468     5240     1044       16      429      401       16
       Senegal                          1%        0     2292     1061     2123     1147     1312     1963     2114     6978    14905       12
       India                            1%        0        0        0        0        0        0     4389    10729     5900     4440     7485
       Madagascar                       1%     1406     2157     3613     1197     3366     3142     1211     1200      702      162      162
       Ghana                            1%        0        0        0        0      600      289      895     7042     1351     3963     3963
       Philippines                      1%     2622     3646     3098     3119     1152     1122      302      555     2142        8        0
       Other                            2%     8510     4695    11943     3345     2511     2497     4647     3116     3016     4121     5478
       Guinea                           1%     2100      700     3700     1000     1000     1000     1000     1000     1000     1000     1000
       Thailand                         1%     5636     2659     3334      860       57       70        5      531      535      214       63
       HHI                            1,671
Table 5
World Market for Raw Cashew

       4. Exports - Value in USD '000 Raw Cashews
       Country                                 1990     1991     1992     1993     1994     1995     1996     1997     1998     1999     2000
       World                                  84133   134926   142915   130465   225659   189613   207717   390192   352165   378147   460169
       Viet Nam                        26%    14917    21100    41415    29700    54500    13400    11000   133331   116954   109747   157000
       Tanzania, United Rep of         25%     3949    16700    23500    23300    51160    64000    97770    91080   107320    98940    98940
       Guinea-Bissau                   11%    11605    14071     3010    12980    30970    19870    16332    45289    23901    49440    69349
       Indonesia                       10%     8243    24560    24854    23144    43401    21308    20800    15386    28706    30774    22781
       India                            6%        0        0        0        0        0        0    21616    52115    28032    26040    37919
       Côte d'Ivoire                    6%     4026     4374     4795     6598     6029    18936     6999    21187    18991    20000    41655
       Singapore                        3%    21146    26167    11665     6025     8460     9316     1529     2447     2152     1524      931
       China, Hong Kong SAR             3%     6914    12226    10414    13785    14962    23569     1021       26      256      306       12
       Nigeria                          3%     4039     4442     5461     7024     7845    10233    11100    10500     7100     7100     7100
       Benin                            1%      900      754     1060     1060     1060     2800     4800     6400     2800     2800     2800
       Senegal                          1%        0      964      708      775      767     1038     1428     1469     6003    13131       19
       Other                            5%     8394     9562    16033     6074     6497     5143    13315    10956     9949    18331    21650
       Kenya                            1%       48      209      423       58     1395       80        1      128     1624     7904     7904
       Guinea                           1%     1700      700     4200     1100     1100     1100     1100     1100     1100     1100     1100
       HHI                            1,653
Table 6
World Market for Processed Cashew

      1. Imports-Volume in Metric Tonnes Processed Cashews
      Country                                   1990     1991     1992     1993     1994     1995     1996     1997     1998     1999     2000
      World                                    87098    85383   103163   107506   116785   114671   323196   370346   352411   152679   158088
      United States of America          34%    54453    49433    61069    59937    61714    53800    58232    63354    64405    71565    81508
      India                             32%        0        0        0        0        0        0   193722   226781   204459    10893      388
      Netherlands                        8%     4088     4644     6642     8537    13486    15915    17347    19024    18835    19316    20494
      Canada                             3%     4376     4747     4951     5562     4780     4153     4542     3633     4245     3735     4830
      Germany                            4%     3732     4008     5513     7219     8573     9959     8745    11436    12975     4968     6081
      United Kingdom                     3%     5108     4808     5756     6495     6120     5603     6145     6260     6743     7905     8043
      Japan                              3%     4298     5530     4892     5621     5665     6413     6548     6526     5532     4886     5660
      Australia                          3%     2920     2619     3371     3126     3749     5500     5116     6700     6300     5629     5260
      France                             2%     1212     1425     1586     2075     2321     3243     3891     4500     6922     4639     4470
      Italy                              1%      307      356      476      718      901     1116     1186     1708     1713     1866     2075
      United Arab Emirates               1%     1700     1899     1882      536      850       17     2380     2380     2380     2380     2380
      China                              1%     1277     1343     1303     1422      988      972     1712     1717     1194     1087      856
      Other                              6%     3627     4571     5722     6258     7638     7980    13630    16327    16709    13811    16044
      HHI                              2,377
      2. Imports-Value in USD '000 Processed Cashews
      Country                                   1990     1991     1992     1993     1994     1995     1996     1997     1998     1999     2000
      World                                   389004   445548   477411   474310   547994   561327   829672   865436   884410   840402   856548
      United States of America          46%   236306   253551   269675   253748   283127   253050   293394   301346   307360   431335   449800
      Netherlands                       11%    18962    24055    34468    41349    65206    81308    89868    95232    93552   117999   118008
      Germany                            6%    18266    20987    29026    34535    43635    52752    46680    58681    58473    26483    33681
      Japan                              5%    21959    32584    25919    27947    28852    34025    36401    33920    28778    31389    32718
      United Kingdom                     5%    23227    27162    26921    29273    29586    26738    32459    30185    33600    50282    44982
      India                              8%        0        0        0        0        0        0   175493   191419   195904    10790      331
      Canada                             3%    20553    25215    21530    24567    23061    20709    22627    16701    19321    20554    23645
      Australia                          3%    13935    12879    17803    14410    16640    30286    25522    27018    25448    34398    26717
      France                             2%     5339     7212     7636     8528    10911    13937    17544    19732    28161    21512    22800
      United Arab Emirates               1%     7800    10529     8331     2214     4146       88    11792    11792    11792    11792    11792
      China                              1%     6248     6726     6674     6763     4631     4696     7594     6651     4292     4537     3740
      Italy                              1%      800     1225     1910     2200     3076     4453     4896     6980     8024    10068    10801
      China, Hong Kong SAR               1%        0        0        0        0        0        0    14886    14087    17290     7920     6430
      Other                              0%
      HHI                              2,454
Table 6
World Market for Processed Cashew

      3. Exports Volume in Metric Tonnes Processed Cashews
      Country                                   1990     1991     1992     1993     1994     1995     1996     1997     1998     1999     2000
      World                                    91338    83904   107979   111951   118737   136145   137141   158136   153323   161040   175657
      India                            52%     49812    49908    58399    69832    76897    70068    64274    65809    71042    92222    81661
      Brazil                           24%     27103    24121    38097    31170    23079    31877    36222    36349    31882    24101    33588
      Mozambique                        3%      4300     3800     5500     2300     5000     2000     3600     4100     4700     4700     4700
      Viet Nam                         10%         0        0        0        0        0    19800    16500    33300    25700    18400    34200
      Netherlands                       4%       990      885      992     3182     7823     6684     6723     6838     8168    11271    10295
      Kenya                             0%       394     1236      342       44      158       81        0      245       35       71       71
      Tanzania, United Rep of           0%       907        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0
      Other                             6%      7832     5954     4649     5423     5780     5635     9822    11495    11796    10275    11142
      HHI                             3,458
      India's Share                             55%      59%      54%      62%      65%      51%      47%      42%      46%      57%      46%
      Mozambique's Share                         5%        5%      5%       2%       4%       1%       3%       3%       3%       3%       3%

      4. Exports Value in USD '000 Processed Cashews
      Country                                   1990     1991     1992     1993     1994     1995     1996     1997     1998     1999     2000
      World                                   402859   438950   474258   500965   593750   603240   599718   573384   763608   944402   867491
      India                             58%   247183   246221   283043   334499   398287   383068   338320   325879   362560   570595   418488
      Brazil                            22%   101351   110685   146441   119896   109200   147236   167508   156917   142575   142125   165059
      Mozambique                         2%    14288    16033    17592     8151    18000     7000    13000    12000    15000    15000    15000
      Viet Nam                           6%        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0   154000   109748   167323
      Netherlands                        5%     3829     3684     4444    15148    38927    39231    41100    37665    41685    61121    53055
      Kenya                              0%     1379     5061     1052      109      548      317        0      986      166      328      328
      Tanzania, United Rep of            0%     3272        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0        0
      United States of America           1%     9853     9016     5972     9828    10042     5767     5643     3038     5026     6093     5625
      Sri Lanka                          1%     6926     6950     5439     4313      991     2109     1328     3074     2273      999      999
      Other                              4%    14778    12204    10275     9021    17755    18512    32819    33825    40323    38393    41613
      HHI                              3,926
Table 7
Mozambican Exports of Cashew by Importer, 1980-1997

    Year          Importing country        (thousands $)   Year         Importing country   (thousands $)
    1980    United States                         38422    1991   Ireland                             11
    1980    Canada                                 1025    1991   Austria                               6
    1980    Hong Kong                               176    1991   Finland                               6
    1980    Trinidad-Tobago                         156    1991   Sweden                                5
    1980    Cyprus                                   54    1992   India                            13256
    1981    United States                         46460    1992   United States                    11432
    1981    Japan                                   963    1992   South Africa                       944
    1981    Canada                                  452    1992   Portugal                           869
    1981    Trinidad-Tobago                         439    1992   Germany                            476
    1981    Syrn Arab RP                            130    1992   France                             332
    1982    United States                         38880    1992   Netherlands                        220
    1982    Japan                                   505    1992   United Kingdom                      97
    1982    Canada                                  219    1992   Switzerland                         68
    1982    Trinidad-Tobago                         161    1992   Belgium-Lux                         42
    1982    Jordan                                   34    1992   Canada                              39
    1983    United States                         12428    1992   Spain                               18
    1983    Canada                                   73    1992   Sweden                              18
    1983    Trinidad-Tobago                          20    1992   Austria                             13
    1983    Belgium-Lux                              10    1992   Ireland                             10
    1984    United States                          9559    1992   Denmark (inc. Faroe Is)               6
    1984    Canada                                  204    1993   India                            14341
    1984    Cyprus                                   33    1993   United States                     6610
    1984    Belgium-Lux                              15    1993   South Africa                      1429
    1985    United States                          9163    1993   Portugal                           625
    1985    Canada                                   45    1993   Canada                             296
    1986    United States                          7401    1993   Netherlands                        235
    1987    United States                         16369    1993   United Kingdom                     230
    1988    United States                         14396    1993   France                             118
    1988    Canada                                  681    1993   Switzerland                        114
    1988    Guadeloupe (inc. Martinique)             65    1993   Germany                             76
    1989    United States                          9457    1993   Italy                               33
    1989    Canada                                  258    1993   China                               23
    1989    Cuba                                    187    1993   Ireland                             10
    1990    United States                         10897    1993   Sweden                              10
    1990    Germany                                1231    1993   Finland                               5
    1990    Australia                               823    1994   India                            10819
    1990    United Kingdom                          477    1994   South Africa                      2670
    1990    Portugal                                424    1994   United States                     1706
    1990    Canada                                  233    1994   Malaysia                           307
    1990    Belgium-Lux                              51    1994   United Kingdom                     141
    1990    Sweden                                   48    1994   Portugal                            58
    1990    Czechoslovakia                           29    1995   United States                     5300
    1990    France                                   22    1995   India                             4607
    1990    Netherlands                              12    1995   South Africa                      2208
    1990    Austria                                  11    1995   Portugal                           567
    1990    Finland                                  11    1995   Netherlands                        130
    1990    Ireland                                    8   1996   India                            25739
    1990    Denmark (inc. Faroe Is)                    7   1996   United States                    13560
    1991    United States                         11526    1996   Portugal                          1864
    1991    India                                  1598    1996   South Africa                      1642
    1991    Portugal                                955    1996   Areas Nes (?)                      784
    1991    United Kingdom                          429    1996   Canada                             520
    1991    Germany                                 393    1996   Singapore                          311
    1991    Canada                                  383    1996   France                              92
    1991    Australia                               371    1996   Zimbabwe                            12
    1991    Netherlands                              92    1997   United States                    12522
    1991    Switzerland                              54    1997   Canada                             774
    1991    Belgium-Lux                              47    1997   Portugal                           745
    1991    France                                   46    1997   France                             143
    1991    Denmark (inc. Faroe Is)                  15    1997   Netherlands                         92
    1991    Japan                                    13    1997   Zimbabwe                            32
    1991    Norway                                   12    1997   Denmark (inc. Faroe Is)               6
Source:
Feenstra (2000): World Trade Flows, 1980-1997
                           Figure 6: Trends in Indian Raw Nut Production

                     500
                     450




'000 Metric Tonnes
                     400
                     350
                     300
                                                                           Indian Raw
                     250                                                   Nut
                     200                                                   Production
                     150
                     100
                     50
                      0
                       61

                       64

                       67

                       70

                       73

                       76

                       79

                       82

                       85

                       88

                       91

                       94

                       97

                       00
                     19

                     19

                     19

                     19

                     19

                     19

                     19

                     19

                     19

                     19

                     19

                     19

                     19

                     20
Table 8
                                          1991/92     1992/93    1993/94     1994/95    1995/96     1996/97
A. Value Added by Local Industry
Source: World Bank (1995b)
Raw Nuts (US$/ton)                              600        680         750
Caju de Mocambique Kernels (US$/ton)            589        593         692

Value Added (US$/ton)                            (11)       (87)      (58)
Monapo Kernels (US$/ton) (1)                      621        645       729
Value Added (US$/ton)                              21       (35)      (21)
Note: kernel RCN equivalent (conversion factor) for Caju de Mocambique is 5.40 and for Monapo is 5.13
Source: Secretary of State for Cashew

B. Value Added by Mozambican Industry
Source: Deloitte and Touche (1997)
FOB Price of Raw Nuts (US$/ton)                                                   675         790        713
Average Kernel Price (US$/ton)                                                   3734        3876       3680
Raw Nut Equivalent (2) (US$/ton)                                                  765         795        754
Value Added                                                                        90           5         41




(1) Assume 20.5% kernel yield
(2) RCN equivalent - FOB P
Appendix B: Historical Overview
   Date                                                                    Event/Policy Change
50       Caju Industrial (present day Polycaju) processing factory was established in Maput
65       Cajuca de Machava (present day Mocaju) was established
65       Anglo American establishes Mocita processing factory in Xai-Xa
65       Procaju-Manjacaze processing factory was established
65       Procaju-Inhambane processing factory was established
69       Antonio Eanes processing factory (present day CC-Nacala Angoche facility) was establishe
69       Socaju processing factory (present day CC-Nacala -Nacala facility) was establishe
71       Cajuca de Angoche (present day Angocaju) processing factory was establishe
71       CC-Monapo processing factory was established
73       Inducaju processing factory was established
75       Mozambique gained independence from Portuga
75       Owners of Cajuca de Angoche, Cajuca de Machava, Polycaju, Procaju Inhambane and Manjacaze abandoned processing factori
75       The Frelimo Government intervened in Cajuca de Angoche, Cajuca de Machava, Polycaju, Procaju Inhambane and Manjaca
78       Raw cashew exports banned
79       Government created Caju de Mocambique, a state-owned holding compan
79       Government incorporated Cajuca de Angoche, Cajuca de Machava, Polycaju, Procaju Inhambane, Manjacaze into Caju de Mocambiq
79*      Antonio Eanes processing factory went into receivership and was managed by Caju de Mocambiqu
79*      Socaju processing factory went bankrupt and was managed by Caju de Mocambiqu
81       Anglo-American pulled out of Mozambique
81       Mocita entered voluntary receivership and Caju de Moçambique took over the daily management of the factor
82       Civil war in Mozambique begins
84       Mozambique joined the IMF and World Bank
87       The period of structural adjustment began with the announcement of the Programa de Reabilitacao Economica (PRE
87/88    The government-established producer price increased from 10mt/kg to 105mt/k
89       Privatization program for all SOEs begins
91/92    Export ban on raw cashews lifted
91/92    QR 10,000 tons and tax of 60% on difference between FOB and factory gate pric
91       Bankruptcy court sold Socju to CC-Nacala.
92       Bankruptcy court sold Antonio Eanes to CC-Nacala
92       Civil war ended
92/93    Tax on difference between export FOB and factory gate price was lowered to 30% (QR of 10,000 tons was maintained
93/94    Export tax (difference between export FOB and factory gate price) was maintained at 30%
93/94    QR was loosened - initial QR remained 10,000 ton, but 2 additional 5,000-ton lots were auctioned off to registered exporter
94       World Bank commisions study of cashew industry by Hilmar Hilmarsso
94       Cajeba processing factory was established
94       Government sold Cajuca de Machava (Mocaju) to the HAS-NUR Group
94       Anglo-American re-entered Mozmabique and partnered with Oltremare in rehabilitating the Mocita processing facto
94       WB commissioned cashew industry study by Hilmar Hilmarsson
95       World Bank required Mozambique to liberalize cashew marketing and exporting in order to satisfy the “base case” lending conditio
95       Government enters into formal agreement with WB to reduce export taxe
94/95    Government-established minimum producer price increased from 700mt/kg to 1,500mt/k
94/95    Quantitative restrictions on exports were removed
94/95    Government introduced a graduated export tax equivalent to about 30 - 32% of the FOB export valu
95       Adil-IC processing factory was established
95       Government sold Polycaju processing factory and Procaju factories at Inhambane and Manjacaz
95       Korea –Mozambique Cashew (KMC) began operationing
95/96    Export tax (on FOB value) of raw nuts was 20%
95       Trade in raw cashews was liberalized, allowing new traders and exporters to become involve
96       Cabo Caju processing factory was established
96/97    Export tax was reduced to 14%
97       CC-Nacala ceased operations
97       Invape processing factory began operation
97       Wolfensohn visited Mozambique and announced the Bank's commitment to a domestic processing indust
97       World Bank commissioned an independent study of the cashew processing sector by Deloitte and Touch
97/98    Export tax remained 14%
98       KMC ceased operating
98       Procaju/Inhambane and Manjacaze ceased operating
98       Madecaju processing factory began operation
98/99    Abt Associates performed study on the cashew processing industry for the Mozambican Ministry of Industry, Trade, and Touris
99       Sept. 30, Parliament approves law calling for export tax between 18-22% for the next 5 yr
99       Export tax raised to 18%
2000     KMC was renamed Socaju and resumed operations
2001     Jan. 2001 Government temporarily bans raw nut export
2001     Mocita factory closed
2001     World Bank Consultant Jaikishan Desai completed a study on cashew production and marketing
Appendix B: Data for Mozambique and the Cashew Industry, 1961-2001



      Year                                               Source      1961      1962      1963      1964      1965      1966      1967      1968      1969      1970      1971
      Export Policy/Tax on FOB                           Various
      Production
      Area Harvested Ha.                                 FAO       180,000   180,000   230,000   230,000   210,000   190,000   180,000   300,000   250,000   290,000   320,000
      Yield kg/ha                                        FAO         5,944     6,000     6,478     6,783     6,476     6,263     5,611     6,197     6,168     6,345     6,312
      Production (tons)                                  FAO       107,000   108,000   149,000   156,000   136,000   119,000   101,000   185,000   154,200   184,000   202,000
      Marketed Raw Cashews (tons)                        (1)                                               120,000   110,000    95,000   120,000   160,000   150,000   175,000
      Processing
      Raw Cashews Processed (tons)                       (1)
      Processed Nuts as % of Marketed Vol.
      Exports
      Number of Exporters                                (2)
      Exported Raw Cashew (tons)                         (1)
      Kernel Exports (tons)                              (1)
      Raw Cashew Exports (Mt.)                           FAO        89,583   107,000   124,210   141,808   119,136    77,235    56,192   132,857    68,532    66,252    53,382
      Raw Cashew VX ('000 $)                             FAO        11,601    13,857    16,085    18,364    15,428    15,183    10,734    24,264    13,898    14,044    11,788
      Shelled Cashew (Kernel) Exports (Mt.)              FAO         2,000     2,000     2,000     2,000     2,500     5,861     8,190    11,646    13,047    15,071    20,395
      Shelled Cashew (Kernel) Value Exports ('000 $)     FAO         1,800     1,800     1,800     1,800     2,300     5,649     7,778    12,643    13,310    16,211    23,602
      Value of Exports (Raw and Processed, '000$)        UCDavis
      Prices
      Government-Established Producer price (Mt/kg)      (6)                                                            2.25      2.33      2.39      2.51      2.65      3.01
      Actual Producer price (Mt/kg)                      (7)
      Actual Producer price (Mt/kg)                      (8)
      Real Producer Price (Mt/kg)                        (9)
      Producer price US$/ton @ OR
      Producer price US$/ton @ PR
      FOB price ($/ton) raw nuts                         (8)
      Producer/ FOB official rates                       (8)
      Producer/ FOB parallel rates                       (8)
      Export Unit Value Raw Cashews ($/ton)              FAO          130       130       129       129       129       197       191       183       203       212       221
      Factory gate price ($/ton)                         (8)
      Export Unit Value Shelled Cashew ($/ton)           FAO          900       900       900       900       920       964       950      1086      1020      1076      1157
      Macro data
      Inflation                                          (10)
      CPI                                                (10)
      Parallel Market Exchange Rate (Mt/$)               (11)
      Official Exchange Rate (Mt/$)                      (11)        28.75     28.75     28.75     28.75     28.75     28.75     28.75     28.75     28.75     28.75      29.6
      GDP (billions of Meticais)                         (12)


      Notes
      (1) Deloitte and Touche (1997); INCAJU (2001)
      (2) Deloitte and Touche (1997)
      (3) QR 10,000, 60% tax (FOB-factory gate price)
      (4) QR 10,000, 30% tax (FOB-factory gate price)
      (5) QR 10,000+, 30% tax (FOB-factory gate price)
      (6) INCAJU (2001) FAO pre-78.
Appendix B: Data for Mozambique and the Cashew Industry, 1961-2001



      Year                                                         1972      1973      1974      1975      1976      1977      1978    1978/79   1979/80   1980/81   1981/82
      Export Policy/Tax on FOB                         Various                                                               banned    banned    banned    banned    banned
      Production
      Area Harvested Ha.                               FAO       320,000   360,000   340,000   300,000   200,000   150,000   110,000   120,000   130,000   130,000   110,000
      Yield kg/ha                                      FAO         6,250     6,667     6,276     6,267     6,100     6,100     5,545     5,500     5,469     5,469     5,545
      Production (tons)                                FAO       200,000   240,000   213,000   188,000   122,000    91,500     61,00     66,00    71,100    71,100    61,000
      Marketed Raw Cashews (tons)                      (1)       215,000   200,000   195,000   170,000   125,000   110,000    80,000    82,800    84,700    91,466    57,323
      Processing
      Raw Cashews Processed (tons)                     (1)
      Processed Nuts as % of Marketed Vol.
      Exports
      Number of Exporters                              (2)
      Exported Raw Cashew (tons)                       (1)                                               banned    banned    banned    banned    banned    banned    banned
      Kernel Exports (tons)                            (1)
      Raw Cashew Exports (Mt.)                         FAO        67,527    33,195    72,899    65,592    13,815
      Raw Cashew VX ('000 $)                           FAO        14,108     8,422    17,606    17,310     2,487
      Shelled Cashew (Kernel) Exports (Mt.)            FAO        26,993    29,960    24,750    22,025    21,153    17,000    18,400    17,100    15,600    12,200    16,700
      Shelled Cashew (Kernel) Value Exports ('000 $)   FAO        30,103    41,690    42,935    31,402    33,400    45,557    43,723    44,189    64,855    53,468    43,607
      Value of Exports (Raw and Processed, '000$)      UCDavis                                                                                    39,833    48,444    39,799
      Prices
      Government-Established Producer price (Mt/kg)    (6)          3.43      3.53      3.74      4.01       5.5       6.6       3.5       3.5       3.5       3.5       5.0
      Actual Producer price (Mt/kg)                    (7)                                                                                 3.5       3.5       3.5       5.0
      Actual Producer price (Mt/kg)                    (8)                                                   3.5       3.5       3.5       3.5       3.5       3.5       5.0
      Real Producer Price (Mt/kg)                      (9)                                                  55.0      54.5      53.4      52.9      51.8      51.3      71.9
      Producer price US$/ton @ OR                                                                                                        107.5     108.0      99.0     132.4
      Producer price US$/ton @ PR                                                                                                         17.9      43.8      46.7      50.0
      FOB price ($/ton) raw nuts                       (8)
      Producer/ FOB official rates                     (8)
      Producer/ FOB parallel rates                     (8)
      Export Unit Value Raw Cashews ($/ton)            FAO          209       254       242       264       180
      Factory gate price ($/ton)                       (8)
      Export Unit Value Shelled Cashew ($/ton)         FAO         1115      1392      1735      1426      1579      2680      2376      2584      4157      4383      2611
      Macro data
      Inflation                                        (10)                                                    1         2         1         2         1         2       18
      CPI                                              (10)                                                 0.06      0.06      0.07      0.07      0.07      0.07      0.07
      Parallel Market Exchange Rate (Mt/$)             (11)                                                                     195       195        80        75       100
      Official Exchange Rate (Mt/$)                    (11)        27.05     24.52     25.41     25.55     30.23     33.02       33      32.56      32.4     35.35     37.77
      GDP (billions of Meticais)                       (12)                                                                                                    78        82


      Notes
      (7) INCAJU (2001)
      (8) Desai (2001)
      (9) (Desai, 2001), WDI; 89/90 base year
      (10) IMF
      (11) WDI
      (12) IMF
Appendix B: Data for Mozambique and the Cashew Industry, 1961-2001



      Year                                                         1982/83   1983/84   1984/85   1985/86   1986/87   1987/88   1988/89   1989/90   1990/91   1991/92   1992/93
      Export Policy/Tax on FOB                           Various   banned    banned    banned    banned    banned    banned    banned    banned    banned     QR (3)    QR (4)
      Production
      Area Harvested Ha.                                 FAO        63,000    36,000    43,700    52,000    61,000    75,000    85,000    40,000    54,000    85,000    45,000
      Yield kg/ha                                        FAO         5,651     5,639     5,721     5,769     5,738     6,000     5,909     5,631     5,766     6,378     5,319
      Production (tons)                                  FAO        35,600    20,399    25,000    30,000    35,000    45,000    50,225    22,524    31,134    54,217    23,935
      Marketed Raw Cashews (tons)                        (1)        17,617    25,311    29,177    40,075    34,882    44,453    50,226    22,106    31,122    54,104    23,935
      Processing
      Raw Cashews Processed (tons)                       (1)                                                                                        24,000    29,700    13,100
      Processed Nuts as % of Marketed Vol.                                                                                                            77%       55%       55%
      Exports
      Number of Exporters                                (2)                                                                                                       3         4
      Exported Raw Cashew (tons)                         (1)       banned    banned    banned    banned    banned    banned    banned    banned    banned      6,005     8,500
      Kernel Exports (tons)                              (1)                                                                                         3,334     4,014     2,653
      Raw Cashew Exports (Mt.)                           FAO
      Raw Cashew VX ('000 $)                             FAO
      Shelled Cashew (Kernel) Exports (Mt.)              FAO         5,800     4,100     3,100     3,100     6,000     6,800     6,000     4,300     3,800     5,500     2,300
      Shelled Cashew (Kernel) Value Exports ('000 $)     FAO        16,106    15,314    11,549    16,716    31,088    26,478    20,022    14,288    16,033    17,592     8,151
      Value of Exports (Raw and Processed, '000$)        UCDavis    12,531     9,811     9,208     7,401    16,369    15,142     9,902    14,284    15,962    27,840    24,155
      Prices
      Government-Established Producer price (Mt/kg)      (6)           5.0       5.0      10.0      10.0      10.0     105.0     165.0     200.0     380.0     460.0     560.0
      Actual Producer price (Mt/kg)                      (7)           5.0       5.0      10.0      10.0      10.0     105.0     165.0     200.0     380.0     460.0     700.0
      Actual Producer price (Mt/kg)                      (8)           5.0       5.0      10.0      10.0      10.0     105.0     165.0     200.0     380.0     460.0     700.0
      Real Producer Price (Mt/kg)                        (9)          60.9      47.2      72.1      55.9      40.2     220.9     231.2     200.0      286       238       255
      Producer price US$/ton @ OR                                    124.4     117.8     231.6     247.3      34.4     200.1     221.5     215.3     264.9     182.8     180.7
      Producer price US$/ton @ PR                                     31.3       3.4       5.7       5.1       4.5     105.0     132.0      88.9      181       164       177
      FOB price ($/ton) raw nuts                         (8)                                                                                                    585       689
      Producer/ FOB official rates                       (8)                                                                                                    31%       26%
      Producer/ FOB parallel rates                       (8)                                                                                                    28%       26%
      Export Unit Value Raw Cashews ($/ton)              FAO
      Factory gate price ($/ton)                         (8)                                                                     433.0     390.0      636       429       271
      Export Unit Value Shelled Cashew ($/ton)           FAO         2777      3735      3725      5392      5181      3894      3337      3323      4219      3199      3544
      Macro data
      Inflation                                          (10)          29        31        29        39      91.05     50.14     40.15     47.01     32.93     45.49      42.2
      CPI                                                (10)         0.08      0.11      0.14      0.18      0.25      0.48      0.71         1      1.33      1.93      2.75
      Parallel Market Exchange Rate (Mt/$)               (11)         160      1450      1750      1950      2230      1000      1250      2250      2,100     2,800     3,950
      Official Exchange Rate (Mt/$)                      (11)        40.18     42.44     43.18     40.43    290.73    524.64    744.92    929.09     1,435     2,517     3,874
      GDP (billions of Meticais)                         (12)          79        75        82       111       122       393       631       991      1,341     3,943     5,053


      Notes
      (1) Deloitte and Touche (1997); INCAJU (2001)
      (2) Deloitte and Touche (1997)
      (3) QR 10,000, 60% tax (FOB-factory gate price)
      (4) QR 10,000, 30% tax (FOB-factory gate price)
      (5) QR 10,000+, 30% tax (FOB-factory gate price)
      (6) INCAJU (2001) FAO pre-78.
Appendix B: Data for Mozambique and the Cashew Industry, 1961-2001



      Year                                                       1993/94   1994/95   1995/96   1996/97   1997/98       1998/99         1999/00         2000/01
      Export Policy/Tax on FOB                         Various    QR (5)      30%       20%       14%       14%           14%             18%             18%
      Production
      Area Harvested Ha.                               FAO        45,000    55,000    75,000    60,000    65,000        66,000          50,000
      Yield kg/ha                                      FAO         5,111     6,077     8,868     7,221     7,954         8,897           7,000
      Production (tons)                                FAO        23,000    33,423    66,510    43,325    51,700        58,720          35,000
      Marketed Raw Cashews (tons)                      (1)        29,987    32,890    66,510    43,325    51,516        58,720          52,608          51,688
      Processing
      Raw Cashews Processed (tons)                     (1)        14,127    23,764    27,700    25,283    25,099        16,300           8,000               0
      Processed Nuts as % of Marketed Vol.                          47%       72%       42%       58%       49%           28%             15%              0%
      Exports
      Number of Exporters                              (2)             5       11        13        11    unknown       unknown         unknown         unknown
      Exported Raw Cashew (tons)                       (1)        20,600    25,566    35,320    16,680    31,105        30,391          28,537          27,618
      Kernel Exports (tons)                            (1)          907      1,134     1,863     4,500     3,910         4,888           2,402               0
      Raw Cashew Exports (Mt.)                         FAO
      Raw Cashew VX ('000 $)                           FAO
      Shelled Cashew (Kernel) Exports (Mt.)            FAO         5,000     2,000     3,600     4,100     4,700         4,700
      Shelled Cashew (Kernel) Value Exports ('000 $)   FAO        18,000     7,000    13,000    12,000    15,000        15,000
      Value of Exports (Raw and Processed, '000$)      UCDavis    15,701    12,812    44,524    14,314
      Prices
      Government-Established Producer price (Mt/kg)    (6)         700.0    1500.0    3000.0    3500.0    3850.0 N/A             N/A             N/A
      Actual Producer price (Mt/kg)                    (7)        1000.0    2000.0    3500.0    4000.0    4000.0        5100.0          7179.0          3950.0
      Actual Producer price (Mt/kg)                    (8)        1000.0    2000.0    3114.0    3447.0    3741.0        5100.0          6950.0          4000.0
      Real Producer Price (Mt/kg)                      (9)          223       289       311       342        369           488             598             309
      Producer price US$/ton @ OR                                  165.6     221.6     275.3     300.9     306.7         391.0           451.2           202.6
      Producer price US$/ton @ PR                                   145       203       255       295        302           384             423             203
      FOB price ($/ton) raw nuts                       (8)          697       675       790       713        615           707             793             450
      Producer/ FOB official rates                     (8)          24%       33%       35%       42%       50%           55%             57%             45%
      Producer/ FOB parallel rates                     (8)          21%       30%       32%       41%       49%           54%             53%             45%
      Export Unit Value Raw Cashews ($/ton)            FAO
      Factory gate price ($/ton)                       (8)          335       423       413       480
      Export Unit Value Shelled Cashew ($/ton)         FAO         3600      3500      3611      2927       3191          3191            3191
      Macro data
      Inflation                                        (10)        63.18     54.43      44.6       0.6       0.6           3.1            11.2            11.2
      CPI                                              (10)         4.49      6.93     10.02     10.08     10.14         10.46           11.63           12.93
      Parallel Market Exchange Rate (Mt/$)             (11)        6,880     9,870    12,200    11,700    12,393        13,274          16,442          19,740
      Official Exchange Rate (Mt/$)                    (11)        6,039     9,024    11,311    11,454    12,196        13,045          15,405          19,740
      GDP (billions of Meticais)                       (12)        8,011    13,319    20,678    32,719    40,603        46,203          51,560


      Notes
      (7) INCAJU (2001)
      (8) Desai (2001)
      (9) (Desai, 2001), WDI; 89/90 base year
      (10) IMF
      (11) WDI
      (12) IMF
