NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

KNOWLEDGE CREATION AND CONTROL IN ORGANIZATIONS

Diego Puga
Daniel Trefler

Working Paper 9121
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9121

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Diego Puga and Daniel Trefler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Knowledge Creation and Control in Organizations
Diego Puga and Daniel Trefler
NBER Working Paper No. 9121
September 2002
JEL No. O31, L22, D23

ABSTRACT
The incremental innovations that underly much of modern economic growth typically involve
changes to one or more components of a complex product. This creates a tension. On the one hand, a
principal would like an agent to contribute innovative components. On the other hand, ironing out
incompatibilities between interdependent components can be a drain on the principal's energies. The
principal can conserve her energies by tightly controlling the innovation process, but this may
inadvertently stifle the agent's incentive to innovate. We show precisely how this tension between
creating knowledge and controlling knowledge shapes organizational forms. The novel concepts
introduced are illustrated with case studies of the flat panel cathode ray tube industry and Boeing's
recent location decisions.

Diego Puga

Daniel Trefler

Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 Saint George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G7
Canada
and NBER
d.puga@utoronto.ca

Department of Economics
University of Toronto
150 Saint George Street
Toronto, Ontario M5S 3G7
Canada
and NBER
trefler@chass.utoronto.ca

http://dpuga.economics.utoronto.ca

Who creates knowledge and who controls it? These are among the most familiar questions
of our age. The myriad issues at stake are brought home by the intensity of recent debates
about the scope of patent policy, by the household familiarity with corporate names such
as Microsoft and Celera Genomics (giants in the field of knowledge creation and control),
and by the technology-based economic resurgence of the United States. In an international context, the location of knowledge creation and control has additional political and
economic implications. In developing countries, there is a sense that rich countries have
failed to create knowledge that is appropriate to local needs. In middle- and even some
high-income countries, there is a sense of impinged sovereignty because knowledge is
often controlled by the headquarter operations of foreign multinationals. Often implicit
in these discussions is an assumption that knowledge-based externalities are large and
that one cannot control knowledge without creating it.
Yet knowledge creation and control are not just about grand new technologies. They
are equally about incremental technological progress. Rosenberg’s (1982a) unsung hero of
modern economic growth is the mundane day-to-day of incremental innovation. This is
partly captured by such phrases as Arrow’s (1962a) ‘learning by doing’ and Rosenberg’s
(1982b) ‘learning by using’. One finds incremental innovation not among lab-coated
technicians, but in business enterprises with their focus on cost-cutting process improvements, quality control, and minor product innovations. Yet if incremental innovation is so
important then a large piece of the economic puzzle is missing. Absent is a positive theory
of the incentives a firm uses to induce incremental innovation on the part of its employees
and subcontractors. Restated, we do not understand the role of incremental innovation
for the internal organization of the firm.
Our analysis of these incentives leads us to a theory of organizational forms built on
three elements. The first, emphasized by Arrow (1962b) in his seminal work on knowledge markets, is that there is an inherent uncertainty surrounding knowledge creation.
This so limits the contracting environment that it is appropriate to assume that contracts
are incomplete. When products are standardized and production processes routine, it

1

is easy for the firm to write detailed contracts governing its relations with employees
and subcontractors. However, as Sabel (1994) pointed out, innovation undermines the
very foundations of such contracts precisely because knowledge creation is about altering
products and processes in potentially unpredictable ways.
The second element, also emphasized by Arrow (1962b), is that knowledge is inherently
a public good and hence non-appropriable. Thus, to the extent that a principal engages an
agent (be it an employee or a subcontractor) in active knowledge creation, there is the
potential for the agent to walk away with the jointly created knowledge. This problem is
particularly severe in the context of incremental innovations, which are more and more
often the result of collaborative efforts such as concurrent engineering between firms and
their sub-contractors (Helper, MacDuffie, and Sabel, 2000).
The third and final element of our paper flows from the fact that incremental innovation
is often embedded in complex, interdependent systems in which an incremental improvement in one component is not effective unless other components are also modified. In the
simplest case, when a firm asks a parts supplier to improve a component, the solution may
entail residual incompatibilities with other components of the system, thus forcing the
firm to incur the additional expenses associated with bringing other components into line.
This interdependence sets up the possibility that the parts supplier may not internalize all
of the firm’s innovation costs. We model this using the novel concept of the imperfect
substitutability of innovative effort. Imperfect substitutability is a measure of the costs
imposed on one party (the principal or agent) by the innovative efforts of the other party
(the agent or principal).
Consider two examples that highlight different aspects of the imperfect substitutability
of innovative efforts. The first example deals with differences between the technical competencies of the principal and the agent. Florescent lighting systems consist of a ballast
and a lamp. The ballast passes a charge through the electrodes at each end of the lamp.
This charge excites the gas in the lamp which in turn makes the lamp’s phosphor coating
glow. While seemingly simple, this system has been subject to countless incremental

2

changes over the last 40 years. What makes these changes complicated is the interaction
between the ballast on the one hand and the lamp components (electrodes, gas, and
phosphor) on the other. For instance, changes in the ballast that improve energy efficiency
typically stress the electrodes, causing delays and flickering on start-up, darkening of the
lamp ends, changes in the colour spectrum, and reduced lamp life.1 Consider a North
American lamp manufacturer who wants to enter European markets. Since we have not
yet introduced any elements that distinguish the principal from the agent, we arbitrarily
refer to the lamp manufacturer as the principal. Europeans are tolerant of start-up delays,
but not of energy inefficiency. As a result, the principal engages a European ballast
manufacturer (the agent) to help improve energy efficiency. The principal’s technical
competence will incline her towards a solution or blueprint that alters the lamp components in a way that fails to fully recognize how difficult it will be for the agent to
produce a compatible ballast. That is, the principal’s blueprint will tend to be costly
for the agent to implement. Likewise, the agent’s technical competence will incline him
towards a modification of the ballast that does not fully recognize the lamp-compatibility
complications this imposes on the principal.
The next example has all the elements of complex, interdependent systems that were
featured in the previous example. In addition, the next example introduces an incentive
problem. The agent develops a number of alternative solutions to an incremental innovation problem, but only reports the solution that is easiest for him to implement (as opposed
to the solution that is easiest for the principal to implement). Faced with stability problems
in the Ford Explorer sports utility vehicle shortly before its scheduled production date of
1990, Ford engineers considered four alternative solutions: widening the chassis, lowering
the engine, fitting smaller tires, or lowering the tire pressure. Ford chose the latter fix and
recommended a tire pressure well below that suggested by its tire supplier, Firestone.
This worsened fuel economy so that in 1994, Ford instructed Firestone to redesign the tire
with the aim of making it lighter. This was not trivial: Ford wanted an innovative tire
1 See National Lighting Product Information Program (1994) and United States Environmental Protection

Agency (1998).

3

that looked like a truck tire, but handled like a car tire. In 2001, following increasingly
frequent rollover accidents due to tire blowouts, Ford recalled 13 million Firestone tires.
In the much-publicized legal battle that followed, each side insisted that the problem lay
with the other company. Ford claimed that the specific choices made by Firestone in
redesigning the tires were to blame and accused Firestone of concealing the associated
risks. Firestone blamed Ford for withholding information about increases to the vehicle
weight that reduced tire safety margins and contended that Ford should have addressed
the vehicle’s stability problems directly. At the various knowledge-creation stages of this
process, each party offered a ‘blueprint’ that shifted the implementation costs onto the
other.2
In these examples, there is an incremental innovation that is embedded in a complex
or interdependent system in which alterations in one component affect the performance
of other components. In this environment there are many layers of uncertainty, including
uncertainty about the appropriate performance targets for each separate component. Substitutability measures the extent to which the full costs of innovation, including residual
incompatibilities to be resolved by the other party, are internalized by the innovator. If
the residual incompatibilities are important then we say that the innovative efforts of the
principal and agent are only ‘imperfectly substitutable’.
Once we acknowledge that the innovative efforts of the principal and the agent are
imperfectly substitutable, it becomes crucial to know who will have the final say or
control over which innovation is implemented in the event that both parties independently
innovate successfully. In this situation, where there are two solutions on the table, each
party prefers ex post control because it shifts the cost of eliminating residual incompatibilities onto the other party. Thus, as in Aghion and Tirole (1997), control can be used ex
ante as an incentive device to induce innovative effort. (As we shall see, our notion of
substitutability is a development of Aghion and Tirole’s (1997) notion of congruence.)
If the agent has control, he has a greater incentive to innovate so as to shift residual
2 See

http://www.safetyforum.com/firestone/ and http://www.time.com/time/business/article/
0,8599,128198,00.html.

4

incompatibility costs onto the principal. Thus, the degree of substitutability is crucial for
thinking about who creates knowledge and who controls it. Provided that substitutability
is sufficiently high (residual incompatibilities are sufficiently small), the principal has an
incentive to engage an agent in knowledge creation and perhaps even to delegate to the
agent control over how knowledge is used. This reduces the busy principal’s time spent on
innovation without unduly increasing time spent on residual incompatibilities. In hiring
the agent, the principal might commiserate with Irving Berlin (“anything you can do, I
can do better”), but will take heed of Ricardo’s advice by having the agent participate in
knowledge creation.
The degree of appropriability is also a determinant of organizational forms. Provided
the risk of appropriability is low, the principal will have an incentive to engage the agent
in knowledge creation. While this last point is not new (see, e.g., Markusen, 2001), it
is worth noting that our notion of appropriability, which is based on the public-goods
nature of information, differs from the hold-up problem described in Klein, Crawford, and
Alchian (1978), Williamson (1985), Hart (1995), and others. Also, we will document some
interesting interactions between appropriability and substitutability that are relevant for
thinking about organizational forms.
We believe that the three core elements of our framework — contractual incompleteness, non-appropriability, and imperfect substitutability — are uniquely important in
the context of day-to-day incremental innovation. The incremental nature of innovation
means that the benefits of a contract governing the increment alone are small. Further,
since incremental improvements to components of an interdependent system almost always involve collaborative efforts, often in hierarchical settings, the non-appropriability
of knowledge and the imperfect substitutability of innovative efforts are crucial concerns.
As the paper unfolds we will provide a large number of detailed examples drawn
from manufacturing. Each of these examples involves puzzles that cannot be understood
within existing frameworks. For example, why is Sony one of the few integrated tv
manufacturers and why did that integration only come in 1997? For another, why did

5

Boeing go to great lengths in order to separate its headquarters from all of its production
facilities and why did Boeing simultaneously promote its business unit managers within
the organizational hierarchy? We will argue that these and other industrial organization
questions can only be answered by reference to notions of appropriability and especially
substitutability, that is, by reference to what it is that determines who creates knowledge
and who controls it.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 1 sets up the model. Section 2 describes
three organizational forms that come out of our model and that differ in terms of who
controls and who creates knowledge. Section 3 shows how organizational forms affect
the incentives to produce knowledge and sections 4–7 describe how substitutability and
appropriability determine the choice of organizational form. Section 8 embeds the analysis
of a single principal and a single agent into a general equilibrium model in which the
number of principals and agents is endogenous as are their outside options. Section 9
concludes.

1. Set-up
We have in mind a situation in which a firm with an existing product sets out to improve
it with an incremental process or product innovation. We use the term innovation in its
broadest sense to include, for example, a marketing innovation. We model this situation
as a principal p (she) who engages an agent a (he) to help her develop and implement
a blueprint for this incremental innovation. Both the principal and the agent are riskneutral. We now describe the sequence of events in chronological order (the subheadings
in this section summarize the timeline).

6

A. Matching
The principal costlessly matches with an agent whose innovative effort is broadly substitutable for her own.3 The exact degree of substitutability is not known by either party
until they actually work together. That is, the principal and agent initially only know the
distribution from which s is drawn.

B. The contracting environment
Upon matching (but before substitutability is revealed) the pair writes a contract contingent on contractable information. Not all information in the model is contractable. Most
significantly, a contract cannot be contingent on any aspect of the blueprint for the innovation. These aspects are the technical information contained in the yet-to-be-developed
blueprint, whether the blueprint is workable, and who developed the blueprint in the
case where both parties contributed innovative effort. The contractual incompleteness
is motivated by the uncertainties associated with knowledge creation in settings where
innovation involves the incremental improvement of a component part of an interdependent system. The parties cannot contract on the blueprint that will eventually be developed
since, by definition, the blueprint is new knowledge and therefore unknown to the parties
at the time of writing the contract. Also, the parties cannot contract on the blueprint
because, if the principal asks the agent to help her in knowledge creation, then an outside
party such as a court is unable to disentangle the relative contribution of each party’s
innovative effort to the final blueprint. Also, as is standard, effort is neither observable
nor contractable.4
3 The

assumption that matching is costless is innocuous. For one, matching costs may be modelled as a
fixed cost that has no marginal implications once a principal and agent are matched. It will have general
equilibrium implications, but these are not complicated. For another, costly matching adds nothing to
the analysis that has not otherwise been examined in the context of organizations (e.g., by McLaren, 2000;
Grossman and Helpman, 2002; Helsley and Strange, 2002). It is therefore an unnecessary complication.
4 Note that we are asserting rather than proving that contractual incompleteness flows from the context
of the problem. For a foundational analysis of incomplete contracts see for example the debate involving
Maskin and Tirole (1999), Hart and Moore (1999) and Segal (1999). See also Anderlini and Felli (1994).

7

This leaves only four pieces of information upon which to contract. These are (1)
whether the agent is involved in knowledge creation, (2) whether, when multiple blueprints are developed, the principal retains or delegates control over which blueprint to
implement, (3) whether production occurs, and (4) whether payments are made. By
‘organizational form’ we mean aspects of the contract that deal with knowledge creation
(item 1) and knowledge control (item 2). The contract that the principal and the agent sign
upon matching states the payment that the agent will receive, conditional on production,
under each organizational form.

C. Organizational choice
After the state-contingent contract is signed the principal and the agent start working
together, thus revealing the degree of substitutability of their innovative efforts.5 The
principal then chooses the organizational form. There are two aspects to this choice of
organizational form. First, the principal must decide whether or not to engage the agent
in knowledge creation i.e., in blueprint development. Second, the principal must decide
ex ante whether to retain or to delegate to the agent the choice of blueprint in the event
that several blueprints are developed. The first decision is about who creates knowledge.
The second is about who controls knowledge.
The principal is distinguished from the agent only by her authority to make these
two decisions. The question of who has this authority typically flows naturally form the
situational context (e.g., a manager can set the tasks and responsibilities of a subordinate
employee while the reverse is not true). It also flows from the agent’s incentive compatibility constraint. The principal can ask the agent to engage in the creation and control
of knowledge, but the agent has the right to refuse. We will show that the incentive
compatibility condition ensuring that the agent agrees implies that the principal must
have higher income than the agent. In practice, both considerations (position within
5 This

sets up the potential for an interesting dynamic. The principal and agent may wish to start with
smaller projects or projects with less uncertainty about s and then, over time, consider more complex
projects. We hope to examine this issue in future research.

8

an organization and incentive compatibility) are closely related: greater authority over
the allocation of tasks within an organization goes hand in hand with higher earnings.
Thus, despite the symmetry between the two parties in other respects, we will show that
incentive compatibility means that roles cannot be reversed.
There are two additional constraints on the contracted payments to be considered. One
of these is that the payments under each organizational form must be such that both
parties prefer the contract to an outside option. This option takes the form of alternative
occupations that will be introduced when we turn to general equilibrium modelling.
Thus, in general equilibrium the opportunities available to the principal and the agent
affect the size of the contracted payments via their individual rationality constraints. An
additional incentive compatibility issue is that these payments are also affected by the
appropriability of knowledge: when the agent is involved in knowledge creation his
payment must reflect what he and the principal expect to get if either one takes the other
party to court over the knowledge created. We now develop this latter issue.

D. Knowledge creation and appropriability
If the principal involves the agent in knowledge creation, then there is potentially an
appropriability problem. Consider two scenarios. On the tacit knowledge side, if the agent
is involved in knowledge creation then he will learn key non-codifiable knowledge that
cannot be incorporated into any blueprint. The principal’s innovation decisions will also
reveal to a closely-involved agent many details of the principal’s market strategies. As
a result, once involved in knowledge creation the agent will be able to exploit jointly
created knowledge in a way that denigrates the principal’s profits.6 On the legal side, if
both parties are involved in knowledge creation then the agent may be able to make a
6 One

way for the principal to partially prevent non-appropriability is by means of a restrictive covenant
stating that if the principal-agent relationship is terminated, the agent will not then compete directly with
the principal. However, such covenants are illegal in many jurisdictions (including California, under Section
16600 of the Business and Professions Code). Even where they are legal, they are generally not enforceable
unless (1) they are sufficiently limited in scope and duration (e.g., one year under Section 36 of the Austrian
Employee’s Act), (2) they adequately compensate the employee (e.g., Article 2125 of the Italian Civil Code),
and (3) they impose limited penalties for breach of contract (e.g., a maximum of twelve month’s salary in
France). See Thiébart (2001).

9

credible claim in court that he came up with the crucial ideas. It is remarkably difficult
for the principal to prevent a successful court challenge, even in settings where the facts
and legal issues are clear.7 A fortiori the problems are more severe in our incremental
knowledge setting.
For simplicity, we model the appropriability problem as a possible court challenge. We
capture this with a parameter λ that is the probability a court awards the operational
profits π to the agent. It follows that if the agent is involved in knowledge creation then
the agent must be paid λπ. If the agent receives less than this then the risk-neutral agent
can do better by taking the case to court and receiving an expected return of λπ. If the
agent receives more than λπ then the principal receives less than (1 − λ)π. It follows
that the risk-neutral principal can do better by taking the case to court and receiving an
expected return of (1 − λ)π. It is possible that the agent gains additional tacit knowledge
or credibility in court when he has control over the choice of blueprints. We allow for this
possibility below by having an appropriability risk parameter λ for the case of no control
and a parameter λ0 (λ0 > λ) for the case of control. We start with the simpler case in which
λ0 = λ.8
7 The

controversy over the discovery of streptomycin is illustrative. In 1939 microbiologist Selman Waksman discovered that soil microbes known as actinomyces produce substances that destroy other microbes.
He named these substances ‘antibiotics.’ After developing a method to systematically search for antibiotics,
he hired a team of lab assistants to implement it. This systematic search lead Waksman to the discovery of 22
antibiotics, including streptomycin which in 1944 became the first effective treatment against tuberculosis.
In 1949 Albert Schatz, who had been involved in the discovery of streptomycin as a student lab assistant,
successfully sued Waksman for a share of the royalties. Schatz’s legal success came despite the fact that
Waksman had been studying actinomyces for over 30 years, had devised the technical procedure that led
to the discovery (for which he received the Nobel Prize), had hired Schatz as a salaried lab assistant, had
identified many other antibiotics both before and after he met Schatz, and 28 years earlier had even isolated
the actinomycete responsible for streptomycin. In contrast, Schatz had been involved in the project for just
a few months prior to the discovery and had made no other major contribution to medical research. See
Wainwright (1990). Even in this apparently clear-cut case, the principal was unable to prevent the agent
from appropriating the knowledge created i.e., from claiming a share of the profits.
8 It is worth noting how our framework differs from the standard principal-agent problem with unobserved agent effort. There, if one assumes that both actors are risk neutral (as we do here), the principal
can get the agent to fully internalize the effects of his effort decision with an endogenously chosen payment
scheme that depends on the effort-related outcome. However, in our setting of incremental knowledge
creation, the unobservability of effort is only one component. An equally important component is that it is
not possible to determine whether the agent’s effort contributed to the development of the blueprint.

10

E. Knowledge control and substitutability
Having decided to involve the agent in knowledge creation, the principal must also decide
whether to retain control over the use of the knowledge created or to delegate control to
the agent. Control is defined as the right to choose whose blueprint will be implemented
in the event that the principal and the agent come up with competing specifications. As
in Aghion and Tirole (1997), control is an incentive device to induce innovative effort
in settings where monetary incentives are insufficient.9 Control is an effective incentive
because of the imperfect substitutability of innovative efforts. Suppose that there are
two alternative blueprints, one designed by the principal and the other designed by the
agent. Our key assumption is that if the principal develops a blueprint for an incremental
innovation, then the interdependence between components requires the agent to make
some changes in response. As a result, the principal’s blueprint shifts the problem of
residual incompatibilities onto the agent. Likewise, the agent’s blueprint shifts the problem of residual incompatibilities onto the principal. Recall that the fluorescent light and
Ford-Firestone examples were intended to show that our key imperfect-substitutability
assumption reflects the realities of day-to-day incremental innovation.

F. Innovation
To capture the idea of imperfect substitutability in its simplest form, innovation is modelled as a two-stage process. In the first stage an incremental innovation is developed and
codified in a blueprint. This amounts to finding a solution to an incremental innovation
problem. Finding such a solution requires creative effort from one and possibly both
parties. In the second stage the blueprint is implemented. This amounts to adapting
9 In

Aghion and Tirole (1997), monetary incentives do not work because the agent is assumed to be
infinitely risk-averse. In our setting, the agent is risk neutral and does respond to monetary incentives.
However, the difficulty of identifying the relative contribution of each party to incremental knowledge
creation raises an appropriability risk. This appropriability risk constrains what the principal pays the agent
once involved in knowledge creation. On the one hand, it forces the principal to pay the agent enough that
the agent gets involved in knowledge creation and does not to walk away with the knowledge gained. On
the other hand, it constrains the distribution between the parties of the benefits of a successful innovation
and thus limits the extent to which the principal can induce innovative effort by the agent with monetary
incentives alone.

11

existing components to the solution found. It requires implementation effort from one and
possibly both parties. In practice, the distinction between the two stages is not hard
and fast. The first stage typically does not provide a complete blueprint so that the
second stage also involves some amount of effort that with certainty will eliminate the
final bugs.10, 11
Let ei (i = p,a) be the time i spends on creative effort. Let 1 − si be the time i spends
on implementation effort. We also allow for the empirically likely possibility that the
knowledge gained from research helps one eliminate the final bugs in the implementation
stage. Let ei (1 − si ) be the reduction in time spent on implementation effort given that
time ei has already been spent on creative effort. Each actor is endowed with one unit of
time so that leisure is given by
li = 1 − [ei + (1 − si ) − ei (1 − si )]
= (1 − ei )si .

(1)
(2)

This captures in the simplest terms the way in which effort translates into time. It is worth
noting that, while this is a particularly convenient parameterization of how effort translates into loss of leisure time, more general parameterizations (e.g., having non-unitary
coefficients in front of each of the terms ei , (1 − si ), and −ei (1 − si )) yield qualitatively the
same results.12
Indirect utility for economic actor i (i = p,a) is
Ui =

y i li
,
P

10 The

(3)

main difference between creative and implementation effort is that there is much greater uncertainty regarding the outcome of creative effort. One may work hard at trying to come up with a solution to
a problem without finding one. However, once a solution is found, fixing the final bugs may take more or
less effort but can certainly be done.
11 Notice that all inputs into the knowledge creation process are measured in terms of effort — there are
no intermediate inputs or non-effort primary inputs. One could introduce intermediate inputs into the
innovative process as in Duranton and Puga (2001). However, this would simply raise a series of general
equilibrium interactions that are well understood and would distract us from the main focus of this paper.
12 We can be precise about what we mean by ‘qualitative.’ Without anticipating our results too much, we
basically show that there is a parameter space, say [0,1], such that each organizational form lives uniquely
on an interval (α j ,α j+1 ) in [0,1]. The choice of functional form does not affect the existence of organizational
forms nor the ordinal ranking of the α j . It only affects the cardinal values of the α j . (We do not use this
cardinal information.) This is what we mean throughout the paper when we mention that much more
general specifications yield qualitatively the same results.

12

where yi is i’s income and P is the relevant price index, which we will take as numéraire.
Thus, preferences over goods are homothetic and the utility derived from purchased
goods is proportional to the leisure time one has to enjoy those goods.13 .
Creative effort by i (i = p,a) translates into one or more blueprints with probability ei
and into no blueprint with probability 1 − ei .14 All blueprints yield the same total profit
or real income so that they are distinguished only by the amount of effort required from
each party to implement them.
Suppose that the principal has developed at least one blueprint. Then the principal’s
preferred blueprint from among the set of all blueprints she has developed will be the
one with the smallest implementation costs for her. We assume that the implementation
costs of the principal’s preferred blueprint are higher for the agent than for the principal.
Likewise for the blueprint that the agent prefers from among the set of blueprints he has
developed: implementation costs of the agent’s preferred blueprint are higher for the
principal than for the agent. To formalize this, without loss of generality we normalize
implementation effort required by i to implement i’s own blueprint by setting it to 0. In
addition, we simplify by setting i’s implementation effort equal to (1 − ei )(1 − s) for the
case where i is implementing j’s blueprint (i 6= j). That is, we assume that it is equally
difficult for the agent and for the principal to implement each other’s blueprint and that
the required implementation effort is decreasing in the match-specific parameter s. Given
this parameterization, s is a measure of the degree of substitutability of creative efforts. The
larger is s, the more substitutable is creative effort. Under this parameterization our notion
13 For instance, the principal may use her income to buy a fancy mansion, season opera tickets, or a Ferrari.

If she chooses to work very hard, putting lots of effort into developing and implementing a blueprint, she
will spend many evenings and weekends in the office. As a result, she will have little chance to enjoy
her mansion, will frequently miss operas, and the Ferrari will mostly gather dust in the garage. Note
that this specific choice of preferences is not important for our qualitative results. What matters is that
preferences are weakly separable so that we can study decisions regarding effort by the principal and the
agent independently of their consumption choices.
14 Note that i’s probability of success is independent of j’s creative effort. This is not important. We
could also assume that i’s probability of success increases with j’s creative effort, as long as this type
of complementarity does not dominate our core notion of imperfectly substitutable creative efforts. We
can easily make this statement about dominance precise, but there is little point in doing so because the
focus of our paper is on incremental knowledge creation and not on the sort of high-tech research in which
complementarities are important.

13

Organizational form Short name
Implementation form
I form
Knowledge form
K form
Control form
C form

Agent creates knowledge
No (ea = 0)
Yes (ea > 0)
Yes (ea > 0)

Agent controls knowledge
No
No
Yes

Note: In all 3 forms, the principal creates knowledge (e p > 0).

Table 1. The three organizational forms

that each party’s preferred blueprint shifts the implementation effort to the other party is
simply 0 < (1 − ei )(1 − s), or equivalently, s < 1. It follows from this parameterization
that i’s leisure is

li =




(1 − e )

if i’s blueprint is implemented,



(1 − ei )s

if j’s blueprint is implemented.

i

(4)

For strictly positive leisure, we require s > 0. In combination with the previous restriction,
this implies that s ∈ (0,1).

G. Production
Whenever a blueprint is created and implemented, production takes place and operational
profits are used to make the payments specified in the contract. If no blueprint is created,
then there is no production. Given that all blueprints are equally profitable, we can study
the choice of organizational form separately from production decisions. Thus, we leave
the specification of production decisions for the penultimate section.

2. Organizational forms
Variations in the degree of substitutability and appropriability generate three distinct organizational forms that are distinguished by whether the agent is involved in knowledge
creation and, if so, whether the agent has control over knowledge. Table 1 provides a
schematic. We now review these organizational forms in detail.

14

A. The implementation-form organization (I form)
In the implementation form organization (‘I form’ for short), the principal does not engage
the agent in knowledge creation i.e., ea = 0. Rather, the principal develops the blueprint
and has it implemented by the agent (i.e., the agent sorts out the final bugs). Conditional
on production the principal pays the agent some amount waI and is left with π − waI . The
level of operational profits π and its division between waI and π − waI are endogenized in
the penultimate section where we introduce the free-entry conditions for principals and
agents. The principal’s problem is to choose a level of creative effort e p that maximizes
her expected utility:
maxEU pI
{e p }

where

EU pI = (π − waI )e p (1 − e p ) .

(5)

The principal develops a blueprint with probability e p and, since it is her blueprint, all
implementation costs are borne by the agent. Thus, the principal’s leisure is 1 − e p and the
agent’s leisure is (1 − ea )s = s. Correspondingly, the expected utility for the agent is
EUaI = waI e p s .

(6)

If no blueprint is developed, which happens with probability 1 − e p , there is no production and income levels are zero. This raises two issues that apply to all organizational
forms. First, we are presuming that production is always preferred to no production. This
follows from and is the purpose of our assumption that s > 0. Second, it would be of
interest to introduce a fixed production cost that must be incurred independent of the
outcome of research e.g., a factory must be built or the agent must be compensated even
if there is no production. However, this fixed cost does not alter our conclusions and only
adds another parameter to keep track of. We therefore assume that there are no fixed costs
other than the blueprint requirement itself.
The solution to (5) is trivial (e p = 1/2). For future reference, denote the equilibrium
creative effort levels under the I form by
e pI = 1/2

and
15

eaI = 0 .

(7)

B. The knowledge-form organization (K form)
In the knowledge-form organization (‘K form’ for short), the principal engages the agent
in knowledge creation (ea > 0), but retains control over the choice of blueprints. Involving
the agent in knowledge creation leads to a risk of appropriability which, as discussed
above, leaves the agent with income λπ and the principal with income (1 − λ)π. In the
event that both parties come up with a blueprint, the principal will choose to have her
own blueprint implemented. This shifts the implementation costs onto the agent.
The principal chooses a level of creative effort that maximizes her expected utility:
max EU pK
{e p }

where

EU pK = e p (1 − λ)π(1 − e p ) + (1 − e p )ea (1 − λ)π(1 − e p )s
(8)
= (1 − λ)π[e p + (1 − e p )ea s](1 − e p ) .

That is, with probability e p the principal develops a blueprint, receives income (1 − λ)π
and has leisure time of 1 − e p . With probability (1 − e p )ea the principal fails to develop
a blueprint, but the agent succeeds, thus leaving the principal with income (1 − λ)π and
leisure (1 − e p )s. s < 1 captures the cost to the principal of implementing the agent’s
blueprint. Correspondingly, the agent chooses a level of creative effort that maximizes her
expected utility:
maxEUaK
{ea }

where

EUaK = λπ[e p s + (1 − e p )ea ](1 − ea ) .

(9)

The reaction functions of the principal and the agent under the K form are given by
eKp (ea ) =

1 − 2sea
2(1 − sea )

and

eKa (e p ) =

1 − (1 + s)e p
.
2(1 − e p )

(10)

Solving these yields the equilibrium levels of creative effort for the principal and agent:
eKp =

1
2+s

and

eKa =

1
.
2(1 + s)

(11)

C. The control-form organization (C form)
In the control-form organization (‘C form’ for short), the principal engages the agent in
knowledge creation and delegates control over the choice of blueprints to the agent. It
16

follows from the discussion of the K form that if the agent develops a blueprint, it is the
agent’s blueprint that is used. The problem faced by the principal is thus
maxEU pC
{e p }

where

EU pC = (1 − λ)π[ea s + (1 − ea )e p ](1 − e p ) ,

(12)

and the problem faced by the agent is
maxEUaC

where

{ea }

EUaC = λπ[ea + (1 − ea )e p s](1 − ea ) .

(13)

The reaction functions of the principal and the agent under the C form are given by
eCp (ea ) =

1 − (1 + s)ea
2(1 − ea )

and

eCa (e p ) =

1 − 2se p
.
2(1 − se p )

(14)

Solving these yields the equilibrium levels of creative effort for the principal and the agent:
eCp =

1
2(1 + s)

and

eCa =

1
.
2+s

(15)

We next turn to investigating how the levels of creative effort depend on the degree of
substitutability s and the organizational form.

3. The role of control
The choice of organizational form by the principal affects the extent of knowledge creation
(creative effort) by both the principal and the agent. Comparison of equations (7), (11), and
(15) yields the following relationship between creative effort levels and organizational
forms.
Lemma 1 (Creative effort and organizational form)
eCa > eKa > eaI = 0 and 0 < eCp < eKp < e pI .
As we move from the I form through the K form to the C form, the principal’s creative
effort falls and the agent’s creative effort rises. That is, the principal replaces her creative
effort with that of the agent’s.
Figure 1 illustrates lemma 1 by plotting the K-form and C-form reaction functions
(equations 10 and 14) as well as the equilibrium creative effort levels of the principal and
17

ep
1
2s

eCa (e p )
1
1+s

eKa (e p )

1
2

I form

K form
C form

eKp (ea )
eCp (ea )
1
2

1
1+s

1
2s

ea

Figure 1. Creative effort reaction functions

agent (equations 7, 11, and 15). Under the I form, the agent is not involved in knowledge
creation (eaI = 0) and the principal must exert a high level of creative effort (e pI = 1/2).
Under the K form, the agent does some of the blueprint development (eKa > 0), thus
allowing the principal to cut back on her creative effort levels. Under the C form, the
principal uses even more of the agent’s creative effort as a substitute for her own. Why
does delegating control induce the agent to exert more creative effort? Having control
allows one to choose one’s own blueprint, thereby shifting the burden of implementation
onto the other party. This raises the returns to successfully developing a blueprint. In
particular, when control is shifted from the principal to the agent the returns to creative
effort rise for the agent and fall for the principal. As a result, the principal is able to replace
her own creative effort with that of the agent’s. Note that this central insight regarding
the role of control in inducing effort first appeared in Aghion and Tirole (1997).
The analysis of lemma 1 holds s fixed. We may also inquire as to the effects of our key
substitutability parameter s on the choice of effort.

18

Lemma 2 (Creative effort and substitutability s)
deiC
< 0,
ds

deiK
< 0,
ds

and

deiI
=0
ds

i = p,a .

The less substitutable is creative effort (i.e., the smaller is s), the greater is the downside
risk of having to implement the other party’s blueprint. This induces greater creative
effort by both parties. Lemmas 1–2 are interesting features of equilibrium creative effort
that feed into our main results about the choice of organizational form.

4. The organizational choice
The principal chooses the organizational form that yields the highest utility, subject to the
agent’s participation constraint. Plugging in the Nash effort levels of equations (7), (11)
and (15) into the principal’s expected utility functions of equations (5), (8) and (12) yields
the following values for expected utility (with expectation taken over the probability of
developing a blueprint):
1
,
4
1+s
,
EU pK = (1 − λ)π
2(2 + s)
EU pI = (π − waI )

(16)

and
EU pC = (1 − λ)π

(1 + 2s)2
.
4(1 + s)(2 + s)

It is mathematically convenient to re-write these equations by dividing through by
j

Denoting the result by Vp ≡

j
4
(1−λ)π EU p

(1−λ)π
.
4

(j = I,K,C) yields:

VpI = α ,
VpK =

2(1 + s)
,
(2 + s)

and
VpC

(1 + 2s)2
=
,
(1 + s)(2 + s)

where
19

(17)

α≡

π − waI
.
(1 − λ)π

(18)

α is the principal’s income when the agent is not involved in knowledge creation divided
by the principal’s income when the agent is involved in knowledge creation. α thus measures the monetary cost of appropriability risk for the principal. (We use α for appropriability).
Inspection of equation (17) makes it clear that the principal’s choice of organizational form
depends on just two key parameters, substitutability s and appropriability α.
j

j

Figure 2 plots the Vp against s and α. Within a panel, the Vp are plotted against the s.
j

Across panels, the Vp are plotted against the α in the sense that α rises as one moves from
case 1 through to case 3. Consider the upper panel. The VpK and VpC curves are upward
sloping and intersect only once. The intersection occurs at s2 . To the left of s2 the K form is
preferred over the C form while to the right of s2 the C form is preferred over the K form.
Whether the I form is preferred depends on the value of α. The top panel of figure 2 (case
1) illustrates the case where α is sufficiently small that the relevant intersection is between
VpI and VpK . This occurs at s3 (α). To the left of s3 (α) the I form is preferred.15 For somewhat
larger values of α (case 2), the relevant intersection is between VpI and VpC and occurs at
s1 (α). To the left of s1 (α) the I form is preferred. For very large values of α (α > α1 in figure
2), VpI lies everywhere above VpK and VpC so that the I form is always preferred. Figure 2 is
core to the paper and illustrates how the choice of organizational form depends on our two critical
parameters, the degree of substitutability (s) and the degree of appropriability (α).
At the risk of being pedantic, we formalize the discussion of figure 2 with a couple
of definitions and a proposition. This formalization brings home just how simple is the
closed-form analysis.
15 We

will show shortly that incentive compatibility implies α > 1 which in turn implies that α can never
be so low as to eliminate the I form entirely.

20

Vp

α1
α2

VpK

Case 1
(low α)

α

VpI
VpC

I form
0

K form
s 3 (α)

C form
s2

s

1

Vp

α1
VpI

α
α2

VpK

Case 2
(intermediate α)
VpC

I form

C form
s 1 (α)

0

s

1

Vp
α
α1

VpI

α2

VpK

Case 3
(high α)
VpC

I form
0

1

Figure 2. Determinants of organizational forms

21

s

Definition 1 (Critical degrees of substitutability)
√

1. Let s1 (α) ≡
2. Let s2 ≡

√1
2

3. Let s3 (α) ≡

3α−4+ α(α+12)
2(4−α)

be the value of s that equates VpI = VpC .

be the value of s that equates VpK = VpC .
2(α−1)
2−α

be the value of s that equates VpI = VpK .

√
Note that s2 (= 1/ 2) is independent of the risk of appropriation. However, as we
shall see when we generalize the model, this last feature is an artifact of our simplifying
assumptions rather than a robust result.
Definition 2 (Critical degrees of appropriability)
1. Let α1 ≡

3
2

2. Let α2 ≡

√
2+2√2
1+2 2

be the value of α that satisfies s1 (α) = 1.
' 1.26 be the value of α that satisfies s2 = s3 (α).

The next proposition is organized using the cases displayed in figure 2. It is best
understood by referring back to the figure.
Proposition 1 (Determinants of organizational form)
Case 1. If α < α2 (low appropriability costs) then the principal chooses the I form whenever
s ∈ (0,s3 (α)), the K form whenever s ∈ (s3 (α),s2 ), and the C form whenever s ∈ (s2 ,1).
Case 2. If α ∈ (α2 ,α1 ) (moderate appropriability costs) then the principal chooses the I form
whenever s ∈ (0,s1 (α)) and the C form whenever s ∈ (s1 (α),1).
Case 3. If α > α1 (high appropriability costs) then the principal always chooses the I form.
Proposition 1 is our core result. Before investigating the economics of this proposition let
us briefly discuss incentive compatibility.
While it is the principal who offers to engage the agent in the creation and control
of knowledge, the agent can always refuse. The organizational choice of proposition
1 holds provided that the agent is willing to engage in knowledge creation and control
22

whenever the principal asks him to do so. That is, incentive compatibility requires that
min(EUaK ,EUaC ) > EUaI whenever min(EU pK ,EU pC ) > EU pI . A necessary and sufficient
condition for this to hold for all s is waI /π ≤ 2λ/3.16,17
The incentive compatibility constraint implies that the roles of the principal and the
agent cannot be reversed despite their apparent symmetry. To see this, note that incentive
compatibility is more easily satisfied the lower is waI /π because this makes involvement
in knowledge creation more attractive to the agent. By involving the agent in knowledge
creation, the principal is trading off income for leisure while the agent is trading off leisure
for income. This will only be worthwhile for both parties if the principal is a sufficiently
higher income earner in the absence of agent involvement in knowledge creation i.e., if
waI /π is low. Thus, the principal is the one who wants to exchange income in return for
leisure and the agent is the one who wants to exchange leisure in return for income.

5. Organizational choice: determinants and co-existence
There are a number of ways to interpret proposition 1. One is as a description of how
substitutability s and appropriability α determine the choice of organizational form. In
this sense, the proposition offers a comparative static involving s and α. Another way
to think about the proposition is as a statement about the co-existence of organizational
forms. We turn to these interpretations now.
16 To

derive this expression, substitute equations (7), (11), and (15) into the agent’s expected utility expressions of (6), (9), and (13) and compare the result with the principal’s expected utilities expressions of (16).
It will be immediately apparent that min(EUaK ,EUaC ) > EUaI whenever min(EU pK ,EU pC ) > EU pI as long as
EUaI 6 EUaC for s = 1. This yields the condition waI /π ≤ 2λ/3.
17 It is now easy to show that the intervals involving the s (α) in proposition 1 are well defined. In case 2, it
j
is easy to show that α ∈ (α2 ,α1 ) implies 0 < s1 (α) < 1. Simply plug in the definitions of α2 , α1 , and s1 (α). In
case 1, it is easy to show that s2 < 1 and that α < α2 implies s3 (α) < s2 . Again, plug in the definitions of α2 ,
s3 (α), and s2 . To show s3 (α) > 0 note from the definition of s3 (α) and α that s3 > 0 if and only if α > 1. But
α > 1 follows from rearranging the incentive compatibility condition waI /π ≤ 2λ/3. Hence all the intervals
in proposition 1 are well defined.

23

magnetic shield

implosion protection

deflection yoke

mask

electron gun

glass panel
red, green, and blue
phospors
glass funnel

Figure 3. Section of a cathode ray tube

A. The role of substitutability as a determinant of organizational choice
A core innovation of our paper is in identifying substitutability of creative efforts s as a
determinant of organizational choice. The next corollary uses friendlier language to draw
out this implication from proposition 1.
Corollary 1.1 (Substitutability and organizational choice) An increase in the degree of substitutability between the creative efforts of the principal and the agent (i.e., an increase in s) can
lead to a change in organizational form. In case 1, as s rises from 0 to 1 the organizational form
changes from the implementation form to the knowledge form and then to the control form. In case
2, the organizational form changes from the implementation form to the control form.
To investigate the empirical relevance of this corollary we present the case of the cathode ray tube (crt). The crt lies at the heart of colour tvs. As illustrated in figure 3, it
consists of an electron gun that bombards the phosphor-coated inner surface of the glass
panel, causing phosphors coloured in red, green, and blue to glow and produce a colour
image (see Alig, 1999, for more details). Accurately targetting the inner surface of the
glass panel with electrons is tricky. This is the job of the deflection yokes (which create a
magnetic field that forces the electron beams to scan across the glass panel surface) and the

24

sophisticated, pattern-forming mask (which shapes the electron beams). The surface must
be accurately targeted both in terms of location (which determines the focus or vividness
of the image) and in in terms of intensity (which determines the brightness of the image).
The electron gun and phosphor-coated surface sit inside a vacuum glass tube. The
tube must meet three main requirements. First, it must be strong enough to withstand
the vacuum pressure. Second, the front panel of the tube must have a thickness that is
substantially uniform so as not to distort the image as it passes through the glass. Third,
since the phosphor-coated surface sits up against the front panel, the panel must have a
shape that is easily targeted by the electron gun.
In the high end of the North American crt market, there are only eight crt manufacturers (e.g., Sony) supplied by four glass manufacturers (e.g., Techneglass). Both the
glass and crt manufacturers routinely improve their components. Because the electronic
and glass components are interdependent, changes in one component invariably require
custom changes in the others. Despite the required customization of glass tubes, the
relationships between glass and crt manufacturers were both arms-length and stable
throughout the 1980s and the first half of the 1990s.
In the early 1990s there was a change in the industry that might be viewed as a natural
experiment. Incremental improvements in crts had reached the point where flat-screen
displays were feasible, though expensive. The flat screen created a host of new technical
problems. (For a discussion, see us patent 6,121,723.) In particular, it compromised the
strength of the glass tube (curved structures, as in domes, withstand pressure better)
and also made it difficult to ensure that focus and brightness where uniform from edge
to edge of the flat screen (in curved tubes the edges and the centre of the front panel
are more equidistant from the electron gun). Broadly speaking, there are two solutions
to these problems. First, the glass can be made thicker around the edges in order to
strengthen the tube, a practice known as wedging (see, e.g., us patent 5,107,999). Wedging
can be seen in the crt of figure 3. This glass manufacturer’s solution imposes heavy
implementation costs on the crt manufacturer because the variable glass thickness makes

25

it even more difficult to ensure uniform focus and brightness across the front panel.
The crt manufacturer must therefore make modifications to the electron gun and the
phosphor-coated surface (see, e.g., us patent 6,307,333). Alternatively, the electron gun
can be designed to ensure edge-to-edge focus and brightness on a uniformly thin front
panel (see, e.g., us patent 5,539,285). This crt manufacturer’s solution imposes heavy
costs on the glass manufacturer because it means that the tube can only be strengthened
by more fully exploiting the compressive characteristics of the glass (see, e.g., us patent
6,353,283). What this means is that the introduction of the new flat-screen displays sharply
reduced substitutability between the creative efforts of the crt and glass manufacturers.
In the notation of our model, s fell.18
According to our model, this exogenous fall in s should have led to a change in
organizational form. In particular, the dominant organizational form, which involved
out-sourcing the design and production of the glass tube (i.e., the control form), should
have given way to the knowledge-form organization or even the implementation-form
organization. This is precisely what happened. The case of Sony provides a good example.
Instead of approaching its traditional glass manufacturers for a solution, Sony partially
integrated its operations in two ways (see Hardison, 1996). First, it initiated a joint venture
with Corning-Asahi, called American Video Glass (avg), which was mandated to design
and produce a glass tube with a uniformly thin front panel. Sony’s control over avg is
evident from the fact that avg was located inside Sony’s Pittsburgh production facility.
The avg arrangement thus has features of both the knowledge- and implementation-form
organizations. Second, Sony continued to out-source glass tubes from its existing suppliers, such as Techneglass. This out-sourcing arrangement is essentially an implementationform organization. Thus, corollary 1.1 correctly predicts developments in the organizational form of this industry.
18 All

of these patents protect small incremental improvements to the glass and electronic components of
crts. Yet the existence of these patents has not prevented each manufacturer from finding slightly different
solutions and filing patent applications over its particular blueprint or implementation of a blueprint. See
Levin, Klevorick, Nelson, and Winter (1987) for evidence that in most sectors firms do not regard patents
as an effective means of protecting incremental innovations, but file patent applications anyway for a host of
other reasons.

26

Finally, it is worth pointing out that more traditional explanations for vertical integration are not relevant here. For one, Sony’s avg arrangement was not about concentrating
different stages of the tv production process in one site: avg was set up to supply Sony’s
San Diego production facility, not Sony’s Pittsburgh production facility where it was located. For another, the usual hold-up explanation (e.g., Klein et al., 1978; Williamson, 1985;
Hart, 1995) is not relevant here either. First, Sony and all other crt manufacturers had a
long history of ordering custom glass tubes from outside suppliers. Despite the potential
for hold-up that custom tubes entail, out-sourcing of tubes was pervasive and stable
throughout the 1980s and early 1990s (before flat-screen displays appeared). Second,
throughout this long period, Sony bought from three of the four main glass tube suppliers
and these suppliers appear to have freely applied knowledge developed for Sony to the
glass tubes they supplied to Sony’s competitors. (See Helper et al., 2000, for evidence
that this is a common practice among suppliers in many industries.) Third, even after
the introduction of flat-screen displays Sony continued to out-source glass tubes from its
existing suppliers, which suggests that investment specificity did not become any more of
a concern. Fourth, both the crt and glass manufacturers’ patents cited above clearly state
that the introduction of flat screen displays created technical problems for which there
were two types of solutions, each of which shifted the burden of implementation onto the
other party. Finally, we are clearly dealing with the production of knowledge, which has
more of a public-goods character than, say, a Fisher Brothers automotive body. In short, it
seems that the change in organizational form had little to do with transportation costs or
hold-up and everything to do with a reduction in Sony’s ability to substitute its creative
effort for that of its glass tube suppliers. That is, we are dealing with a reduction in s.

B. The role of appropriability risk as a determinant of organizational choice
Another innovation of our paper is in identifying an appropriability problem that exploits
the public-goods nature of knowledge. The next corollary uses friendlier language to
draw out this implication from proposition 1.

27

Corollary 1.2 (Appropriation costs and organizational choice) An increase in the cost of
appropriability risk for the principal (i.e., an increase in α) pushes the organizational form away
from both the knowledge and control forms towards the implementation form.
To illustrate this point we return to the crts found in colour tvs. There is wide heterogeneity in the extent to which crt manufacturers involve their suppliers in knowledge
creation and control. For instance, Hitachi out-sources the design and production of its
crts. Sony instead designs its own tubes, produces the key technological components,
and keeps a tight control over the technical specifications of the components it out-sources.
A key difference between the two manufacturers is the type of pattern-forming mask that
each uses. See figure 3. Hitachi uses a fairly standard shadow mask whereas Sony uses
its advanced ‘Triniton’ aperture-grille mask. As a result, Sony has a jump on the field
and crucial knowledge to hide from manufacturers that have started producing Trinitron
clones. (The Triniton patent just expired.) Given these differences in the appropriability
of mask technology, our model correctly predicts that Hitachi will out-source more than
Sony.
Notice once again how the choice of organizational form is very different from the usual
one (e.g., Klein et al., 1978), including, most recently, Grossman and Helpman (2002). In
the usual setting, there is a relationship-specific investment and one party can renegotiate
for a better deal knowing that the investment is not worth anything to the other party
in the absence of a deal. The solution is to integrate, possibly incurring additional governance costs. Here integration will not solve the public goods, knowledge-appropriation
problem. The principal has two solutions. She may set an incentive-compatible payment
that prevents the agent from trying to claim ownership of the knowledge (the K and C
forms). Alternatively, the principal may choose not to involve the agent in knowledge
creation (the I form). In either case, the public-goods nature of knowledge is central.

28

C. Co-existence of organizational forms
A very different way of thinking about proposition 1 is as a statement about the coexistence of organizational forms. The idea is that if there are multiple principal-agent
matches, each with an idiosyncratic characteristic (α,s), then we would observe the simultaneous coexistence of up to three different organizational forms. Such heterogeneity
appeared in our discussion of Hitachi and Sony. In this case, the heterogeneity is induced
by differences across firms in λ and hence α. In the section on general equilibrium we will
consider the existence of multiple matches each characterized by a different s. We then
show that in equilibrium, organizational forms co-exist.
To summarize, proposition 1 contains two novel features. It tells us how organizational
forms vary with the degree of substitutability of creative efforts (s) and with the risk of
appropriation (α). It also predicts that heterogeneity in α or s will lead to the coexistence
of organizational forms.

6. Higher appropriability risk with control
In the next two sections we show how easy it is to extend proposition 1 in a number of
interesting and empirically relevant directions. Suppose that the agent is more likely to
walk away with the principal’s idea if he has been delegated control over the implementation of knowledge, perhaps because control gives the agent additional tacit knowledge
or credibility in court. Let λ0 be the share of profits going to the agent in a C-form
organization and let λ continue to denote the agent’s share in a K-form organization. If the
risk of appropriation increases when the agent has control, then λ0 will exceed λ (although
the model can equally accommodate the reverse).
The optimal effort levels are independent of λ0 and λ, as can be seen from equations
(7), (11) and (15). Consequently, this generalization only requires one to change λ to λ0 in
the expression for EU pC in (16). As a result, VpC in equation (17) becomes
VpC =

1 − λ0 (1 + 2s)2
.
1 − λ (1 + s)(2 + s)
29

(19)

Vp

α1
α3
α2

VpK

Case 1
(low α, low λ0 )

α

VpI
VpC

I form

K form

s 2 (λ,λ )

s 3 (α)

0

C form
s

1

Vp

α3
α1

VpK

Case 4
(low α, high λ0 )

α

VpI

VpC
I form
0

K form
s 3 (α)

1

s

Figure 4. Co-existence of organizational forms when appropriability risk increases with control

From the discussion of figure 2, all that the introduction of λ0 > λ does is to lower the
VpC curve. Consequently, the cut-off s2 between the K and C forms, which was a constant
√
1/ 2, becomes dependent on the appropriability parameters λ0 and λ. This provides an
additional channel through which appropriability and control interplay. The cut-off s3
between the I and K forms is unchanged, while the cut-off s1 between the I and C forms
now also depends on λ0 and λ. Thus, definitions 1 and 2 generalize as follows.

30

Definition 10 (Critical degrees of substitutability with λ0 6= λ)
√

1. Let s1

(α,λ,λ0 )

≡

3α(1−λ)−4(1−λ0 )+ α(1−λ)[α(1−λ)+12(1−λ0 )]
2[4(1−λ0 )−α(1−λ)]

be the value of s that equates

VpI = VpC .
√

2. Let s2 (λ,λ0 ) ≡
3. Let s3 (α) ≡

2(λ−λ0 )+ (1−λ)(1−λ0 )
√
(1+λ−2λ0 ) 2

2(α−1)
2−α

be the value of s that equates VpK = VpC .

be the value of s that equates VpI = VpK .

Definition 20 (Critical degrees of appropriability with λ0 6= λ)
1. Let α1 ≡

3(1−λ0 )
2(1−λ)

2. Let α2 ≡

be the value of α that satisfies s1 (α,λ,λ0 ) = 1.

2+2s2 (λ,λ0 )
2+s2 (λ,λ0 )

be the value of α that satisfies s2 (λ,λ0 ) = s3 (α) or, equivalently,

s2 (λ,λ0 ) = s1 (α,λ,λ0 ).
3. Let α3 ≡

4
3

be the value of α that satisfies s3 (α) = 1.

The consequences of this generalization for the choice of organizational form can be
seen by comparing figure 2 (where λ0 = λ) with figure 4 (where λ0 > λ). Consider case 1.
Starting from λ0 = λ (the top panel of figure 2), an increase in λ0 lowers the VpC curve (the
top panel of figure 4). This shifts s2 , the cut-off between the K and C forms, to the right.
That is, it makes C-form organizations less likely.
If one continues to increase λ0 to the point where the VpC curve lies everywhere below
the VpK curve (which, by equations 17 and 19 happens when λ0 > 1 − 2λ) then the C form
disappears entirely. See the bottom panel of figure 4. In this case, matches to the left of s3
adopt the I form while those to the right of s3 adopt the K form. This case does not happen
with λ0 = λ.
Thus, proposition 1 generalizes as follows.

31

Proposition 10 (Co-existence of organizational forms with λ0 6= λ)
Case 1. If λ0 < 1 − 2λ and α < α2 then the principal chooses the I form whenever
s ∈ (0,s3 (α)), the K form whenever s ∈ (s3 (α),s2 (λ,λ0 )), and the C form whenever
s ∈ (s2 (λ,λ0 ),1).
Case 2. If λ0 < 1 − 2λ and α ∈ (α2 ,α1 ) then the principal chooses the I form whenever
s ∈ (0,s1 (α,λ,λ0 )) and the C form whenever s ∈ (s1 (α,λ,λ0 ),1).
Case 3. If λ0 < 1 − 2λ and α > α1 or if λ0 > 1 − 2λ and α > α3 then the principal always
chooses the I form.
Case 4. If λ0 > 1 − 2λ and α < α3 then the principal chooses the I form whenever s ∈
(0,s3 (α)), and the K form whenever s ∈ (s3 (α),1).

7. A busier principal
In March 2001, the Boeing Company announced it was fundamentally changing its organizational structure. Boeing had three major lines of business, including the famous
commercial aircraft unit co-located with its corporate headquarters in Seattle. Faced with
a flat market for commercial aircraft and limited growth potential elsewhere, Boeing’s
corporate management set out to identify new lines of business. At the same time,
corporate managers knew that to remain competitive they needed to continue delivering
incremental innovations in their existing lines of business. To achieve both ends, Boeing’s
corporate management decided to relinquish control over operational improvements in
its existing lines of business. In particular, it promoted the three existing unit heads to
chief executive officers and geographically separated the corporate headquarters from all

32

three business units.19
This is yet another example of a change in organizational form that cannot be explained
by the more conventional approach to organizations that emphasizes hold-up issues. It
can however, be easily understood within our framework simply by introducing one
additional parameter that measures how busy the principal is with other tasks. More
generally, this allows us to analyze the effects of managerial overload on the involvement
of subordinates in knowledge creation and control.
So far we have assumed that the principal and the agent have similar demands on their
time. Let us now allow for the possibility that the principal is busier than the agent. The
simplest way to do this is by assuming that the principal has θ units of time less than
the agent. Then the principal’s leisure is l p = [(1 − e p )s − θ] when the agent’s preferred
blueprint is implemented and l p = (1 − e p − θ) when the principal’s own preferred
blueprint is implemented. (Our baseline case corresponds to θ = 0.) The agent’s leisure
continues to be la = (1 − ea )s when the principal’s preferred blueprint is implemented and
la = (1 − ea ) when the agent’s own preferred blueprint is implemented.
When the agent is not involved in knowledge creation, the problem faced by the principal now that θ units of her time are already taken by other tasks is
maxEU pI ,
{e p }

EU pI = (π − waI )e p (1 − e p − θ) .

(20)

The solution to this yields the principal’s equilibrium creative effort level under the I form
as
e pI = (1 − θ)/2 .

(21)

Note that e pI is decreasing in θ: as the principal becomes busier with other tasks, she is less
willing to exert creative effort. This lowers the probability of a blueprint being developed.
19 The

simultaneous announcement of these two decisions and the explanations given by Boeing’s Chairman at the news conference made it clear that the relocation of Boeing’s corporate headquarters (to Chicago,
it was later announced) was not just about locating more centrally within the United States; it was mainly a
commitment to delegating control over incremental knowledge creation. (Indeed, centrally-located Saint
Louis was not even considered as a potential headquarter location because it housed Boeing’s military
aircraft and missile operations and Boeing’s Chairman felt that having business units managers down the
corridor from him would limit their initiative.) A recording of Boeing’s news conference of 21 March 2001
is available from http://www.boeing.com/news/.

33

When the agent is involved in knowledge creation, the problem faced by the principal
is now
maxEU pK ,
{e p }

EU pK = (1 − λ)π{e p (1 − e p − θ) + (1 − e p )ea [(1 − e p )s − θ]}

(22)

if the principal retains control, and
maxEU pC ,
{e p }

EU pC = (1 − λ)π{ea [(1 − e p )s − θ] + (1 − ea )e p (1 − e p − θ)}

(23)

if control is delegated to the agent. The solutions to these yield the reaction functions of
the principal under the K and C forms as
eKp (ea ) =

1 − 2sea − θ(1 − ea )
2(1 − sea )

eCp (ea ) =

and

1 − (1 + s)ea − θ(1 − ea )
,
2(1 − ea )

(24)

respectively. The main point to note from these equations is that both eKp (ea ) and eCp (ea )
are decreasing in θ: as the time spent by the principal on other tasks increases, she is less
willing to exert creative effort for any given level of creative effort by the agent. In other
words, an increase in θ shifts down the principal’s reaction functions under the K and C
forms. Figure 5 illustrates this. (The downwards shift in the principal’s reaction functions
can be seen by comparison of figures 5 and 1.)
The agent’s problem under each organizational form and the agent’s reaction functions
when he is involved in knowledge creation are unaffected by the fact that the principal
is busier. (The relevant equations for the agent appear in section 2 above.) However, the
agent is now further to the southeast along his K- and C-form reaction functions. The busy
principal puts in less creative effort while the agent puts in more.
Thus, while there is a direct cost of work overload for the principal in terms of foregone
leisure, she also enjoys a strategic benefit of over-commitment: the principal’s busier schedule
commits her to cutting back on creative effort, thus inducing the agent to work harder. The
choice of organizational form is affected by the relative magnitude of these two effects.
When there is low substitutability between the creative efforts of the principal and the
agent (s is low), the direct cost of over-commitment dominates. On the other hand, when
there is high substitutability between the creative efforts of the principal and the agent
34

ep
1
2s

eCa (e p )
1
1+s

eKa (e p )

1−θ
2

I form

K form
C form
eKp (ea )
eCp (ea )
1
2

1−θ
1+s−θ

1−θ
2s−θ

ea

Figure 5. Creative effort reaction functions when the principal is busier

(s is high), the strategic benefit of being busy dominates. To see this, consider a faculty
member (a principal) with an idea for a paper. She engages a PhD student (an agent)
to do at least some of the research. If the faculty member becomes involved in another
activity that eats up her time (e.g., chairing the recruiting committee), how will this affect
the student’s involvement and the faculty member’s research output? The answer will
depend on the degree of substitutability between the creative efforts of the faculty member
and the student. If the student’s research effort is not very substitutable with the faculty
member’s then the student’s output will be far from a finished product, the supervisor
will not have enough time to finish the paper, and the project will be still-born. On the
other hand, if the student’s research effort is very substitutable with the faculty member’s,
taking on other commitments can be good for the supervisor’s research productivity. It
induces the student to work harder and the student’s output will be so close to what the
faculty member would have done that it will result in a good co-authored paper with little
time involvement by the faculty member.

35

Vp

VpI

Case 1

VpK
VpC
I form

K form

(high θ)

(high θ)

I form

K form

(low θ)

(low θ)

C form
(high θ)

C form
(low θ)

0

1

s

Figure 6. Co-existence of organizational forms when the principal is busier

Figure 6 graphically illustrates the issues. For low levels of substitutability (low s)
the VpK curve shifts down, reflecting the direct cost of work overload. As a result, the
cut-off between the I and K forms shifts left. Simply put, if substitutability is low then
the busy principal either does it herself or does not do it at all. She will not waste time
on large implementation costs. For high levels of substitutability (high s) the VpK curve
shifts up, reflecting the benefit of strategic over-commitment that forces the agent to work
harder. As a result, the cut-off between the K and C forms shifts right. Simply put, if
substitutability is high then the busy principal delegates most aspects of the project.
The transformation of Boeing’s organizational form can be seen as an example of the
latter change. This interpretation fits well with Boeing’s own presentation of the facts.
Boeing’s Chairman emphasized that the aim of promoting business unit managers and
relocating the corporate headquarters was to give business unit managers “more freedom
to deliver operational improvements”, thus allowing its corporate managers to “focus on
new business opportunities for Boeing”.20 That is, the aim was to reduce e p and raise
ea . Thus, to continue delivering incremental product improvements (knowledge creation)
in the face of greater demands on their time, Boeing’s corporate managers relinquished
control over knowledge creation to business unit managers. In the terminology of our
20 See

Boeing’s news release of 21 March 2001 at http://www.boeing.com/news/.

36

framework, Boeing’s internal organization changed from the knowledge form to the control form.

8. General Equilibrium
We have been careful to set up the model so that its general equilibrium aspects are easy
to handle. While general equilibrium interactions are not the main message of this paper,
we nevertheless have several reasons for pursuing them. First and most importantly, this
allows us to endogenize how profits are split between the principal and the agent under
the implementation form. This in turn allows us to endogenize the key appropriability
parameter α = (π − waI )/[(1 − λ)π]. Second, general equilibrium analysis allows us to
endogenize the number of principals and agents. Third, it establishes the uniqueness of
equilibrium. Finally, this section shows just how easy it is to use our model for general
equilibrium comparative statics, a subject we will return to in future work. To avoid
over-kill, we do not work through all three cases identified in figure 2 and proposition
1. Instead, we look at the most complicated case (case 1, with all three organizational
forms). The remaining cases follow trivially.
Each type of actor i (i = p,a) has an alternative opportunity in the ‘nine-to-five’ sector,
that is, a sector where workers do not exert either creative effort or implementation effort.
This leaves workers in this sector with one unit of leisure. Let wi9−5 be the wage in this
sector. With one unit of leisure, wi9−5 will also measure utility. Each actor must decide
whether to work in the nine-to-five sector or to match. Matches are characterized by the
substitutability parameter s. The probability of entering a match of type s is described
by an arbitrary but known probability density function f (s) defined over (0,1) and with
positive mass throughout this interval. With free entry into either a match or the nine-tofive sector, utility and expected utility must be equalized across activities. Since nine-tofive sector utility is just wi9−5 , perfect mobility implies
wi9−5

s3

Z
=
0

EUiI f (s)ds +

Z

s2
s3

EUiK f (s)ds +

37

Z

1
s2

EUiC f (s)ds ,

i = p,a

(25)

where on the right hand side expectations are taken across different values of s and hence
across utilities under different organizational forms. Note that since nine-to-fivers have
more leisure time, their incomes must be lower.21
We have not explained what nine-to-fivers do. While there are many options, the
simplest for present purposes is an activity that does not introduce another product market. We thus treat nine-to-fivers as production line workers who are hired to produce the
products described by blueprints. Further, to distinguish between principals and agents
in the simplest way possible, we assume that when employed as nine-to-fivers, agents are
φ times as productive as principals:
.
= φw9−5
w9−5
p
a

(26)

The incentive compatibility constraint derived in section 4 implies 0 < φ < 1.
We will need to keep track of the number of principals L p , the number of agents L a , the
number of matches m, and the number of matches that successfully produce blueprints n.
Let ρ ≡ n/m be the probability that a match successfully produces a blueprint. ρ is given
by
n
ρ(s3 ) ≡
=
m
=

s3

Z
0

1
2

e pI f (s)ds +
s3

Z

f (s)ds +
0

Z

3
2

s2 h
s3

Z

1
s3

eKp

+ (1 − eKp )eKa

i

f (s)ds +

Z 1h
s2

i
eCa + (1 − eCa )eCp f (s)ds

1
f (s)ds ,
(2 + s)
(27)
j

where the second line follows from substituting in the expressions for the ei given by
equations (7), (11), and (15).
Finally, we need an expression for profits. Since there are fixed costs of developing a
blueprint, firms will earn positive operational profits. Let µ(n) be a firm’s mark-up i.e.,
(price less marginal cost)/(price). We assume only that mark-ups fall as the number of
producers rises. That is, dµ(n)/dn 6 0. This is consistent with a large number of market
21 It

is worth noting that, besides endogenizing key variables, our approach in this section illustrates
the more general point that each firms’ choice of organizational form is affected by the options available
to the ‘marginal’ principal or agent in the economy, which necessarily reflect the (general equilibrium)
environment in which the firm operates. See Legros and Newman (2000).

38

structures.22 Each firm’s revenue is a fraction 1/n of total income Y. By the definition of
µ(n), each firm’s profits will be a fraction µ(n) of its revenues:
π = µ(n)Y/n .

(28)

Total income is the sum of nine-to-five incomes plus total profits nπ:
Y = (L p − m)w9−5
+ (L a − m)w9−5
+ nπ .
p
a

(29)

This completes our description of general equilibrium.23
Our primary interest is in endogenizing α = (π − waI )/[(1 − λ)π] which is equivalent
to endogenizing ω ≡ waI /π. To this end, we can rewrite the equation (25) free entry
conditions of the principal and agent exclusively in terms of just two unknowns, ω and
√
the number of successful matches n. To do so, first note from definition 1 that s2 = 1/ 2
and s3 = 2(λ − ω)/(1 − 2λ + ω). Second, substitute the equation (16) expression for the
j

EU p into the equation (25) free entry condition for principals to obtain
1−ω
g(n,ω) =
4

2(λ−ω)
1−2λ+ω

Z
0

1−λ
f (s)ds +
2

Z

√1
2

1+s
1−λ
f (s)ds +
2(λ−ω) (2 + s)
4
1−2λ+ω

Z

1

(1 + 2s)2
f (s)ds
√1 (1 + s)(2 + s)
2
(30)

where g(n,ω) is simply w9−5
p /π expressed as a function of n and ω. It is straightforward
to show that dg(n,ω)/dn > 0 and that dg(n,ω)/dω < 0.24 The corresponding free entry
condition for agents is
ω
g(n,ω) =
2φ

2(λ−ω)
1−2λ+ω

Z
0

λ
s f (s)ds +
4φ

Z

√1
2

(1 + 2s)2
λ
f (s)ds +
2(λ−ω) (1 + s)(2 + s)
2φ
1−2λ+ω

Z

1
√1
2

1+s
f (s)ds .
(2 + s)
(31)

22 Consider

two examples. If firms are monopolistic competitors producing differentiated varieties that
enter consumer preferences with a constant elasticity of substitution σ, then µ(n) = 1/σ and dµ(n)/dn = 0.
If firms are Bertrand oligopolists, again with ces product differentiation, then µ(n) = 1/[σ − (σ − 1)/n] and
dµ(n)/dn = −(σ − 1)/[1 + (n − 1)σ]2 < 0.
23 For our purposes it is sufficient to solve for the ratio w9−5 /π. To solve for w9−5 and π individually we
p
p
would need an additional equation equating w9−5
to
the
value
of
its
marginal
product.
p
24 Substituting

g(n,ω) ≡

w9−5
p
π

equations (26) and (29) and the definition of ρ into (28) and solving for w9−5
p /π yields
=

[1−µ(n)]n
µ(n){[L p −n/ρ(λ,ω)]+φ[L a −n/ρ(λ,ω)]} .

Noting that, with s3 = 2(λ − ω)/(1 − 2λ + ω),

dρ(λ,ω)/dλ < 0 and dρ(λ,ω)/dω > 0, it is straightforward to see that dg(n,ω)/dn > 0 and dg(n,ω)/dω <
0. Notice that, by (26), w9−5
a /π = φg(n,ω).

39

ω

Free entry of principals
Free entry of agents

n

Figure 7. General equilibrium

Equations (30) and (31) jointly characterize the general equilibrium values of the number of producers (n) and the share of operational profits going to the agent under the I
form (ω). As illustrated in figure 7, when drawn in {n, ω} space the free entry condition
for agents always slopes upward and has a larger slope than the free entry condition for
principals.25 Thus, the intersection of the two free entry conditions is unique as illustrated
in figure 7.
To summarize our general equilibrium derivations, let us collect our exogenous parameters in the vector β = {L p ,L a ,λ,φ} where β ∈ B = {(0,∞)2 × (0,1)2 }. The discussion
leading up to figure 7 demonstrates that for each parameter vector β there exists a unique
equilibrium with n = n(β) and ω = ω(β). Since α is a function of ω, this implies a unique
α = α(β). Proposition 1 with α set to α(β) then fully characterizes the co-existence of
organizational forms in equilibrium.
25 These

claims about slopes follow from dg(n,ω)/dn > 0, dg(n,ω)/dω < 0, and the fact that the righthand side of equation (30) is decreasing in ω whereas the right-hand side of equation (31) is increasing in
ω.

40

Proposition 2 (General equilibrium) For each parameter vector β ∈ B there exists a unique
general equilibrium. The types of organizational forms that co-exist and the range of substitutability s for which each form is adopted are given by proposition 1 with the cost of appropriability α set
to α(β).
The comparative statics discussed throughout the paper still hold in general equilibrium. We can also take these comparative statics one level deeper. For instance, we may
use equations (30) and (31) to look at how the risk of appropriation (λ) affects the number
of producers (n), the share of operational profits received by agents under the I form (ω),
and the cut-off between organizational forms (s3 ).
So far we have taken the distribution of the substitutability parameter f (s) as exogenous. Its evolution is of course of interest. The dynamic we have in mind is that the larger
is the set of agents involved in knowledge creation and control, the more rapidly agents
acquire the skills that principals are looking for. That is, f (s) becomes skewed to the
right over time. This will increase the proportion of matches that adopt the K and C
forms which further reinforces the acquisition of skills. The result is a knowledge-based
externality: by involving workers and subcontractors more closely in knowledge-based
activities today, firms create an environment that encourages even more agent participation in knowledge-based activities tomorrow. This will have implications for growth that
we hope to explore in future work.

9. Conclusions
Nate Rosenberg’s unsung hero of economic growth is the mundane day-to-day of incremental innovation. Yet sustaining incremental innovation within a ’neo-classical firm’ is
difficult for reasons long ago pointed out by Arrow (1962b): the uncertainty of knowledge
creation is associated with contractual incompleteness and the public-goods nature of knowledge is associated with non-appropriability. We also identified the additional problem that
incremental innovation is typically embedded in complex, interdependent systems. As a
result, incremental change in one component creates residual incompatibilities with other
41

components. The effort needed to resolve these incompatibilities led us to our core notion
of imperfect substitutability between the creative efforts of the principal and the agent.
In this environment of contractual incompleteness, non-appropriability, and imperfect
substitutability, what organizational forms can firms adopt in order to mitigate the incentive problems that discourage incremental innovation? The answer, we argued, is a variety
of organizational forms, each distinguished by who creates knowledge and who controls
it.
Our basic analysis relies on a simple technique illustrated by figure 2. The figure
shows how the risk of appropriability and the degree of substitutability together determine which of three organizational forms will appear. Focussing on substitutability,
where substitutability is low the implementation-form organization appears, that is, the
agent neither creates nor controls knowledge. Where substitutability is at least moderate,
the principal engages the agent in knowledge creation. If in addition substitutability is
sufficiently high, then the principal relinquishes control over how knowledge is used
— the agent controls knowledge. We showed how our analysis explains Sony’s decision
to vertically integrate the production of crts. We also showed how easy it is to extend
our analysis in any of several directions by examining Boeing’s decision to vertically
disintegrate its activities. In each case, we clearly identified the determinants of who
creates knowledge and who controls it.

References
Aghion, Philippe and Jean Tirole. 1997. Formal and real authority in organizations. Journal
of Political Economy 105(1):1–29.
Alig, R. Casanova. 1999. Cathode-ray tubes. In John G. Webster (ed.) Wiley Encyclopedia of
Electrical and Electronics Engineering. New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Anderlini, Luca and Leonardo Felli. 1994. Incomplete written contracts: Undescribable
states of nature. Quarterly Journal of Economics 109(4):1085–1124.
Arrow, Kenneth J. 1962a. The economic implications of learning by doing. Review of
Economic Studies 29(3):155–173.

42

Arrow, Kenneth J. 1962b. Economic welfare and the allocation of resources for invention.
In Richard R. Nelson (ed.) The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity. Princeton: Princeton University Press, 609–625.
Canevazzi, Giuliano. 1992. Cathode-ray tube having improved 16×9 aspect ratio faceplate. United States Patent 5,107,999.
Duranton, Gilles and Diego Puga. 2001. Nursery cities: Urban diversity, process innovation, and the life cycle of products. American Economic Review 91(5):1454–1477.
Ghosh, Asish and Suresh T. Gulati. 2002. Implosion-resistant cathode ray tube envelope.
United States Patent 6,353,283.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman. 2002. Integration versus outsourcing in
industry equilibrium. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1):85–120.
Hardison, Laura. 1996. Sony’s tv land: Vertical integration comes into focus at Pittsburgh
site. Plants, Sites and Parks (July-August).
Hart, Oliver. 1995. Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure. Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Hart, Oliver and John Moore. 1999. Foundations of incomplete contracts. Review of
Economic Studies 66(1):115–138.
Helper, Susan, John Paul MacDuffie, and Charles F. Sabel. 2000. Pragmatic collaborations:
Advancing knowledge while controlling opportunism. Economics of Innovation and New
Technology 9(3):443–488.
Helsley, Robert W. and William C. Strange. 2002. Innovation and input sharing. Journal of
Urban Economics 51(1):25–45.
Iguchi, Yukinobu and Nobuya Okano. 1996. Cathode-ray tube with electric field correction lens for improved resolution. United States Patent 5,539,285.
Klein, Benjamin, Robert G. Crawford, and Armen A. Alchian. 1978. Vertical integration,
appropriable rents, and the competitive contracting process. Journal of Law and Economics 21(2):297–3264.
Legros, Patrick and Andrew F. Newman. 2000. Competing for ownership. Discussion
Paper 2573, Centre for Economic Policy Research.
Levin, Richard C., Alvin K. Klevorick, Richard R. Nelson, and Sidney G. Winter. 1987.
Appropriating the returns from industrial research and development. Brooking Papers
on Economic Activity (3):783–820.
Markusen, James R. 2001. Contracts, intellectual property rights, and multinational investment in developing countries. Journal of International Economics 53(1):189–204.
Maskin, Eric and Jean Tirole. 1999. Unforeseen contingencies and incomplete contracts.
Review of Economic Studies 66(1):83–114.

43

McLaren, John. 2000. ‘Globalization’ and vertical structure. American Economic Review
90(5):1239–1254.
National Lighting Product Information Program. 1994. Electronic ballasts: Non-dimming
electronic ballasts for 4-foot and 8-foot fluorescent lamps. Specifier Reports 2(3).
Rosenberg, Nathan. 1982a. Technological interdependence in the american economy.
In Inside the Black Box: Technology and Economics, chapter 3. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 55–80.
Rosenberg, Nathan. 1982b. Learning by using. In Inside the Black Box: Technology and
Economics, chapter 6. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 120–140.
Sabel, Charles F. 1994. Learning by monitoring: The institutions of economic development. In Neil J. Smelser and Richard Swedberg (eds.) Handbook of Economic Sociology.
Princeton: Princeton University Press, 137–165.
Segal, Ilya. 1999. Complexity and renegotiation: A foundation for incomplete contracts.
Review of Economic Studies 66(1):57–82.
Sluyterman, Albertus A. S., Johannes C. A. Van Nes, and Daniel Den Engelsen. 2001. Color
display device with a deflection-dependent distance between outer beams. United
States Patent 6,307,333.
Sugawara, Tsunehiko, Toshihide Murakami, and Takao Kuwashima. 2000. Glass panel for
a crt having a strengthened flat face portion. United States Patent 6,121,723.
Thiébart, Patrick. 2001. Restrictive covenants in France. Annual Meeting Documents.
American Bar Association Labor and Employment Law Section, Edison, nj: Bureau of
National Affairs Books.
United States Environmental Protection Agency. 1998. Lighting upgrade technologies.
epa/430–B–95–008.
Wainwright, Milton. 1990. Miracle Cure: The Story of Penicillin and the Golden Age of
Antibiotics. Cambridge, ma: Blackwell Publishers.
Williamson, Oliver E. 1985. The Economic Institutions of Capitalism: Firms, Markets, Relational Contracting. New York: Free Press.

44

