                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               INSTITUTIONAL CAUSES, MACROECONOMIC SYMPTOMS:
                        VOLATILITY, CRISES AND GROWTH


                                          Daron Acemoglu
                                           Simon Johnson
                                          James Robinson
                                        Yunyong Thaicharoen


                                         Working Paper 9124
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9124


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    September 2002




We thank Alessandra Fogli, Sebastián Mazzuca, Ragnar Torvik and seminar participants at the Carnegie-
Rochester conference, NYU and MIT for their suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, James Robinson and Yunyong Thaicharoen. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Institutional Causes, Macroeconomic Symptoms:
Volatility, Crises and Growth
Daron Acemoglu, Simon Johnson, James Robinson
and Yunyong Thaicharoen
NBER Working Paper No. 9124
September 2002
JEL No. O11, E30, N10
                                               ABSTRACT
        Countries that have pursued distortionary macroeconomic policies, including high inflation,
large budget deficits and misaligned exchange rates, appear to have suffered more macroeconomic
volatility and also grown more slowly during the postwar period. Does this reflect the causal effect of
these macroeconomic policies on economic outcomes? One reason to suspect that the answer may be
no is that countries pursuing poor macroeconomic policies also have weak "institutions," including
political institutions that do not constrain politicians and political elites, ineffective enforcement of
property rights for investors, widespread corruption, and a high degree of political instability.
         This paper documents that countries that inherited more "extractive" institutions from their
colonial past were more likely to experience high volatility and economic crises during the postwar
period. More specifically, societies where European colonists faced high mortality rates more than 100
years ago are much more volatile and prone to crises. Based on our previous work, we interpret this
relationship as due to the causal effect of institutions on economic outcomes: Europeans did not settle
and were more likely to set up extractive institutions in areas where they faced high mortality. Once we
control for the effect of institutions, macroeconomic policies appear to have only a minor impact on
volatility and crises. This suggests that distortionary macroeconomic policies are more likely to be
symptoms of underlying institutional problems rather than the main causes of economic volatility, and
also that the effects of institutional differences on volatility do not appear to be primarily mediated by
any of the standard macroeconomic variables. Instead, it appears that weak institutions cause volatility
through a number of microeconomic, as well as macroeconomic, channels.

Daron Acemoglu                                           Simon Johnson
Department of Economics                                  Sloan School of Management
MIT, E52-380B                                            MIT
50 Memorial Drive                                        50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142                                      Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER                                                 sjohnson@mit.edu
daron@mit.edu

James Robinson                                           Yunyong Thaicharoen
Department of Political Science and Economis             Bank of Thailand
Berkeley                                                 Thailand
jamesar@socrates.berkeley.edu
                                      1   Introduction

The postwar experience of many societies in Africa, Central and South America and else-
where has been marred by severe crises and substantial volatility. Why some societies
suﬀer from large volatility and crises is one of the central questions facing macroeco-
nomics. The Washington consensus highlighted a variety of factors as primary causes
of bad macroeconomic performance and volatility, including poorly enforced property
rights and corruption, but the emphasis was often placed on mismanaged macroeconomic
policies.1 Policies often blamed for crises and poor macroeconomic performance include
excessive government spending, high inflation, and overvalued exchange rates. Similarly,
in most macroeconomic accounts of economic and financial crises, the blame is often laid
on distortionary macroeconomic policies. A salient example would be the recent crisis
in Argentina, where, according to many macroeconomists, an overvalued exchange rate
was the cause of the macroeconomic problems. Another example is chronic volatility
in Ghana, especially from independence until the early 1980s. Ghana had a relatively
high inflation (1970-98 average=39.1 percent) and one of the most overvalued exchange
rates in our sample. It also experienced substantial crises and volatility (the standard
deviation of the annual growth rate, 1970-97, was approximately 5, as compared to, for
example, an average of 2.5 among West European countries). In Ghana, as in Argentina,
it is easy to blame macroeconomic policies for macroeconomic problems.
      Distortionary macroeconomic policies are not typically chosen because politicians
believe that high inflation or overvalued exchange rates are good for economic perfor-
mance. Instead, they reflect underlying institutional problems in these countries. For
example, in his classic account of political economy in Africa, Robert Bates (1981) em-
phasized how overvalued exchange rates were in eﬀect a way of transferring resources
  1
     See for example Williamson (1990). This is also the line generally taken by the IMF and the
World Bank. For example, Edwards (1989) analyzes the 34 IMF programs with high-conditionality
between 1983 and 1985, and provides a breakdown of the conditions/policy requirements. Four of the
five most common conditions required by the IMF are: control of credit to public sector, control of
money aggregates, devaluation and control of public expenditures.



                                                1
from the large agricultural sector to urban interests, and developed the argument that
this reflected the power of urban interests to influence the decisions of politicians in
an “institutionally-weak” society. In fact, Ghana is a textbook case of highly distor-
tionary redistribution, political instability, and politician after politician being captured
by interest groups or pursuing distortionary policies in order to remain in power.
   This perspective raises the possibility that the macroeconomic performance of many
of these societies may reflect not only, or not even primarily, the eﬀect of distortionary
macroeconomic policies, but the deep institutional causes leading to these particular
macroeconomic policies. In other words, one may suspect that in the Ghanaian example,
even without the overvalued exchange rate, macroeconomic performance would have
been volatile because with the institutions and the social structure Ghana inherited from
the British colonists, there was no way of constraining politicians, ensuring adequate
enforcement of contracts and property rights, and preventing various social groups from
engaging in chronic political fights to take control of the society’s resources. Through
one channel or another, the major producers in Ghana, the cocoa farmers, were going
to be expropriated by the politicians and urban interests. Overvalued exchange rates
were simply one of the ways of expropriating the producers. Moreover, given the weak
constraints on politicians and political elites, there were substantial gains to be had from
political power, and these gains created considerable political and economic instability
in Ghana, as diﬀerent groups fought to achieve and retain power.
   The main result of this paper is to document a strong and robust relationship between
the historically-determined component of postwar institutions and volatility (as well as
severity of economic crises and economic growth): countries that inherited worse (“ex-
tractive”) institutions from European colonial powers are much more likely to experience
high volatility and severe economic crises.
   To document this relationship, we build on our previous work, Acemoglu, John-
son, and Robinson (2001), and develop an instrument for the historically-determined
component of institutions in a cross-section of countries. More specifically, we exploit


                                              2
diﬀerences in mortality rates faced by European settlers during colonial times as a source
of variation in the historical development of institutions among former colonies. Former
European colonies provide an attractive sample to study the eﬀect of institutions on
economic outcomes; European colonization of a large part of the globe starting in the
15th century comes close to a “natural experiment” in creating diﬀerent institutions,
since the institutions in these countries were largely shaped by European colonization,
and there were systematic diﬀerences in institutions that Europeans set up in various
colonies. In places where colonists faced high mortality rates, they followed a diﬀerent
colonization strategy, with more extractive institutions, while they were more likely to
set up institutions protecting private property and encouraging investments in areas
where they settled. In Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001), we illustrated and
developed the argument that (potential) European settler mortality rates are a good in-
strument for the institutional development of these countries throughout the nineteenth
and twentieth centuries, and via this channel, for their current institutions. We also
showed a large eﬀect of institutions on long-run economic development.
   Figure 1 shows that there is also a strong relationship between settler mortality rates
and postwar economic outcomes, especially volatility and crises. Former colonies with
higher European mortality more than 100 years ago are today more likely to suﬀer high
volatility (as measured by the standard deviation of growth rate), severe output collapses
(as measured by the largest output drop in any year) and low growth. Our interpretation
is that these relationships reflect the causal eﬀect of institutions on volatility and other
economic outcomes: in places where the Europeans did not settle, they set up more
extractive institutions with power concentrated in the hands of a small elite, and these
countries typically ended up with weaker (worse) institutions at the beginning of the
postwar era. And institutionally-weak societies not only grow less slowly in the long run
(Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001, 2002a), but also experience greater volatility
and other worse macroeconomic outcomes.
   The relationships shown in Figure 1, especially those involving volatility and crises,


                                             3
are highly robust and account for a large fraction of diﬀerences in these economic out-
comes across countries.2 Moreover, once we control for the eﬀect of institutions on
economic outcomes in this manner, standard macroeconomic variables, often blamed for
economic crises and volatility, play a relatively minor role. This suggests that macro-
economic policies are not the major cause of crises, and are more likely symptoms of
underlying institutional problems. Somewhat more surprisingly, these macroeconomic
variables, with the possible exception of exchange rate misalignment, do not appear to be
a major mediating channel through which institutions aﬀect economic outcomes. Weak
institutions appear to create macroeconomic problems via a variety of microeconomic
as well as macroeconomic channels.
      What are the institutions that matter? In our empirical exercise, we use an insti-
tutional variable for which we have data for a broad cross-section of countries at the
beginning of the sample: constraints placed on the executive, as measured in the Polity
IV data set based on the work of Robert Gurr. This variable is conceptually attractive
since it measures institutional and other constraints that are placed on presidents and
dictators (or monarchies). Theoretically, we expect a society where elites and politicians
are eﬀectively constrained to experience less infighting between various groups to take
control of the state, and to pursue more sustainable policies. Nevertheless, “constraint
on the executive” is only one measure of institutions, and it is quite possible that a
country might have adequate constraints on their executives, but suﬀer from corruption
or weak property rights for other reasons. More generally, the institutions we are in-
terested in are a cluster of social arrangements that include constitutional and social
limits on politicians’ and elites’ power, the rule of law, provisions for mediating social
cleavages, strong property rights enforcement, a minimum amount of equal opportunity
and relatively broad-based access to education, etc. This cluster determines whether
agents with the investment opportunities will undertake these investments, whether
there will be significant swings in the political and social environment leading to crises,
  2
    Figure 1A excludes two outliers, Gabon and Rwanda, to show the pattern more clearly. Including
these two countries slightly strengthens the relationship.


                                                4
and whether politicians will be induced to pursue unsustainable policies in order to re-
main in power in the face of deep social cleavages. Therefore, we prefer to be relatively
loose on what the fundamental institutional problems are, and instead try to isolate the
historically-determined component of these institutional diﬀerences.
       How do we interpret these results? Our conclusion is that the large postwar cross-
country diﬀerences in volatility, crises and growth performance have institutional causes.
Both poor macroeconomic performance and distortionary macroeconomic policies are
symptoms rather than causes, and the macroeconomic policies often blamed for crises
do not appear to be the major mediating channel for the impact of institutions on eco-
nomic instability. This does not mean that macroeconomic policies do not matter for
macroeconomic outcomes. Clearly, overvalued exchange rates or high inflation would
discourage certain investments, and unsustainable policies will necessarily lead to some
sort of crisis.3 Our main argument is that in institutionally-weak societies, elites and
politicians will find various ways of expropriating diﬀerent segments of the society, rang-
ing from microeconomic to various macroeconomic policies. It is the presence of this
type of expropriation and the power struggle to control the state to take advantage of
the resulting rents that underlie bad macroeconomic outcomes and volatility.4 A logical
implication of this view is a seesaw eﬀect: if the elites are prevented from using one
particular instrument, as long as institutional weaknesses remain, a likely outcome is
   3
      Moreover, the cause of the decline in U.S. output volatility over the past two decades is unlikely to
be institutional. Our focus here is not diﬀerences in output volatility between OECD countries, which
all have relatively good institutions, but the large cross-country diﬀerences in volatility across societies
with very diﬀerent institutional structures.
    4
      There are a variety of reasons why weak constraints on executives and other institutional problems
might lead to volatility. For example, Acemoglu and Robinson (2001) show how “weak institutions”
might encourage coups and revolutions, leading to political and economic instability. Alternatively,
institutional failures may also make economic adjustment diﬃcult. In an important paper, Rodrik
(1999) suggests that countries with weak institutions are unable to deal with major economic shocks,
and identifies the major shocks with those taking place during the 1970s. Rodrik suggests that this
inability to deal with global economic changes underlies the disappointing growth performance of many
less developed countries (LDCs) during the 1980s and 1990s (see also Easterly, 2001). Similarly, Johnson,
Boone, Breach and Friedman (2000) show that among emerging markets open to capital flows, it was
those with weaker political and financial institutions that experienced more severe crises during the late
1990s, suggesting an important interaction between global shocks and institutions (see also Eichengreen
and Bordo 2002).


                                                     5
that they will pursue their objectives using other instruments. And this, we believe, is
the reason why none of the standard macroeconomic variables are the main mediating
channel for the eﬀect of institutions on volatility and crises.
   To improve our understanding of the relationship between institutions and volatility,
we also look at whether countries with weak institutions are unable to deal with global
crises, world economic slowdowns or other global developments, such as the increase in
the volume of international trade. Our results indicate that this is not an important
channel via which weak institutions aﬀect volatility and economic performance. We also
find that there is a very similar relationship between institutions and volatility in every
decade, and crises are spread across the various decades quite evenly.
   These findings suggest that it is the inability of institutionally-weak societies to deal
with their own economic and political shocks that is of first-order importance. Moreover,
this inability appears to be somewhat linked to “state failures” (civil wars, revolutions or
periods of severe infighting). If we consider these state failures as the tip of the iceberg,
it is a reasonable conjecture that many economic crises and a great deal of volatility
happen amidst political problems. At some level, this is not surprising. The problem of
institutionally-weak societies is to constrain those controlling political power, and this
lack of constraints on politicians and elites increases the willingness of various groups
to fight in order to gain power, and enables them to exploit their position, sometimes
with disastrous consequences, when they come to power. Nevertheless, that the greater
instability faced by institutionally-weak societies is linked to frequent political crises is
for now only a conjecture, backed only with some circumstantial evidence.
   There is now a large literature on economic volatility. Much of it focuses on developed
countries, and investigates why the business cycle has become less volatile in the U.S.
and many OECD economies over the past 20 years (e.g., Blanchard and Simon, 2001;
McConnell and Perez-Quiros, 2000; Stock and Watson, 2002). This literature emphasizes
technological factors (e.g., improved inventory management) and improvements in policy
(e.g., better and more credible monetary policy, inflation targeting etc.). Our results


                                             6
can be interpreted as showing that these factors are much less important in the very
large cross-country diﬀerences in volatility than are institutional diﬀerences.
   The literature on macroeconomic volatility among LDCs is also large, but focuses
primarily on macroeconomic problems (e.g., Krugman, 1979, Dornbusch et al., 1995;
Kaminsky and Reinhart, 1999) and financial factors (e.g., Caballero, 2001; Caballero
and Krishnamurthy, 2000; Chang and Valesco, 2002; Denizer et al., 2001; Easterly,
Islam and Stiglitz, 2000, Voth, 2002, Raddatz, 2002). We are unaware of any studies
linking volatility to long-run institutional causes other than the paper by Rodrik (2000)
which shows that democracies are less volatile than nondemocratic regimes. In addition,
Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1997) show a strong relationship between initial income and
volatility: richer countries are less volatile. They interpret this as resulting from the fact
that richer countries are able to achieve a more balanced sectoral distribution of output.
Ramey and Ramey (1995) document a cross-country relationship between volatility and
growth, and interpret it as due to the adverse eﬀects of volatility on growth. Finally,
Kraay and Ventura (2000) develop a model where trade between rich and poor countries
can increase volatility in poor countries, and provide some evidence consistent with this
prediction.
   In addition, our work relates to the large literature on the determinants of growth.
Starting with the seminal work by Barro (1991), many economists have found a variety
of important determinants of growth. While some of these determinants are outcomes of
previous investments, such as education, others are contemporary policy variables, such
as government consumption or inflation. Although economic growth is not our main
focus, our paper is clearly related to this literature since we are trying to determine
which of these macroeconomic policies matter for volatility and crises (and also for
growth), when we take the importance of institutions into account.
   Finally, this paper is most closely related to studies investigating the relationship
between institutions and economic performance. Many economists and social scientists
have argued that economic and political institutions are a major determinant of economic


                                              7
outcomes. Recent proponents of this view include, among others, Jones (1981), North
and Thomas (1973), North (1981), and Olson (1981)–see also Acemoglu and Robinson
(2000, 2002), Bardhan (1984), Benhabib and Rustichini (1996), Krusell and Rios-Rull
(1996), Parente and Prescott (1999) and Tornell and Velasco (1992) for attempts to
model some of these issues. Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001 2002), Besley
(1995), Johnson, McMillan and Woodruﬀ (2002), Hall and Jones (1999), La Porta,
Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny (1998) and Mauro (1995), among others, provide
micro and macro evidence consistent with this notion. All of these studies focus on the
eﬀect of institutions on economic growth, investment or the level of development. The
current paper can be viewed as extending this literature by showing a robust and strong
eﬀect of institutions on the volatility of economic activity.
   The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we document the
correlation between a range of macroeconomic variables and volatility, which is consistent
with the standard view that macroeconomic policies have a causal eﬀect on volatility.
In Section 3, we discuss why we expect a relationship between institutions and volatil-
ity, and present two case studies, Argentina and Ghana, where institutional weaknesses
appear to have translated into macroeconomic problems. In Section 4, we explain our
empirical strategy for distinguishing the eﬀect of institutions on volatility, crises and
growth from the eﬀect of macroeconomic policies. In Section 5, we review the source of
variation in institutions that we will exploit for this exercise. In Section 6, we document
the relationship between institutions and macroeconomic performance, and show how
once we control for the causal eﬀect of institutions (or of the historically-determined com-
ponent of institutions) on volatility and economic performance, macroeconomic policies
do not appear to play a direct role. In Section 7, we investigate the robustness of the
eﬀect of institutions on volatility, crises and growth, and explore various mechanisms
via which this eﬀect might be working. Section 8 concludes.




                                             8
          2    Macroeconomic Policies and Economic Performance

The standard macroeconomic view links economic volatility to bad macroeconomic poli-
cies. According to this view, large government sectors and budget deficits, high infla-
tion, and misaligned exchange rates will result in macroeconomic crises. In line with
this standard view, many macroeconomists see a causal relationship between the im-
proved conduct of monetary policy of the past two decades and the increased stability
of U.S. output. Are there grounds to suspect that there is also a relationship between
cross-country diﬀerences in volatility and macroeconomic policies? Again, the standard
view among macroeconomists seems to be that the answer is yes. For example, in its
1987 Development Report, the World Bank states that “high inflation increases uncer-
tainty, discourages investment and technological change, distorts relative prices, and
stands in the way of sustainable growth.” In discussing crises in Mexico and Argentina,
Dornbusch et al. (1995, p. 220) write: “...the real exchange it is a key relative price.
When it becomes too high, it hurts growth, endangers financial stability, and ultimately
comes crashing down... the real exchange is in many, though not all, instances a policy
variable...”
   To investigate the relationship between macroeconomic policies and volatility, we
construct a simple measure of cross-country diﬀerences in volatility; the standard devi-
ation of the growth rate of per capita output. Our baseline period is 1970-97, but we
also look separately at diﬀerent decades. We take 1970 as the first year because of data
availability reasons, and also because when we look at institutions, we want to start
from a point in time when all the countries in our sample are independent nations (not
colonies). In addition to volatility, we want to look at a measure of “severe crises”; with
this purpose, we also calculate the largest drop in output for every country for 1970-97
(or for subperiods) as a proxy for the severity of the most important crisis. Finally, we
also look at average growth as a measure of overall economic performance. Appendix
Table A2 gives means and standard deviations for these variables in various subsamples,
as well as descriptive statistics for some of the other variables we use in this paper.

                                            9
       We have experimented with many diﬀerent measures of macroeconomic policies. In
this section, we report results using three diﬀerent measures that appear to work best
(i.e., they have the most robust eﬀect on our measures of economic performance and
volatility). These are average size of government (measured by government consumption
to GDP ratio), (log) average rate of inflation, and a measure of exchange rate overvalua-
tion, all of these calculated over the relevant periods. Average size of government is used
as a proxy for “irresponsible” fiscal policy (we chose this variable rather than a measure
of budget deficits, since it appears to work better than budget deficits, so gives a better
chance for this macro policy variable to matter against institutions). High inflation is
often viewed as a prime cause of volatility and poor economic performance. Overvalued
exchange rates are often unsustainable, and naturally lead to economic crises.5
       Figures 2, 3 and 4 show the bivariate relationship between these macroeconomic
variables, on the one hand, and economic volatility (standard deviation of growth),
crises (worst output drop) and growth, on the other. In all cases, we see the expected
relationship. Countries with large government sectors are more volatile and have more
severe crises. They also grow, on average, more slowly. The same is true for countries
with high inflation and overvalued exchange rates.
       Do these correlations reflect the causal eﬀect of bad macroeconomic policies on eco-
nomic volatility and performance or are they capturing the eﬀect of institutional factors
on economic outcomes? This is the question we investigate in the next four sections.
   5
     These variables refer to the following dates and are obtained from the following sources: government
consumption, from 1970 to 1989, obtained from Barro and Lee (1993) data set; and average inflation
for 1970-1998, from World Development Indicators, CD-ROM, 1999. Real exchange rate overvaluation
is for 1960-98, from Easterly and Levine (2002) who extend Dollar’s (1992) data. Appendix Table A1
gives further details on data sources. We have also experimented with other macroeconomic variables,
including volatility of exchange rate, size of government budget deficit, black market premia, etc.. These
variables have less robust eﬀects on economic instability, and we obtain very similar results to those
reported below when we use these variables as well.




                                                   10
                    3   Institutions and Economic Performance

Figures 2, 3 and 4 show a correlation between macroeconomic policies and outcomes,
but they do not establish causality. Countries that pursue distortionary macroeco-
nomic policies are diﬀerent in a number of dimensions; most importantly, they diﬀer
substantially in their “social organization”. While some countries, such as the U.S.,
Australia or Canada, are democratic, relatively equal, suﬀer few radical social cleav-
ages and have a variety of checks and balances on politicians’ actions, others, such as
Ghana, Nicaragua, or Nigeria, fluctuate between democracy and dictatorship, are highly
unequal, and lack eﬀective constraints on politicians and elites. We refer to this cluster
of social arrangements as “institutions” and think of the latter group of countries as
having “weak institutions”.
      It is quite reasonable to suspect that weak institutions will have a significant impact
on economic performance. In previous research, we documented a large eﬀect of this
type of institutions on economic development (Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001,
2002a; see also Knack and Keefer, 1995, Hall and Jones, 1999). There are also natural
reasons for why institutionally-weak countries might suﬀer substantial volatility, which
we discuss next.

3.1     Institutions and Volatility: Some Theoretical Ideas

Here we briefly discuss why we might expect greater economic instability in institutionally-
weak societies.6

   1. In institutionally-weak societies there are few constraints on rulers. Following a
        change in the balance of political power, groups that gain politically may then
        attempt to use their new power to redistribute assets and income to themselves,
        in the process creating economic turbulence. In contrast, this source of turbu-
        lence would be largely absent in societies where institutions prevent this type of
  6
     See the previous version of the paper where we provide a simple dynamic model formalizing the
first two ideas.

                                               11
     redistribution.

  2. Lack of eﬀective constraints on politicians and politically powerful groups implies
     that there are greater gains from coming to power, and correspondingly, greater
     losses from not controlling political power–thus, overall greater “political stakes”.
     Therefore, in institutionally-weak societies, there will be greater infighting between
     various groups to come to power and enjoy these greater gains, and hence, greater
     political and economic turbulence.

  3. With weak institutions, economic cooperation may have to rely on “trust” or,
     more explicitly, on cooperation supported by repeated games strategies. Shocks
     may make it impossible to sustain cooperation, and lead to output collapses.

  4. With weak institutions, contractual arrangements will be more imperfect, making
     certain economic relationships more susceptible to shocks.

  5. In societies with institutional problems, politicians may be forced to pursue un-
     sustainable policies in order to satisfy various groups and remain in power, and
     volatility may result when these policies are abandoned.

  6. With weak institutions, entrepreneurs may choose sectors/activities from which
     they can withdraw their capital more quickly, thus contributing to potential eco-
     nomic instability.

   Our empirical work will not be able to distinguish between these various channels
linking institutions to economic instability, though we believe that gaining a deeper un-
derstanding of the relative importance of various channels would be a major contribution
to our understanding. We leave this as a potential area for future research.




                                           12
3.2    Sources of Volatility in Institutionally-Weak Societies: Two Case
       Studies

In this subsection, we briefly discuss the experiences of two institutionally-weak societies
with economic instability, Argentina and Ghana.


      3.2.1 Ghana

Ghana was the first European colony in Africa to become independent in 1958 and at
this time had roughly the same level of GDP per capita as South Korea. However, in
2000 GDP per capita had just about recovered to where it was in 1958 even after a
decade and a half of relatively consistent of growth. The economic and political history
of Ghana has been marred by severe instability with military coups in 1966, 1972, 1978,
1979 and 1982 and re-democratizations in 1969, 1979 and 1996.
      The anti-colonial movement was organized in Ghana by Kwame Nkrumah and his
Convention People’s Party (CPP) (see Austin, 1964, and Apter, 1972). However, as
soon as the promise of independence had been secured from the British the anti-colonial
coalition in Ghana crumbled. Chazan and Pellow note (1986, p. 30) “by 1951, with the
British agreement in principle to grant independence to the colony, this stage of decolo-
nization gave way to a period of domestic struggles for power on the eve of independence.
At this junction, the internal tensions that had been somewhat in check erupted into
an open clash over the control of the colonial state.” This left Nkrumah (who was
from a minor Akan ethnic group–the Nzima) with a very precarious political base. To
compensate for this Nkrumah engaged in a “divide and rule” strategy with respect to
the Ashanti (whose chiefs were one of his strongest opponents) by attempting to set
diﬀerent factions of commoners against the chiefs. The chiefs and their National Libera-
tion Movement (NLM) “met the nationalist appeal of the CPP with a rival nationalism
of its own, through an impassioned demand for recognition of the traditional unity of
the Ashanti nation,” Austin (1964, p. 250). This political strategy ensured Nkrumah’s



                                            13
power at independence in 1957. After the departure of the British, he moved to suppress
the opposition and altered the Constitution (in a fraudulent plebiscite) to strengthen
his powers. Pellow and Chazan (1986, p. 41) argue that

     “The 1960 constitutional referendum ... augmented the powers of the ex-
     ecutive ... Nkrumah was elected president of the First Republic, and thus,
     for all intents and purposes, by 1960 Ghana had become a one-party state
     with Nkrumah as its leader. The authoritarian tendencies apparent during
     decolonization were oﬃcially entrenched in the centralized and personalized
     pattern of government that emerged at this juncture.”

   Despite the announced objectives of modernization, the need to stabilize political
power seems to have been the key determinant of economic policies. Pellow and Chazan
(1986, p. 45) argue that by 1964 the CPP had “reduced the role of the state to that
of a dispenser of patronage. By advocating the construction of a ramified bureaucracy,
Nkrumah established a new social stratum directly dependent on the state. By cur-
tailing the freedom of movement of these state functionaries through the diversion of
administrative tasks to political ends, the regime contributed directly to undermining
their eﬀective performance.”
   The disastrous economic impact of the CPP’s policies have been well analyzed by
Bates (1981) (see also Owusu, 1970, and Leith and Loftchie, 1993). He showed that
the government used the state Cocoa marketing board and exchange rate policy to
systematically expropriate the coca farmers who dominated the economy and exports.
The CPP transferred these rents to the urban and ethnic interests which supported
them. The fact that this redistribution took such an ineﬃcient form was explained both
by the inability of the central state to control or raise taxes in the countryside, and by
the political rationality of redistributing in ways which could be selectively targeted.
Bates (1981, p. 114) argues:

     “Were the governments of Africa to confer a price rise on all rural producers,

                                           14
      the political benefits would be low; for both supporters and dissidents would
      secure the benefits of such a measure, with the result that it would generate
      no incentives to support the government in power. The conferral of benefits in
      the form of public works projects, such as state farms, on the other hand, has
      the political advantage of allowing the benefits to be selectively apportioned.
      The schemes can be given to supporters and withheld from opponents.”

   Bates applied a similar argument to explain the overvaluation of the exchange rate.
When the foreign exchange market does not clear, the government has to ration access
to foreign exchange and can target allocations to supporters. In addition, and perhaps
more important, overvalued exchange rates directly transfer resources from the rural
sector to the urban sector, making it an attractive policy tool for the political elites.
   These distortionary policies did not stop when Nkrumah was deposed in 1966; they
were in fact intensified right up until Rawlings’s policy changes of 1982 (see Herbst,
1993, on these changes and the more recent economic and political history).
   Ghana therefore provides a clear example of how a range of distortionary policies, in-
cluding overvalued exchange rates, were motivated by the desire to redistribute income.
The bad eﬀects were so severe and debilitating for the economy because the institutional
environment inherited from Britain placed few, if any, constraints on what politicians
could do. Nkrumah and the CPP were able to build a one-party state, use the bureau-
cracy and economic policies for patronage and engage in mass corruption. The high
political stakes that resulted made it very attractive to be in power and induced intense
political instability, as shown by the very frequent coups, and political instability trans-
lated into economic instability. Overall, it seems fairly clear that in the Ghanaian case,
economic instability was caused mainly by institutional weaknesses, which was mediated
by a range of diﬀerent macro and micro policies.




                                            15
      3.2.2 Argentina

In any discussion of crises and poor growth in developing countries Argentina tends to
come near the top of anyone’s list. Argentina is the most famous case of a country which
ought to be relatively prosperous, and indeed was so until the 1920s. It is standard to
blame poor economic performance and volatility in Argentina on bad economic policies.
The usual candidate for low growth is inward-looking industrialization and irresponsible
fiscal policy (Krueger, 1993, Taylor, 1998).
      The traditional story for why Argentina pursued such policies is the adoption of
misguided state-led development strategies as a result of the influence of economists
such as Prebisch and the dependency theorists (Krueger, 1993). Yet Peronist policies
predated Prebisch’s seminal work in 1950,7 and the reality is that Perón never followed
a coherent industrialization policy. Gerchunoﬀ (1989) sums up Peronist economic policy
in the following way:

        “there was no specific and unified Peronist economic policy, much less a
        long-term development strategy. In spite of oﬃcial rhetoric about a plan,
        the objective–and at times exclusive–priority was ... an economic order
        capable of maintaining the new distributive model.”

      The first real statement of Prebisch’s views was in his famous work of 1950, and
he had no influence on policy in Argentina until 1955, when he was recalled from exile
following Perón’s fall from power.
      A second view sees the great depression and the Second World War as leading to a
phase of “natural import substitution,” which then created an industrial interest group.
This interest group was suﬃciently strong that it could induce state subsidies and inter-
vention (this view is developed in Frieden, 2002). Both this theory and the one emphasiz-
ing mistaken economic theories see bad industrial policies and state intervention leading
also to unsustainable subsidization, fiscal insolvency, bankruptcy and hyperinflation.
  7
    Perón came to power in 1943 and indeed Prebisch was hounded from Argentina and into exile in
Chile by Perón.

                                               16
      A third view, popular in political science, sees the cause of the form of both macro-
economic and microeconomic policy in the rise and persistence of “populism” and more
specifically Peronism (Waisman, 1987, Collier and Collier, 1991, Roe, 1998). This view
tends to see structural changes in the economy, such as urbanization and the rise of
organized labor, as leading to particular sorts of political coalitions, favoring certain
policies, and preventing economic development.
      Although there are undoubtedly aspects of truth in these explanations, a more satis-
factory account of poor economic policies in Argentina situates them in their institutional
context. It seems that Perón’s policies, and subsequent Argentinian policies, were not
really a reflection of a “full-blown Peronist growth strategy” as argued by Shleifer (1997),
or aimed at “the goal of rapid industrialization” and “the intent of building a domestic
industrial base behind tariﬀ rates,” as argued by Sachs (1990, p. 148). Instead, these
were policies intended to transfer resources from one segment of society to another, as
well as a method of maintaining power by politicians with a weak social base in an
institutionally-weak society (see, Gerchunoﬀ, 1989, and Mazzuca, 2001). In line with
this view, Diaz Alejandro (1970, p. 126) concludes that

        “Peronist policies present a picture of a government interested not so much
        in industrialization as in a nationalistic and populist policy of increasing the
        real consumption, employment, and economic security of the masses–and
        of the new entrepreneurs. It chose these goals even at the expense of capital
        formation and of the economy’s capacity to transform.”

      Where do the institutional weaknesses of the Argentine society come from?8 As a
Spanish colony Argentina had low population density and was something of a backwater
because of the focus on the mines of Peru and Bolivia. It thus avoided many of the
worse colonial institutions, such as the encomienda and the mita. Nevertheless, after in-
dependence Argentina suﬀered from severe political instability as rival regional warlords
  8
      Our account here builds on Mazzuca (2001).


                                                   17
and Caudillos vied for control of Buenos Aires and the country. An eﬀective national
state emerged only in the 1860s under the Presidency of Mitre. In order to secure com-
pliance, the constitutional settlement and institutions created then ceded large powers
to the provinces. Crucially, the central state never imposed upon the regions the type
of centralized institutions constructed historically in Europe. Mazzuca (2001) suggests,
building on the work of Tilly (1990) and Herbst (2000), that this was because: (1) the
Argentine regime did not face external threats to its sovereignty and was therefore never
forced to modernize; (2) both the expanding world commodity and financial markets
gave the central governments enough fiscal resources that they could use to avoid the
costs of disciplining the provinces.9 Although this institutionalization of political power
did not impede the boom in Argentina up until 1920s, it left a legacy of political insti-
tutions which has had a crucial impact on policy over the last century. Our argument
is that in particular it has led to highly ineﬃcient forms of redistribution away from the
most productive parts of the country (Buenos Aires and the littoral) towards the eco-
nomically marginal, but politically salient provinces. Politicians undertook this type of
ineﬃcient redistribution using a variety of tools, ranging from fiscal policy and exchange
rate policy to microeconomic policies.
       A tangible manifestation of this perverse institutionalization of political power can
been seen from the malapportionment of the Argentine congress. Samuels and Snyder
(2001, 2002) show that Argentina has the most malapportioned Senate in the world and
that the degree of malapportionment of Congress is about 2.5 times the world average
and 50% higher than the Latin America average.10 The four provinces of Buenos Aires,
Santa Fe, Córdoba and Mendoza contain 78% of national industrial production and 70%
of the total population, but control just 8 of the 48 seats in the senate, and 48% of the
   9
    Rock (1987, p.125 ) notes “Mitre became adept in the dispensation of subsidies to the provinces.”
  10
    Measuring malapportionment by the proportion of seats that are not allocated on the basis of one-
person one vote, the Argentine Senate has a score of 0.49 and the Congress 0.14. The world and Latin
American averages are, respectively, 0.27 and 0.19 for Upper Chambers and 0.09 and 0.06 for lower
chambers. Note that while the U.S. Senate is malapportioned (score 0.36), the U.S. Congress is not
malapportioned. Gibson, Calvo and Faletti (2001) provide evidence suggesting that it is malappor-
tionment in the lower chamber that is the main determinant of fiscal redistribution.


                                                 18
seats in Congress. Gibson (1997) refers to these four provinces as the ‘core’ and the
other provinces as the ‘periphery’ and shows that political support from the periphery
has been crucial in Argentine politics (see also Germani, 1962, Mora y Araujo and
Llorente, 1980). In particular, the Peronists, despite the conventional wisdom that they
are the party of labor and urban interests, have always relied heavily on this support.
       Gibson, Calvo and Faletti (2001, p. 11) argue that the importance of “overrepre-
sented peripheral region provinces in the national Peronist coalition has continued to
the present day, and during President Menem’s first term they provided a major base of
support in the national legislature.” The nature of this political coalition led Menem to
insulate the periphery from most of his economic reforms. During his presidency, public
sector employment and subsidies to the periphery increased despite rapid retrenchment
and deregulation in Buenos Aires (Gibson, Calvo and Faletti, 2001, Table 6). This
structure of political institutions is important because it leads the peripheral regions
to be a crucial part of any political coalition and leads, as in Ghana, to the burden of
redistribution falling squarely on the most productive region of the country.
       Nevertheless, political institutions such as these, while they may have large eﬀects
on policy, are not determined randomly. Indeed, malapportionment was intensified by
Perón in 1949 when he established a minimum of two deputies per province regardless
of population (Sawers, 1996, p. 194). It was further increased by the military in 1972
and the early 1980s in an attempt to weaken the power of urban interests in democracy.
This process was driven by the initial political equilibrium favoring the periphery and
thus further intensified the inherent institutional distortions.11
  11
     There are many ways in which malapportionment can aﬀect the eﬃciency of economic policy. For
example, imagine that to put together a coalition, a President must give politicians enough redistribution
for them to be re-elected. In this case, it is cheaper to “buy” a politician from a peripheral province in
Argentina since he needs fewer votes to win. This “price” can influence the form that payment takes
(see the model by Lizerri and Persico, 2001, for a formalization of a related idea). For example, when
the price is low it may be rational to buy politicians with private goods (income transfers), while when
it is high (for instance in Buenos Aires) it is cheaper to use public goods. Malapportionment can then
lead to the undersupply of public goods. Moreover, anticipating the cost of ‘buying’ power, a President
may want to create malapportionment because he has to redistribute less in total and keeps more of
the rents from power.



                                                   19
       This perspective suggests that the repetitive nature of unsustainable and bad macro-
economic policies in Argentina stems from an underlying set of weak institutions, which
make massive redistribution of income feasible and even politically rational. This analy-
sis is rather diﬀerent from much current analysis.
       The recent crisis in Argentina has been explained by the collapse of an unsustain-
able economic model which involved tying the peso to the US dollar. This resulted in
overvaluation, domestic recession and a current account deficit that had to be funded by
unsustainable international borrowing. The conventional wisdom is that the adoption of
this particular set of policies was an attempt to obtain credibility with financial markets
(e.g. Rodrik, 2002). Instead, our perspective suggests that, as in Bates’s (1981) analysis
of the political economy of Africa, bad economic policies should be understood as part
of a package of often ineﬃcient redistributive tools. The currency board adopted by
Argentina also created clear winners and losers. The economically poor but politically
pivotal periphery gained transfers and was unthreatened by the adverse eﬀects of a crisis
that had greater eﬀects on the core and the middle classes (who are now being “expro-
priated” by a variety of methods).12 The persistent nature of crises and expropriation
in Argentina, and the fact that the same set of macroeconomic policies continually recur
and subsequently collapse (see della Paolera and Taylor, 2001) are consistent with our
interpretation.13
       Some recent analyses (e.g. Caballero and Dornbusch, 2002) recognize the existence of
“political and social problems,” but still maintain the view that bad policy in Argentina
is either misguided or incompetent, and argue that the policy failures in Argentina can
now only be solved by an international takeover of fiscal and monetary policies. Our
analysis here suggests that this solution to instability and poor economic performance in
Argentina may not be successful. If at root the problems are weak institutions leading to
  12
     Undoubtedly the form of the monetary policy helped to bring down inflation, but this does not
imply that the main objective of the set of policies adopted was to promote development and stability.
  13
     A significant example of absence of constraints on the executive in Argentina is the ability of Menem
to re-write the Constitution in 1995 so that he could run for the presidency again.




                                                   20
political conflict, highly ineﬃcient redistribution and outright predation, then, without
institutional change, distributional conflict is bound to resurface even if international
bankers are in control of monetary policy. There are always other instruments.

                                    4    Empirical Strategy

The discussion so far illustrates how we might expect both institutional diﬀerences
and diﬀerences in macroeconomic policies to cause diﬀerences in macroeconomic per-
formance, especially in volatility and crises. We now discuss a simple empirical strategy
to make progress in distinguishing between these two sources of diﬀerences in volatility
and crises.
   Ignoring nonlinearities, the economic relationship we are interested in identifying is:

              Xc,t−1,t = Q0c,t−1,t · α + β · Ic,t=0 + Zc,t−1,t
                                                       0
                                                               · γ + θ · ln yc,t−1 + εc,t−1,t   (1)

where Xc,t−1,t is the macroeconomic outcome of interest for country c between times
t and t − 1. The three outcomes that we will look at are overall volatility (standard
deviation of GDP per capita growth), severity of crises (worst output drop) and average
per capita growth. In our baseline regressions, the basic time period will be from 1970
to 1997 (this choice is dictated by data availability and our desire to start the analysis
at a point in time where the countries for which we have data are all independent nation
states). Q0c,t−1,t is a vector of macroeconomic policies for country c between times t and
t − 1. The three measures of macroeconomic policies we will look at are the ones shown
in Section 2: average size of government consumption, inflation, and real exchange rate
overvaluation.
   Ic,t=0 is our measure of institutions at the beginning of the sample. We will use
the constraint on the executive variable from the Polity IV dataset, which measures
the extent of constitutional limits on the exercise of arbitrary power by the executive.
The Polity dataset reports a qualitative score, between 1 and 7, for every independent
country. In previous work (e.g., Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001 and 2002a),

                                                    21
we showed that this measure is correlated with other measures of institutional quality
and with economic development. As our baseline measure, we use the average value
for this constraint from the Polity IV dataset for 1950, 1960 and 1970, assigning the
lowest score to countries that are not yet independent (and therefore not in the Polity
IV dataset).14 This is reasonable since in a country still under colonial control there are
typically few real constraints on the power of the rulers. Appendix Tables A3, A4 and
A5 provide results using constraint on the executive in 1970 as an alternative measure
of institutions, with qualitatively and quantitatively very similar results.
    In addition, in equation (1), Zc,t−1,t is a set of other controls, and ln yc,t−1 is the log of
initial income per capita, which we include in some of the regressions. Following Barro
(1991) this variable is included in most growth regressions to control for convergence
eﬀects. It is also useful to include it in regressions of volatility or crises, since as shown
in Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1997), poorer countries suﬀer substantially more volatility.
    The parameters that we are interested in identifying are α and β, the eﬀect of macro-
economic policy variables and institutions.15 The simplest strategy is to estimate the
model in equation (1) using ordinary least squares (OLS) regression. There are two
distinct problems with this strategy:

   1. Both institutions and macro policy variables are endogenous, so we may be cap-
      turing reverse causality, or the eﬀect of some omitted characteristics (geography,
      culture, or other variables) on both policy (or institutions) and economic outcomes.

   2. Both institutions and policy variables are measured with error, or in the case
   14
      We take these averages of 1950, 1960 and 1970 as our baseline measure, rather than simply use the
1970 value of the index, since we are interested in the long-run component of these constraints (not
in the year-to-year fluctuations) and also because the Polity dataset gives high scores to a number of
former colonies in 1970 that subsequently drop by a large amount. This reflects the fact that many of
these countries adopted the constitution of their former colonial powers, but did not really implement
the constitution or introduce eﬀective checks.
   15
      In addition it is interesting to look at whether there is an interaction between institutions and
macro policy variables. We can add the interaction term Q0c,t−1,t · Ic,t−1 , and investigate whether there
is a non-monotonic relationship between institutions and volatility, i.e., add higher order terms Ic,t−1
to the regression equation (1). In our empirical work, such interaction and higher order terms are never
significant, so we do not report them in the paper.

                                                   22
      of institutions, available measures correspond only poorly to the desired concept
      (more explicitly, while the institutions we have in mind are multi-dimensional,
      “constraint on the executive” only measure one of these dimensions, and that
      quite imperfectly).

   Both of these concerns imply that OLS regressions will give results that do not corre-
spond to the causal eﬀect of institutions and policy variables on economic outcomes. So
we would like to estimate equation (1) using Two-Stage Least Squares (2SLS) with dis-
tinct and plausible instruments for both macro policy variables and institutions. These
instruments should be correlated with the endogenous regressors, and they should be
orthogonal to any other omitted characteristics and not correlated with the outcomes of
interest through any other channel than their eﬀect via the endogenous regressors.
   In this paper, we pursue the strategy of instrumenting for institutions using the
historically-determined component of institutions, arising from the colonial experience
of former colonies. The instrument will be discussed in detail in the next section. To the
extent that the instrument is valid, it will solve the endogeneity, the omitted variables
bias and the measurement error problems. In particular, if the instrument is valid, we can
estimate the eﬀect of institutions on economic outcomes, the β parameters, consistently
in models that exclude the macro policy variables.
   When the macro policy variables are also included, the simplest strategy is to treat
them as exogenous. Ignoring the measurement error problem, the coeﬃcients on these
policy variables, the α parameters, will be typically biased upwards. The Appendix of
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) shows that in this case there may also be a
downward bias in β, the eﬀect of institutions on outcomes. Therefore, our simplest strat-
egy of instrumenting for institutions and treating macro policy variables as exogenous is
“conservative”, in the sense that it stacks the cards against finding a substantial role for
institutions and in favor of finding an important role for macro policy variables (unless
measurement error in these policy variables is a major problem). Moreover, equation
(1) shows that we are using contemporary averages of the macro variables, while using

                                            23
lagged values of institutions. This is again in the spirit of stacking the cards in favor of
finding a significant role for macro variables. As it turns out almost all of our regres-
sions will show a major role for institutions, and more limited and less robust influence
from the macro variables. So our conservative strategy makes the interpretation of these
results simpler.
       A caveat for the above discussion is that if the measurement error in macro variables is
significant, their coeﬃcients might be biased downward due to attenuation bias. Since we
are taking thirty-year averages of these variables, the measurement error problem should
not be too severe.16 As an alternative strategy for dealing both with attenuation bias
and endogeneity of the macro variables, we also report regressions where we instrument
for the macro variables with their lagged values when available. We will see that these
specifications give similar results to those where these policy variables are treated as
exogenous.
       Another possible concern is that distortionary policy may matter for macroeconomic
variables, but we may be unable to detect this because we are taking averages over
thirty-year periods. This would be the case if, for example, some of the countries go
through a period of about 5 to 10 years of high inflation or an overvalued exchange
rate, causing major crises, but during other periods they have oﬀsetting low inflation
and undervalued exchange rates, making their average policies similar to those in other
countries. To deal with this problem, we estimate a variation on our basic regression
using a panel of 5-year averages for each country between 1970 and 1997 (or shorter
periods for some of the macro variables), with the following structure:

          Xc,t−1,t = Q0c,t−1,t · α + β · Ic,t=0 + Zc,t−1,t
                                                   0
                                                           · γ + θ · ln yc,t−1 + δt−1,t + εc,t−1,t ,    (2)

where all the variables are defined similarly to equation (1), except that we now have a
full set of time eﬀects for every five-year episode, the δt−1,t terms. In addition, we still
  16
    Unless there is again attenuation bias caused by the variables in question not corresponding to the
conceptually appropriate policy variables. We believe this possibility is unlikely in the case of the policy
variables, since these are the variables emphasized in the policy discussions and the relevant literature,
and we have experimented with many other variables.

                                                     24
use the institutions at the beginning of the sample, Ic,t=0 . Recall that our interest is in
the historically-determined component of institutions (that is more clearly exogenous),
hence not in the variations in institutions from year-to-year. As a result, this regression
does not (cannot) control for a full set of country dummies. Since we have more than
one observation per country, but one of our key regressors only varies by country, we
cluster the standard errors by country (using the Stata robust standard errors). If some
countries have volatile macroeconomic policies that matter only when they reach very
extreme values, this specification should show a greater role for policy variables than the
cross-sectional regression (1). In practice, estimates of the impact of policy variables on
volatility, crises and growth from equations (1) and (2) are quite similar.

                    5   Sources of Variation in Institutions

The empirical strategy outlined in Section 4 relies on a valid instrument for institu-
tions. Our idea is to exploit the historically-determined component of institutions, or in
other words, instrument for institutions with historical variables. This clearly solves the
simple “reverse causality” problem, and to the extent that the instrument is plausibly
orthogonal to other omitted determinants of economic outcomes, such as volatility, crises
and growth, it also avoids the omitted variable bias. Also, the instrumentation strategy
removes the attenuation bias (as long as the “measurement error” or the conceptual dis-
crepancy between our measure and the true concept can be approximated by classical
measurement error).

5.1   Historical Determinants of Institutions Among Former European
      Colonies

The set of former European colonies provides an attractive sample for isolating the
historically-determined component of institutions, since the institutions in almost all
of the former colonies have been heavily influenced by their colonial experience (see
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2001, for a more detailed discussion on this point).


                                            25
       In Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001, 2002a), we contrasted institutions of
private property, which protect the property rights of a broad segment of society, and
extractive institutions, which lack constraints on elites and politicians. We argued that
institutions of private property, which correspond to eﬀective constraints on elites and
rulers, were more likely to arise when Europeans settled in large numbers, and set up
institutions protecting their own rights. The “Neo-Europes,” the U.S., Canada, Aus-
tralia and New Zealand, are perhaps the best examples of the high European settlement
associated with the development of good institutions. In contrast, extractive institutions
emerged when Europeans pursued a strategy of extracting resources from the colonies
without settling and without developing participatory institutions. While there are many
determinants of the exact colonization strategy pursued by European powers, an impor-
tant determinant is naturally whether Europeans could settle or not, since where they
could not settle, the extractive strategy was much more likely.17 Therefore, in places
where the disease environment was not favorable to European health and settlement, we
expect the formation of extractive states, and today the presence of weak institutions,
as these extractive institutions persist. This reasoning suggests that proxies for mortal-
ity rates expected by the first European settlers in the colonies could be an instrument
for current institutions in these countries. Schematically, the reasoning underlying this
instrumentation strategy is:

 (potential) settler                    early         current        current
                     ⇒ settlements ⇒              ⇒              ⇒
     mortality                       institutions   institutions   performance

Based on this reasoning, we use data on the mortality rates of soldiers, bishops, and
sailors stationed in the colonies between the 17th and 19th centuries (Curtin, 1989, and
1998, and Gutierrez, 1986). These give a good indication of the mortality rates faced
by settlers. Europeans were well informed about these mortality rates at the time, even
though they did not know how to control the diseases that caused these high mortality
  17
     Another important determinant appears to be population density. Europeans were less likely to
settle in already densely-settled areas, and more likely to pursue extractive strategies given the level
of settlement (Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2002a). We obtain similar results to those reported
below if we use population density in 1500 as an additional instrument.

                                                  26
rates, especially yellow fever and malaria (see the discussion in Acemoglu, Johnson and
Robinson, 2001).
       A major concern is the validity of the exclusion restriction presumed by this instru-
mentation strategy–i.e., whether the mortality rates faced by the settlers between the
17th and 19th centuries could actually have an eﬀect on current outcomes through an-
other channel. Probably the most important threat to the validity of our instrument
comes from the correlation between European mortality rates over 100 years ago and
the health of the current population or climate, and the eﬀect of current health and
climate on current economic outcomes. We believe that this concern does not invalidate
our approach and that our exclusion restriction is plausible. The majority of European
deaths in the colonies were caused by malaria and yellow fever. Although these diseases
were fatal to Europeans who had no immunity, they had much more limited eﬀects on
indigenous adults who, over the centuries, had developed various types of immunities.
These diseases are therefore unlikely to be the reason why many countries in Africa and
Asia are very poor today. This notion is supported by the mortality rates of local people
in high-settler mortality areas, which were comparable to the mortality rates of British
troops serving in Britain or in healthier colonies (see for example Curtin, 1998, Table
2). To substantiate the validity of our instrumentation approach, in Acemoglu, Johnson
and Robinson (2001) we showed that the results are robust to controlling for climate,
humidity, other geographic variables, and current health conditions, and that we obtain
very similar results exploiting only diﬀerences in European mortality due to yellow fever,
which is an attractive source of variation, since yellow fever has been mostly eradicated.
On the basis of these findings, we take mortality rates of European settlers between the
17th and 19th centuries as an instrument for current institutions in the former colonies.18
       Figure 5 shows the first-stage relationship between our constraint on the executive
variable (an average for 1950, 1960 and 1970) and the log of European settler mortality
in annualized deaths per thousand mean strength. This measure reports the death
  18
    We also show in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) that these mortality rates were a first-
order determinant of early institutions, and these institutional diﬀerences have persisted to the present.


                                                   27
rate among 1,000 soldiers where each death is replaced with a new soldier and was the
standard measure in army records, where much of the information comes from. We use
logs rather than levels, since otherwise some of the African observations are extreme
outliers. The figure shows a strong relationship between the measure of institutions
used in this paper and settler mortality more than 100 years ago. Our interpretation is
that this reflects the causal eﬀect of colonial policies on current institutions, and hence
it can serve as a useful source of variation for identifying the eﬀect of institutions on
macroeconomic outcomes.

5.2    Institutions and Economic Outcomes: A First Look

We now briefly look at the relationship between the historically-determined component
of institutions and current economic outcomes. The first column in Table 1 replicates
our main regression from Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001), which looks at the
eﬀect of institutional diﬀerences on (log) income per capita today. The lower part of the
panel shows the first-stage relationship. In Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001),
we used average protection against expropriation risk between 1985 and 1995 as our
measure of institutions. Here, we prefer a measure that refers to the beginning of our
sample (i.e., 1970), and protection against expropriation is not available for the 1960s
and 1970s. Column 4 replicates the same regression using the constraint on the executive
variable used in this paper. The first-stage relationship for this regression is shown in
Figure 5.
      Columns 7 and 10 turn to a regression of the average growth rate between 1970
and 1997 on an average of constraint on the executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, again
instrumented by log settler mortality (with or without controlling for initial income).
Throughout the paper, we express all growth rates in percentage points (e.g., 2 percent
rather than 0.02) to save on decimal points; see Appendix Table A2 for summary sta-
tistics. Column 7 shows a statistically significant relationship, indicating faster growth
in the postwar era among countries with better historically-determined institutions. For


                                            28
example, the coeﬃcient of 0.75 implies that a country like the U.S., with a value of
constraint on the executive of 7, is predicted to grow about 3 percent a year faster
than a country like Nigeria, with a score of 3. The coeﬃcient estimate of the eﬀect
of initial “constraint on the executive” on growth becomes larger when we control for
initial income in column 10, but also the standard error more than triples (though the
coeﬃcient is still statistically significant at the 5 percent level). This is a pattern we see
throughout the paper; regressions with economic growth as the dependent variable are
less robust than regressions for volatility or largest output drop, especially when we con-
trol for initial income. At some level, it is not surprising that the relationship between
the historically-determined component of institutions and postwar growth becomes sub-
stantially weaker when we control for initial income: initial income is determined largely
by institutions, so our measure of institutions and initial income are highly correlated.
In fact, much of the divergence among former colonies took place between 1750 and
1950, when countries with good institutions took advantage of industrialization and
modernization opportunities, and those with extractive institutions failed to do so (see
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2002a). So our measure of institutions may be a
much better determinant of the level of income in 1970 than subsequent growth.
   It is useful to know whether the relationship between the historically-determined
component of institutions and economic outcomes is driven mainly by the contrast be-
tween rich and poor nations. Columns 2, 5, 8 and 11 report similar regressions for
countries above the median world per capita income in 1970 (using the Summers-Heston
income per capita data for that year, from the Barro and Lee dataset). In these regres-
sions, and all those in subseqent tables that use this subsample, we drop Gabon, which
is an outlier with high volatility (including Gabon in this subsample does not change the
results). In Table 1, the estimates for this subsample are similar to, but slightly lower
than, those for the sample of all excolonies. They continue to be highly significant in
income level regressions (columns 2 and 5), but are only significant at the 10 percent
level in the growth regressions (columns 8 and 11).


                                             29
      Finally, columns 3, 6, 9 and 12 report regressions for excolonies without Africa, to
show that the eﬀect of the historically-determined component of institutions on income
level and growth is not driven by a contrast between African and non-African nations.
In this smaller sample, the 2SLS estimate of the eﬀect of institutions on economics
outcome is again slightly lower than that for all excolonies. Nevertheless, this estimate
is still significant at the 5 percent level in the income level regressions, and significiant
at the 10 percent in the growth regressions. In the subsequent analysis, we find that the
results without Africa are similar to those that just use countries above median world
per capita income, so we just report the latter.

  6     Institutions, Macroeconomic Policies, Macroeconomic Outcomes

In this section we look at the eﬀect of institutions and macroeconomic policies on volatil-
ity, and also on the severity of crises and growth. We start with the relationship between
institutions and macro variables, and then investigate their relative influences on volatil-
ity more carefully. In the next section, we investigate the robustness of the relationship
between institutions and volatility in more detail, and look for potential mechanisms.

6.1    The Effect of Institutions on Policies and Volatility

Table 2 shows the relationship between institutions, on the one hand, and the three
macroeconomic variables discussed above and our measures of volatility and crises, on
the other. More specifically, we run regressions of the form

                            Qc,t−1,t = β q · Ic,t=0 + εqc,t−1,t , and                    (3)

                            Xc,t−1,t = β x · Ic,t=0 + εxc,t−1,t ,

where Q denotes the macro policy variables, X denotes our measures of volatility and
crises, and Ic,t=0 is the measure of constraint on the executive at the beginning of the
sample (average constraint on the executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970).
      In Panel A, we first report OLS estimates of equation (3). These regressions show

                                               30
that weaker institutions are associated with larger government sectors, higher inflation
rates, more overvalued exchange rates, greater volatility, and more severe crises (though
the associations between institutions and macroeconomic policy variables are not statis-
tically significant in the sample of former colonies above median world income).
   Our interest is not in statistical associations, but in uncovering the causal eﬀect
of institutions on macroeconomic distortions and volatility. For this reason, Panel B
reports 2SLS estimates of equation (3). In these estimates, the institutions variable is
instrumented with log settler mortality. The first-stage relationships for institutions are
identical to those shown in Table 1 (since there are no other covariates here).
   The results are similar to the OLS estimates, but somewhat stronger. For example,
the coeﬃcient on Ic,t=0 in the government consumption regression changes from -0.012
to -0.018. This indicates that the attenuation bias caused by our use of imperfect mea-
sures of institutions is probably more serious than the endogeneity bias (see Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson, 2001, for a discussion on this issue). To the extent that our in-
strument is valid, this corresponds to the causal eﬀect of institutions on macroeconomic
policies. We can therefore conclude that some societies pursue distortionary macroeco-
nomic policies, in particular, in the form of high inflation, larger government sectors,
overvalued exchange rates and other distortionary macroeconomic prices because they
have (or have had) weak institutions. This raises the question of whether the correlation
between the distortionary policies and macroeconomic volatility (and other bad macro-
economic outcomes) shown in Figures 2, 3 and 4 reflects the eﬀect of macroeconomic
policies or the direct eﬀect of institutional problems working through other potentially
non-macroeconomic channels.
   The bottom panel of Table 2 also shows the relationship between institutions and
volatility (columns 7 through 10) and severity of crises (columns 11 through 14). Coun-
tries with institutional problems suﬀer substantially more volatility. For example, the
estimate of -0.83 in column 9 (bottom panel) implies that a 1 point higher score in
the institutional index translates into about a 0.83 decline in the standard deviation


                                            31
of growth. So on the basis of this estimate, we should expect a country like the U.S.,
which has an institutional score of 7, to have a standard deviation 3.32 lower than a
country like Nigeria which has an institutional score of 3. This gap is approximately
two-thirds of the actual gap in standard deviation between the U.S. (2.16) and Nigeria
(7.37) in the data, which is 5.21. When we also control for initial income, the coeﬃcient
is -1.56, and correspondingly, the predicted volatility diﬀerence between the U.S. and
Nigeria is now 6.24, which is a little larger than the actual gap. Notice however that
in this specification including initial income, the standard error on the institutions vari-
able is substantially larger (0.58 instead of 0.20). This is not surprising since, as noted
above, the historically-determined component of institutions is a very good predictor for
income in 1970, making our institutions variable and log in GDP per capita 1970 highly
colinear. Nevertheless, our institutions variable is significant at the 1 percent level, while
the initial income variable is not significant at the 5 percent level. This is a pattern we
will see repeatedly below, and suggests that institutions have a first-order eﬀect above
and beyond the influence of initial income on volatility emphasized in Acemoglu and
Zilibotti (1997).19
       Recall that to the extent that our instrument for institutional diﬀerences is valid,
what we are estimating in this bottom panel of Table 2 is the causal eﬀect of institutional
diﬀerences on volatility. So the key questions are whether this causal eﬀect is being
mediated by macroeconomic variables such as inflation, fiscal policy and exchange rate
policy, and whether diﬀerences in these macroeconomic policies unrelated to institutions
have a first-order eﬀect on volatility and macroeconomic outcomes. We turn to these
issues next.
  19
     It also suggests that the relationship between initial income and volatility, which Acemoglu and
Zilibotti (1997) interpreted as due to lack of sectoral diversification in relatively poor countries, may be
related to institutional factors.




                                                    32
6.2   Institutions Versus Macroeconomic Policies: Interpretation

How can we interpret the results from regressions as in equations (1) and (2), which
include both institutions and macroeconomic variables? Imagine that we are estimating
these regressions with volatility as the dependent variable. We know from Table 2 that
institutions have an eﬀect on volatility, which we can interpret as causal as long as we
trust the validity of our instruments. So now imagine adding the macro variables, Q,
to regressions of measures of volatility and crises on institutions. Consider the following
alternative scenarios:

  1. If we find institutions are insignificant, while macroeconomic policies are signifi-
      cant, the most likely interpretation, in light of the results of Table 2 that show that
      a large “causal” eﬀect of institutions on volatility, is that institutions have an ef-
      fect on volatility, but these specific macroeconomic policies are the main (primary)
      mediating channel for this eﬀect. (This naturally does not rule out that macro-
      economic policies may have an independent eﬀect, unrelated to the importance of
      institutions.) Since macroeconomic policies are the main mediating channel, these
      results would suggest that getting macroeconomic policies right, as prescribed by
      the Washington consensus, is likely to be an important policy priority.

  2. If, on the other hand, both institutions, I, and macroeconomic policies, Q, are
      found to be robustly significant, it would appear that both have independent ef-
      fects on volatility, and part of the eﬀect of institutions may be mediated through
      macroeconomic policies, while some part of it is not. We can determine approxi-
      mately how much of the eﬀect of institutions is mediated by macroeconomic policy
      variables by looking at the change in the coeﬃcient on institutions between the
      specifications with and without the macro variables. If this coeﬃcient changes only
      little, it would appear that these specific macroeconomic policies are not the main
      mediating channel for the eﬀect of institutions on volatility (or other economic
      outcomes).

                                             33
   3. Finally, if we find that institutions, I, are significant and macroeconomic policies,
         Q, are not, the most likely interpretation is that the causal eﬀect of institutions on
         volatility is not mediated mainly through macroeconomic policies, but through a
         range of other, probably microeconomic, policies. Macroeconomic policies in this
         case might still have an eﬀect in individual cases; but they are not the system-
         atic channel via which institutions impact on volatility. In this case, the eﬀect
         of institutions on volatility is likely to be working not through a particular mech-
         anisms, but via a variety of microeconomic, as well as macroeconomic, channels
         (thus potentially leading to the “seesaw eﬀects” mentioned in the introduction).

6.3     Institutions Versus Macroeconomic Policies: Volatility

We now estimate models as in equations (1) and (2), with volatility as the dependent
variable. The results presented in Tables 3, 4, and 5 show a robust eﬀect of institutions,
and no eﬀects from government consumption or inflation.20 Overvaluation is, on the
other hand, significant in some specifications, but has a relatively small eﬀect on the
coeﬃcient of the institutions variable. These results therefore favor an interpretation in
which standard macroeconomic variables play a minor role relative to institutional causes
that create economic instability through a variety of channels, though overvaluation
of the exchange rate appears one of the channels linking weak institutions to greater
instability, even if not the primary channel.
       In Table 3, we report regressions with volatility as the dependent variable, and
average ratio of government consumption to GDP (a measure of average government
size) as the macro variable. We chose this variable as it appears to be a better predictor
of macroeconomic outcomes during this period than measures of the budget deficit.
The first three columns in the top panel document a strong relationship between the
size of government and volatility, without controlling for institutions, as already shown
  20
   These baseline results use the average constraint on the executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970. See
Appendix Table A3 for results using constraint on the executive in 1970.



                                               34
in Figure 2. The second panel shows that a similar but weaker relationship applies
when we control for initial income. Greater government size is associated with greater
instability. The rest of the table shows that adding institutions reduces the importance
of the government size variable, which is never found to be significant.21
       In columns 4 and 5, we start with OLS regressions, where institutions are treated
as exogenous. These regressions show a negative relationship between constraint on the
executive and volatility, both in the full excolonies sample and in the smaller sample of
excolonies above median world income. The correlation between government consump-
tion and volatility is no longer significant. The results are similar when we control for
initial income in Panel B: institutions continue to be significant and government size is
not.
       In columns 6 and 7, we instrument for institutions using (potential) European settler
mortality, as in previous tables, and treat government size as exogenous. The eﬀect
of institutions on volatility is now stronger, and there is also no eﬀect of government
consumption (the coeﬃcient is now almost zero down from 8.09).
       Average size of government over the sample period may be correlated with other
determinants of volatility, and may also be measured with error. To deal with these
endogeneity and attenuation issues, columns 8 and 9 instrument for government size
using past government size. Now the government size variable has the opposite sign to
those in columns 1, 2 and 3 and is far from being significant. This is despite the fact
that there is a good first-stage relationship for government size (the t-statistic on past
government consumption is over 10, and the R2 of the first-stage regression is 0.69).
Therefore, the cross-sectional regressions in Panels A and B suggest that diﬀerences in
government size are not a major determinant of the volatility over the thirty-year period
we are looking at.
       It is also worth noting that the (instrumented) eﬀect of initial institutions on volatility
  21
    To save space we do not report the first-stage relationship for institutions, which is very similar to
the regressions reported in Table 2 (though not identical since other variables are now also included in
the first stage).



                                                   35
we estimate in these two panels are very similar to the estimates in Table 2. For example,
in Table 2, the eﬀect of initial constraint on the executive on volatility is around -0.8
in models that do not control for initial income, and around -1.6 in models that control
for initial income. When we also control for government size as in Table 3, the eﬀect
of initial institutions on volatility is very similar: the coeﬃcient is now -0.82 without
initial income and -1.56 with initial income.
   The models reported in Panels A and B are based on the estimation of equation (1),
which looks at the relationship between volatility and government size over the thirty-
year period (1970-97). As discussed above, some countries may experience short periods
of large government spending, causing major crises, while during other periods they may
have oﬀsetting low spending, thus resulting in average government size similar to that
in other countries. To investigate this possibility, in Panels C and D, we estimate the
panel regression equation (2). The first three columns show the eﬀect of government
size without controlling for institutions. When we add institutions, the government size
variable is again found not to be a key determinant of volatility. Instead, there is a
robust relationship between initial institutions and subsequent volatility between 1970
and 1997.
   Table 4 repeats the same exercise as Table 3, but using log inflation rather than
government consumption. We use the log of average inflation rather than the level of
inflation, since the relationship between volatility and inflation is stronger when we use
the log specification and less aﬀected by outliers. Panels A and B estimate equation (1),
with and without initial income. The basic patterns are the same. Throughout, there is
a robust eﬀect of institutions on volatility, with very similar coeﬃcients to those found
in Table 2 (in instrumented regressions using the full sample, the coeﬃcient is -0.83
without initial income and -1.57 with initial income). There is no evidence that inflation
matters for volatility in the full sample of former colonies, either in the cross-section or
in the 5-year panel, although it is significant in some specifications for the sample of
former colonies above median world income.


                                            36
       Table 5 turns to exchange rate overvaluation, and uses the index of exchange rate
overvaluation constructed by David Dollar (1992) and updated by Easterly and Levine
(2002).22 The first three columns show a strong relationship between real exchange rate
overvaluation when the importance of institutions is not taken into account. When the
next column includes institutions in the regression, the eﬀect of overvaluation remains
significant. Initial institutions also continue to have a large and statistically-significant
eﬀect on volatility, with a coeﬃcient about 1/4 less than the corresponding estimate
without controlling for exchange rate overvaluation.23 When we also control for initial
income per capita in Panel B, the eﬀect of overvaluation is still significant, and initial
constraint on the executive is also highly significant, but with a smaller coeﬃcient than
our baseline estimates. These results suggest that misaligned exchange rates are a me-
diating channel for the eﬀect of institutions on volatility, but probably not the primary
mediating channel.
       Overall, the results presented in this subsection suggest that the historically-determined
component of institutions has a first-order eﬀect on volatility, and neither inflation nor
government consumption (nor the other standard macro variables we examined) seem to
be the main mediating channel, though exchange rate overvaluation is typically corre-
lated with volatility. Our interpretation of these results is that a fundamental determi-
nant of thirty-year volatility diﬀerences is institutional diﬀerences across countries, and
that institutional diﬀerences create economic instability through a variety of microeco-
nomic channels as well as the often-emphasized macroeconomic channels.
  22
     Due to data availability, we use the average value of this overvaluation index from 1960 to 1998,
generously provided by Bill Easterly and Ross Levine. Because we only have an average value for the
entire period, we cannot instrument using lagged values as in Tables 3 and 4. We have also checked
the results using the variability of overvaluation from Dollar (1992), but as this does not change our
results we omit it here from the discussion.
  23
     The coeﬃcient on institutions in Table 3 is -0.83, but once we limit the sample to the former colonies
for which we have data on real exchange rate overvaluation, the coeﬃcient on institutions drops to -0.69.
The coeﬃcient in Table 5 -0.49.




                                                    37
6.4    Institutions Versus Macroeconomic Policies: Crises

Table 6 presents a number of specifications that look at the impact of macro variables
and institutions on the severity of crises, measured by the largest output drop during
the sample. Each of the three diﬀerent panels refers to one of the three macro variables
we considered so far. In all cases, our measure of institutions, average constraint on the
executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, is instrumented by settler mortality (See Appendix
Table A4 for results using constraint on the executive in 1970).
      The picture that emerges from this table is similar to that from Tables 3, 4 and 5.
In most specifications there is a substantial eﬀect of initial constraint on the executive
on severity of crises, and this eﬀect remains statistically significant at the conventional
levels even when we control for initial income. In most specifications, the eﬀect of
initial institutions is again comparable to the baseline results in Table 2 (in Table 2,
the coeﬃcient on institutions in the 2SLS regression on worst output performance is
around -2.5 when we do not control for initial income, and around -5 when we control
for initial income; the range of estimates in this table are tightly around these values).
We also find that government consumption and log average inflation do not appear to
have an eﬀect on the severity of crises when we take the influence of institutions into
account. In contrast to our results with volatility, the extent of overvaluation of the real
exchange rate is also insignificant, and only slightly reduces the eﬀect of institutions on
the severity of crises.
      These results confirm the conclusion of the previous section that there appears to be
a close a link between institutions and economic instability, most likely not mediated
primarily through the standard macroeconomic variables.

6.5    Institutions Versus Macroeconomic Policies: Economic Growth

Table 7 looks at the relationship between macroeconomic variables and institutions, on
the one hand, and economic growth, on the other. As in Table 6, the three panels



                                             38
of the table refer to three diﬀerent macro variables, and in all cases we also include
institutions, average constraint on the executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, instrumented
by our historical instruments (See Appendix Table A5 for results using constraint on
the executive in 1970).
   In the full sample of excolonies (odd-numbered columns), we find a significant eﬀect
of initial institutions on growth, no eﬀects from government consumption, some eﬀects
from inflation, and stronger eﬀects from overvaluation. When we limit the sample to
excolonies above median world income, and especially when we also control for initial
income, the eﬀect of institutions on growth is weaker. Our interpretation is the same
as the one we oﬀered above: much of the divergence in income happened between 1750
and 1950, when countries with good institutions grew rapidly, and those with extractive
institutions failed to do so (Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson, 2002a). By 1970, much of
this process of adjustment was complete, and the eﬀect of institutions on further growth
is correspondingly weaker. Moreover, the sample of former colonies above median world
income is relatively small, and exhibits limited variation in growth. In this light, these
weaker results may not be so surprising.

       7   Institutions and Volatility: Robustness and Mechanisms

The previous section documented a strong relationship between institutions and eco-
nomic volatility, and presented evidence suggesting that this relationship was not me-
diated through any of the standard macroeconomic variables. In this section, we inves-
tigate the relationship between institutions and volatility further, and show that it is
robust to controlling for a variety of other potential determinants of economic instabil-
ity. We then investigate the empirical validity of some potential mechanisms via which
institutions might be aﬀecting volatility.




                                             39
7.1    Robustness

Table 8 reports regressions of volatility on institutions, while also controlling for a num-
ber of potential determinants of volatility. In particular, in various columns, we control
for all the macro variables together, the initial level of education, the importance of
financial intermediation, the variability of terms of trade times the share of exports, and
we also estimate models excluding outliers.
      In columns 1 and 2 of Panel A of Table 8, we add all the macro variables together,
with or without initial income. Initial constraint on the executive has a negative eﬀect
on volatility. Without controlling for initial income, this eﬀect is significant, but some-
what smaller than in Table 2. When we also control for initial income, the standard
error increases but the coeﬃcient on institutions remains very similar in size to the co-
eﬃcients reported in Table 2. The eﬀect of initial income is not significant. Jointly, the
macro variables are insignificant as shown by the p-value. In Panel B, we run the same
regressions, but this time in a manner similar to the panel regression in equation (2),
with each observation corresponding to a 5-year period. Now the eﬀects of the macro
variables are even weaker, and the constraint on the executive is consistently significant,
with very similar coeﬃcients to before (again the standard errors in this lower panel are
clustered by country).
      In columns 3 and 4 we control for years of schooling in 1970 (from Barro and Lee,
1993). This is a useful specification, since, as we argue in Acemoglu, Johnson and
Robinson (2001), historical institutions determined various components of investments,
including investments in human capital, so we expect education levels in 1970 to be cor-
related with the historically-determined component of institutions. It is then important
to know whether the eﬀect of institutions on volatility is working primarily through some
educational mechanism. When we include human capital, constraint on the executive
continues to have a negative eﬀect, similar in magnitude to our previous results, but it is
no longer significant. This is because human capital and constraint on the executive are
highly correlated. But, the years of schooling variable is very far from being significant,

                                            40
and in fact, it has the wrong sign. In the lower panel where we run regressions for the
5-year panel, the human capital variable continues to be insignificant, but now the initial
constraint on the executive is significant at the 10 percent level, with a similar coeﬃcient
to that found in Table 2. These results suggest that the eﬀect of initial constraint is not
working through an educational channel.
       In columns 5 and 6 we add (log of) the ratio of real M2 to GDP as a measure
of the importance of financial intermediation (see Easterly, Islam and Stiglitz, 2000,
for the use of this variable in this context). Many macroeconomists emphasize weak
financial intermediation as a primary cause of economic volatility. Again we find no
strong evidence supporting this claim. The financial intermediation variables are not
significant, and initial constraint on the executive is significant in most specifications.24
       In columns 7 and 8, we control for other determinants of variability, including terms
of trade variability, the export share of the GDP, and the interaction between these two
variables. In columns 9 and 10 we also exclude some outliers. The results are very similar
to our baseline results, showing that the eﬀect of the historically-determined component
of institutions on volatility is robust, and is not simply driven by some other sources of
output variability correlated with institutions.25
       Table 9 further checks the robustness of our results in two ways: with additional
control variables and by restricting the sample. Panel A adds additional control vari-
ables. La Porta et al. (1998) have argued for the importance of investor protection,
and Johnson et al. (2000) found that investor protection measures were significantly
correlated with exchange rate depreciations and stock market declines across emerging
markets in 1997-98. In columns 1 and 2, we add the measure of de jure shareholders’
  24
     This is consistent with the results in Johnson, McMillan and Woodruﬀ (2002), who, in a diﬀerent
context, also find that property rights appear to matter more than the availability of external finance.
  25
     We have also run the regressions as in Table 8 using a diﬀerent measure of institutions, average
protection against expropriation risk, which was our main variable in Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson
(2001). This variable refers to a later period and hence is not ideal for our purposes here. However, as
we are instrumenting for institutions with historical variables, this may not matter too much. In any
case, the results in with this alternative specification are very similar to those in Table 8, and show a
robust eﬀect of institutions on volatility.



                                                   41
rights from La Porta et al. (1998).26 These de jure measures do not appear to be related
to volatility (although the sample size is now quite small), while the coeﬃcient on initial
constraint on the executive is essentially the same as in Table 2. Columns 3 and 4 show
similar results for de jure creditors’ rights. The results are similar, but now when we
also include log initial GDP per capita (column 4), the coﬃcient on initial constraint
on the executive is no longer significant at the 5 percent level. Clearly investor protec-
tion and creditors’ rights are closely linked to overall property rights enforcement and
constraint on the executive. Nevertheless, they capture only one dimension of “institu-
tional” diﬀerences, which we believe are much broader, and include various other aspects
of the organization of society. These results therefore suggest that what is important for
volatility (and more generally, for economic performance) is not simply de jure investor
or creditor protection, but a broader range of institutions, including property rights
protection for a broader cross-section of society, constraints on politicians and elites,
arrangements to manage social divisions and ensure political stability, and the “rule of
law”, which determine whether these de jure rights are enforced.27
       Columns 5 and 6 add the share of primary exports in GDP, a basic measure of
openness and exposure to shocks, from Sachs and Warner (1997). This variable also has
little eﬀect on our main results. Similarly, including latitude, as a common proxy for
geographic influences on economic outcomes, has little impact on initial constraint on
the executive, and latitude itself is insignificant (see columns 7 and 8).
       Panel B further checks our results by limiting the sample of countries under consid-
eration. Columns 9 and 10 report regressions using only Common Law countries, i.e.,
those that inherited or adopted a legal system based on British common law (see La
Porta et al., 1998). Columns 11 and 12 run the regressions just for former colonies, and
  26
     We refer to these as “de jure” measures, since these measures do not take into account how well
these legislated rights are enforced. Note also that these measures are only available for countries that
are relatively open to capital flows. For example, we do not have this information for many African
countries.
  27
     La Porta et al (1998) also suggest that eﬀective investor protection must be enforced through courts
or regulation, and Johnson et al (2000) find significant eﬀects for the rule of law both directly and in
interaction with de jure investor protection measures.


                                                   42
drop the “Neo-Europes” (USA, Canada, Australia and New Zealand). The results for
these various subsamples are similar to our baseline results.
   One concern with our basic results is whether they simply reflect very large crises and
volatility in African or other poor nations which also have weak institutions. If this were
the case, one might think that institutions matter for diﬀerences in volatility between
poor (African) and rich (non-African) nations, but have less eﬀect on volatility among
richer (non-African) nations. The results so far show that there is a strong relationship
between the historically-determined component of institutions and volatility even among
nations above median world income (see Tables 1 through 7). Moreover, Table 1 showed
that even excluding Africa, there is a statistical relationship between the historically-
determined component of institutions and the level of income or economic growth. To
investigate this issue further in the context of volatility, columns 13 and 14 drop all
the African countries. The coeﬃcient on initial constraint on the executive remains
significant and similar in size to our baseline result in Table 3. This, together with the
results reported so far, suggests that our results are not driven simply by the contrast
between poor and rich nations, and institutional diﬀerences even among relatively rich
nations matter for volatility. Finally, columns 15 and 16 report results just for countries
below the median world per capita income level, where we find a similar relationship,
suggesting that the link between institutions and volatility is there both among relatively
poor and relatively rich nations.
   Another dimension of robustness is whether the relationship between institutions
and instability is being driven by events in some specific decades. To investigate this
issue, Table 10 looks at the relationship between our measure of institutions (which
refers to the average constraint on the executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970), and the
three macro outcomes of interest, in each of the decades of the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s.
The three panels refer to the three decades, while pairs of columns look at diﬀerent
outcomes, and columns are paired with and without initial income. The results show a
significant relationship between institutions and volatility, and also between institutions


                                            43
and crises in the 1970s and 1980s. These relationships are weaker in the 1990s. In
contrast, the relationship between institutions and growth is stronger and significant
in the 1990s (as well as in the 1980s, but not in the 1970s). A possible interpretation
is that during the 1990s, countries with weak institutions did not experience much
growth, and therefore had no significant volatility.28 This interpretation highlights that
countries with weak institutions may go through extended periods (as long as a decade)
of reasonably high growth, but this growth experience is often associated with high
volatility. These countries may also experience long episodes of very low growth (and
by implication, little volatility) as seems to have been the case during the 1990s.

7.2      Proximate Mechanisms: Global Shocks, Institutions and Volatility

What is the link between institutions and volatility? There are many levels at which we
can try to answer this question. At the simplest level, we can investigate whether the
relationship occurs because countries with weaker institutions suﬀer much more in the
face of economic shocks.
       More specifically, we can imagine each country going through output fluctuations
due to “fundamental reasons”. We may then conjecture that when output is low in
an institutionally-weak society, there will be increased conflict and significant forces
reducing output further. Therefore, output may drop by much more than it would have
done due to the underlying fundamental reasons. Unfortunately, we cannot directly test
for this possibility, since we do not observe the “fundamental” output fluctuations.
       However, we can investigate whether institutionally-weak societies suﬀer more volatil-
ity and larger output drops during periods of world economic slowdown and recession.
This link between world output shocks and economic problems and institutionally-weak
societies is very similar to Rodrik’s (1999) interpretation of why growth slowed down
more in some countries.
  28
    Note, however, that our data on volatility are only through 1997, so our results do not include the
“Asian financial crisis” of 1997-98.



                                                  44
   The results already presented in Table 10 suggest that the link between global shocks
and instability may not be very strong. The early 1990s were a period of disappointing
output growth, but the relationship between institutions and volatility is weak in the
1990s.
   To investigate this issue more carefully, in Table 11, we estimate models of the
following form:

   Xc,t−1,t = Q0c,t−1,t · α + β · Ic,t=0 + η · gt,t−1 · Ic,t=0 + θ · ln yc,t−1 + δt−1,t + εc,t−1,t ,   (4)

where all the variables are defined as before, and in particular, Xc,t−1,t refers to macro
outcomes between time t−1 and t, and here time periods are taken to be five-year periods.
The δt−1,t terms denote time eﬀects, and Ic,t=0 is our measure of initial institutions.
   The variable of interest here is the interaction term between the world growth rate,
gt,t−1 , and country institutions. A significant eﬀect from these interaction terms would in-
dicate that institutionally-weak societies have a greater propensity to experience macro-
economic problems (high volatility or low growth) during periods of slow world growth.
As before we instrument for institutions, Ic,t=0 , using our historical instruments, and now
we also instrument for the interaction between institutions and world aggregates, the
gt,t−1 ·Ic,t=0 terms, using interactions between world aggregates and our instruments. The
variables are de-meaned, so the main eﬀect of institutions in this regression is evaluated
at the mean value of the sample. We also cluster the standard errors by country.
   As an alternative specification we estimate:

         Xc,t−1,t = Q0c,t−1,t · α + η · gt,t−1 · Ic,t=0 + θ · ln yc,t−1 + dc + δt−1,t + εc,t−1,t ,     (5)

which replaces the main eﬀect of institutions by a full set of country dummies.
   Table 11 focuses on two global variables: the growth rate of world output and of
world trade. The results show no evidence that there is a significant interaction term
indicating greater propensity of institutionally-weak societies to run into crises during
periods of world economic slowdown (or expansion) or greater growth of world trade.

                                                    45
The interaction terms are usually insignificant when the dependent variable is volatility
of output. In contrast, in columns 5 and 6 where the dependent variable is country
growth, we find significant interactions between world growth and initial institutions.
This suggests that when the world economy slows down, institutionally-weak societies
slow down more than others. But these growth eﬀects do not translate into greater
volatility for these institutionally-weak societies during periods of world economic slow-
down (columns 1, 2, 3 and 4).
      We conclude that the proximate mechanism for the relationship between institutions
and volatility is not primarily the propensity of institutionally-weak societies to run
into crises during periods of world recession or other major global events. Instead it
is likely that it is the inability of institutionally-weak societies to deal with their own
idiosyncratic economic and most likely political problems that underlies their economic
instability. In the next subsection, we briefly look at a potential mechanism along these
lines.

7.3      State Failures and Volatility

This subsection provides a preliminary investigation of whether political crises could
be a mediating mechanism for the impact of weak institutions on economic volatility,
as suggested by some of the theoretical ideas in subsection 3.1. We believe that the
link between political crises (state failures) and economic instability is important to
understand the relationship between institutions and volatility. A more in-depth study,
using more detailed measures of political crises, is necessary, but beyond the scope of
the current paper. We leave this for future research.
      Here we simply use the dataset of the State Failure Task Force (1998) to code periods
of “state failures”, that is, major political crises, such as civil wars, revolutions, violent
infighting, etc., between diﬀerent factions. In Panel A of Table 12, we first look at
the relationship between state failures (in various periods) and initial constraint on the
executive, instrumented by our historical variables. Countries with weak institutions at


                                             46
the beginning of the sample were more likely to suﬀer state failures, though, somewhat
surprisingly, this eﬀect is not always statistically significant.
   We next turn to the relationship between state failures and volatility or growth.
More specifically, we estimate models similar to equations (1) and (2), with the only
diﬀerence that instead of the macroeconomic variables, Q, we include a dummy for state
failure during the period, S.
   The results from this exercise are reported in Panels B and C of Table 12. In the
cross-section, state failures have the right sign, but are not significant determinants of
volatility and growth (but they are almost significant for the severity of crises, i.e., worst
output drop). We conjecture that this may be because a dummy for state failure is too
crude to capture the severity of various political problems, while also leaving out some
important political crises that may matter for economic instability.
   In any case, when we look at the 5-year observations in Panel C, we find that state fail-
ures are now typically significant determinants of macroeconomic problems and volatility.
Although state failures are significant, the coeﬃcient on initial institutions is reduced
only a little. This suggests that the major state failures identified in this dataset are not
the main channel leading to volatility. One possibility is that these state failures may be
“the tip of a much larger iceberg”, and there may be other less violent or less notable po-
litical crises that lead to episodes of volatility and low growth. Future work using more
detailed measures of political crises is necessary to further investigate whether more
general political crises could be a major mediating channel for the eﬀect of institutions
on economic volatility.

                                     8   Conclusion

Why have many LDCs suﬀered very high volatility and severe crises over the postwar
period? The standard answer is that they have followed unsustainable and distortionary
macroeconomic policies. In this paper, we developed the argument that the funda-
mental cause of post-war instability is institutional. Using the historically-determined


                                             47
component of institutions, we documented a strong relationship between institutions and
volatility (as well as a link between institutions and crises or growth). Once we take the
eﬀect of institutions on volatility into account, there seems to be little major role for the
standard macroeconomic variables emphasized in the literature and by the Washington
consensus. The only “macro” variable which appears to play an important mediating
role is overvaluation of the real exchange rate, which is consistent with our discussion of
the Ghanaian case, where real overvaluation was used as a method of expropropriation
or redistribution.
   Overall, we interpret our findings as suggesting that the major causes of the large
cross-country diﬀerences in volatility are institutional, and none of the standard macro-
economic variables appear to be the primary mediating channels through which institu-
tional causes lead to economic instability. These macroeconomic problems, just like the
volatility and the disappointing macroeconomic performance suﬀered by these countries,
are symptoms of deeper institutional causes.
   This perspective does not suggest that macroeconomic policies do not matter. The
point we believe and want to emphasize is that there are deeper institutional causes lead-
ing to economic instability, and these institutional causes lead to bad macroeconomic
outcomes via a variety of mediating channels. Distortionary macroeconomic policies are
part of these channels, or in other words, they are part of the “tools” that groups in
power use in order to enrich themselves and to remain in power. But they are only
one of many possible tools, and a variety of complex factors, which we do not currently
understand, determine which of these tools get used in various circumstances. An in-
teresting possibility implied by this perspective is a seesaw eﬀect: preventing the use of
a specific macro distortion will not necessarily cure the economic instability problems,
since underlying institutional problems may manifest themselves in the use of some other
tools by politicians and elites to achieve their objectives.
   Our results also did not specifically pinpoint the exact mechanism via which insti-
tutional weaknesses translate into economic instability. They are consistent with the


                                             48
notion that political crises (“state failures”) may be important, but our evidence here is
more circumstantial. More research on these issues is clearly necessary.




                                           49
                                  9   References

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2001) “Colonial
Origins of Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation,” American Economic
Review, 91, 1369-1401.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2002a) “Rever-
sal of Fortune: Geography and Institutions in the Making of the Modern World Income
Distribution,” forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.
   Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James A. Robinson (2002b) “The
Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade, Institutional Change and Economic Growth,” Unpub-
lished.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2000) “Political Losers as a Barrier
to Economic Development,” American Economic Review, 90, 126-130.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2001) “A Theory of Political
Transitions,” American Economic Review, 91, 938-963.
   Acemoglu, Daron and James A. Robinson (2002) “Economic Backwardness
in Political Perspective,” NBER Working Paper No. 8831.
   Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti (1997) “Was Prometheus Unbound
by Chance? Risk, Diversification and Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 105,
1167-1200.
   Apter, David E. (1972) Ghana in Transition, Princeton; Princeton University
Press.
   Austin, Dennis (1964) Politics in Ghana, 1947-1960, Oxford UK; Oxford Univer-
sity Press.
   Bardhan, Pranab (1984) The Political Economy of Development in India, Basil
Blackwell, Oxford.
   Benhabib, Jess and Aldo Rustichini (1996) “Social Conflict and Growth”Journal
of Economic Growth, 1, 125-142.
   Barro, Robert J. (1991) “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,”

                                        50
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 407-433.
   Barro, Robert J. and Lee, Jong-Wha (1993) “International Comparisons of
Educational Attainment,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 32, 363-394.
   Bates, Robert H. (1981) Markets and States in Tropical Africa, Berkeley; Uni-
versity of California Press.
   Besley, Timothy (1995) “Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and
Evidence from Ghana,” Journal of Political Economy, 103, 903-937.
   Blanchard, Olivier J. and John Simon (2002) “The Long and Large Decline
in US Output Volatility,” forthcoming in the Brookings Papers on Economics Activity.
   Cabellero, Ricardo J. (2001) Macroeconomic Volatility in Reformed Latin Amer-
ica: Diagnosis and Policy Proposals, Washington; Inter-American Development Bank.
   Caballero, Ricardo J. and Rudiger Dornbusch (2002) “A Plan for Argentina,”
http://web.mit.edu/caball/www/ARGENTINA22802.pdf.
   Caballero, Ricardo J. and A. Krishnamurthy (2000) “Emerging Market Crises;
An Asset Markets Perspective,” Unpublished, Department of Economics, MIT.
   Chang, Roberto and Andres Velasco (2002) “A Model of Financial Crisis in
Emerging Markets,.” forthcoming Quarterly Journal of Economics.
   Collier, David and Ruth Berins Collier (1991) Shaping the Political Arena:
Critical Junctures, the Labor Movement, and Regime Dynamics in Latin America, Prince-
ton; Princeton University Press.
   Crosby, Alfred (1986) Ecological Imperialism: The Biological Expansion of Eu-
rope, New York; Cambridge University Press.
   Curtin, Philip D. (1989) Death by Migration: Europe’s Encounter with the Trop-
ical World in the 19th Century, New York; Cambridge University Press.
   Curtin, Philip D. (1998) Disease and Empire: The Health of European Troops in
the Conquest of Africa, New York; Cambridge University Press.
   Curtin Philip D. (2000) The World and the West: the European Challenge and
Overseas Response in the Age of Empire, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.


                                         51
   Denizer, Cevzet, Murat Iyigun and Ann Owen. (2001) “Finance and Macro-
economic Volatility,” World Bank Discussion Paper.
   Dı́az Alejandro, Carlos F. (1970) Essays on the Economic History of the Argen-
tine Republic, Yale University Press, New Haven CT.
   Dollar, David (1992) “Outward Oriented Developing Economies Really do Grow
More Rapidly,” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 40, 523-544.
   Dornbusch, Rudiger, Ilan Goldfajn, and Rodrigo Valdes (1995) “Currency
Crises and Collapses” Brookings Papers on Economic Activities, pp. 219-294.
   Easterly, William (2001) “The Lost Decades: The Developing Countries Stagna-
tion in Spite of Policy Reform,” Journal of Economic Growth, 9, 135-157.
   Easterly, William, Roumeen Islam, and Joseph Stiglitz, (2000), “Shaken
and Stirred, Explaining Growth Volatility,” Annual Bank Conference on Development
Economics, The World Bank, April.
   Edwards, Sebastián (1989) “The International Monetary Fund and the Develop-
ing Countries: A Critical Evaluation,” Karl Brunner and Allan H. Meltzer eds. IMF
Policy Advice, Market Volatility, Commodity Price Rules and Other Essays, Amsterdam;
North-Holland.
   Eichengreen, Barry and Michael D. Bordo (2002) “Crises Then and Now:
What Lessons from the Last Era of Financial Globalization?” NBER Working Paper
8716, January.
   Frieden, Jeﬀry (2001) The Modern World Economy, 1870-2000, Unpublished
Book manuscript, Department of Government, Harvard University.
   Gerchunoﬀ, Pablo (1989) “Peronist Economic Policies, 1946-1955,” in Rudiger
Dornbusch and Guido di Tella eds. The Political Economy of Argentina, 1946-1983,
University of Pittsburg Press, Pittsburg PA.
   Germani, Gino (1962) Politica y Sociedad en una Epoca de Transicion, de la
Sociedad Tradicional a la Sociedad de Masas, Buenos Aires; Editorial Paidos.
   Gibson, Edward L. (1997) “The Populist Road to Market Reform: Policy and


                                          52
Electoral Coalitions in Mexico and Argentina,” World Politics, 59,
   Gibson, Edward L., Ernesto F. Calvo and Tulia G. Falleti (2001) “Realloca-
tive Federalism: Overrepresentation and Public Spending in the Western Hemisphere,”
Unpublished, Department of Political Science, Northwestern University.
   Gutierrez, Hector (1986) “La Mortalite des Eveques Latino-Americains aux XVIIe
et XVIII Siecles,” Annales de Demographie Historique, 29-39.
   Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones (1999) “Why Do Some Countries Produce
so Much More Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114,
83-116.
   Herbst, Jeﬀrey I. (1993) The Politics of Reform in Ghana, 1982-1991, Berkeley;
University of California Press.
   Herbst, Jeﬀrey I. (2000) States and Power in Africa: Comparative lessons in
Authority and Control, Princeton; Princeton University Press.
   Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach, and Eric Friedman (2000)
“Corporate Governance in the Asian Financial Crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics,
Volume 58, Nos. 1-2, October/November, 141-186.
   Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruﬀ (2002) “Prop-
erty Rights and Finance,” American Economic Review, forthcoming.
   Jones, Eric L. (1981) The European Miracle: Environments, Economies and
Geopolitics in the History of Europe and Asia, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge
UK.
   Leith, J. Clark and Michael F. Lofchie (1993) “The Political Economy of
Structural Adjustment in Ghana,” in Robert H. Bates and Anne O. Krueger eds. Po-
litical and Economic Interactions in Economics Policy Reform: Evidence from Eight
Countries, Cambridge MA; Basil Blackwell.
   Lizzeri, Alessandro and Nicola Persico (2001) “The Provision of Public Goods
Under Alternative Electoral Incentives,” American Economic Review, 91, 225-245.
   Kaminsky, Graciela L. and Carmen M. Reinhart (1999) “The Twin Crises:


                                          53
The Causes of Banking and Balance of Payments Problems,” American Economic Re-
view, 89, 473-500.
   Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer (1995) “Institutions and Economic Perfor-
mance: Cross-Country Tests using alternative measures,” Economics and Politics, 7,
207-227.
   Kraay, Art and Jaume Ventura (2000) “Comparative Advantage and the Cross-
Section of Business Cycles,” Unpublished, Department of Economics, MIT.
   Krueger, Anne O. (1993) Political Economy of Policy Reform in Developing
Countries, Cambridge; MIT Press.
   Krugman, Paul (1979) “A Model of Balance of Payments Crises,” Journal of
Money Credit and Banking, 11, 311-325.
   Krusell, Per and José-Victor Rı́os-Rull (1996) “Vested Interests in a Theory
of Growth and Stagnation,” Review of Economic Studies, 63, 301-329.
   La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert
W. Vishny (1998) “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106, 1113-1155.
   Maddison, Angus (2001) The World Economy: A Millenial Perspective, OECD,
Paris.
   Mauro, Paulo (1995) “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
CX, 681-712.
   Mazzuca, Sebastián (2001) “Southern Cone Leviathans. State Formation in
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and Uruguay,” Unpublished PhD Dissertation, Department of
Political Science, Berkeley.
   McConnell, Margaret M. and Gabriel Perez-Quiros (2000) “Output Fluc-
tuations in the United States: What has Changed since the Early 1980’s”’ American
Economic Review, 90, 1464-1476.
   Mora y Araujo, Manuel and Ignacio Llorente (1980) El Voto Peronista,
Buenos Aires; Editorial Sudamericana.
   North, Douglas C. (1981) Structure and Change in Economic History, W.W.


                                         54
Norton & Co., New York.
   North, Douglass C. and Richard P. Thomas (1973) The Rise of the Western
World: A New Economic History, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge UK.
   Olson, Mancur C. (1982) The Rise and Decline of Nations, Yale University Press,
New Haven, CT.
   Owusu, Maxwell (1970) Use and Abuses of Power: A Case Study of Continuity
and Change in the Politics of Ghana, University of Chicago Press, Chicago IL.
   della Paolera, Gerardo and Alan M. Taylor (2001) Straining at the Anchor:
The Argentine Currency Board and the Search for Macroeconomic Stability 1880-1935,
Chicago; University of Chicago Press.
   Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott (1999) “Monopoly Rights: A
Barrier to Riches,” American Economic Review, 89, 1216-1233.
   Pellow, Deborah and Naomi Chazan (1986) Ghana: Coping with Uncertainty,
Boulder CO; Westview Press.
   Raddatz, Claudio (2002) “Liquidity Needs and Vulnerability to Financial Under-
development,” Unpublished, Department of Economics, MIT.
   Ramey, Gary and Valerie Ramey (1995) “Cross-Country Evidence on the Links
Between Volatility and Growth,” American Economic Review, 85, 1138-1151.
   Rock, David J. (1987) Argentina 1516-1987: From Spanish Colonization to Al-
fonsin, Berkeley; University of California Press.
   Rodrik, Dani (1997) “Democracy and Economic Performance,”
   http://ksghome.harvard.edu/˜.drodrik.academic.ksg/demoecon.PDF.
   Rodrik, Dani (1999) “Where Did All the Growth Go? External Shocks, Social
Conflict and Growth Collapses,” Journal of Economic Growth,
   Rodrik, Dani (2002) “Reform in Argentina, Take Two: Trade Rout,” The New
Republic.
   Roe, Mark J. (1998) “Essays: Backlash,” Columbia Law Review, 98, 217-241.
   Sachs, Jeﬀrey D. (1990) “Social Conflict and Populist Policies in Latin America,”


                                           55
in R. Brunetta and C. Dell’Aringa eds. Labor Relations and Economic Performance,
NYU Press, New York.
   Sachs, Jeﬀrey D. and Andrew Warner (1997). “Fundamental Sources of Long-
Run Growth,” American Economic Review, Papers and Proceedings, May.
   Samuels, David and Richard Snyder (2001) “The Value of a Vote: Malappor-
tionment in Comparative Perspective,” British Journal of Political Science, Volume 31,
Issue 4, October, 651-671.
   Samuels, David and Richard Snyder (2002) “Legislative Malapportionment in
Latin America: Historical and Comparative Perspectives,” Unpublished.
   Sawers, Larry (1996) The Other Argentina: The Interior and National Develop-
ment, Boulder; Westview Press.
   Shleifer, Andrei (1997) “Government in Transition,” European Economic Review,
41, 385-410.
   State Failure Task Force (1998) “State Failure Task Force Report: Phase II
Findings,” prepared by Daniel C. Esty, Jack A. Goldstone, Ted Robert Gurr, Barbara
Huﬀ, Marc Levy, Geoﬀrey D. Dabelko, Pamelo T, Surko, and Alan N. Unger, 31 July.
   Stock, James and Mark Watson (2002) “Has the Business Cycle Changed and
Why?” forthcoming in the NBER Macroeconomic Annual.
   Taylor, Alan M. (1998) “On the Costs of Inward Looking Development: Price
Distortions, Growth and Divergence in Latin America,” Journal of Economic History,
57, 147-184.
   Tommasi, Mariano, Sebastián Saiegh and Pablo Sanguinetti (2001) “Fiscal
Federalism in Argentina: Policies, Politics and Institutional Reforms,” Economı́a, 1,
157-211.
   Tornell, Aaron and Andres Velasco (1992) “The Tragedy of the Commons and
Economic Growth: Why Does Capital Flow from Poor to Rich Countries?” Journal of
Political Economy,100, 1208-31.
   Voth, Hans-Joachim (2002) “Why was Stock Market Volatility so High During


                                         56
the Great Depression? Evidence from 10 Countries During the Interwar Period.” CEPR
Discussion Paper, DP3254.
   Weisman, Carlos (1987) The Reversal of Development in Argentina, Princeton;
Princeton University Press.
   Williamson, John (1990) Latin American Adjustment: How Much Has Happened?
Washington DC; Institute for International Economics.




                                        57
                                                                    Table 1
                                                       Income, Growth and Institutions
                                                   Excolonies                                    Excolonies
                                    Excolonies    above median Excolonies          Excolonies   above median    Excolonies
                                     Sample       world income without Africa       Sample      world income   without Africa
                                        (1)            (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)            (6)
                                                 Panel A: Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995
                                                                    Two-Stage Least Squares
Average Protection Against            0.96           0.50             0.56
 Expropriation, 1985-95               (0.17)         (0.08)          (0.10)
Initial Constraint on Executive                                                       0.62          0.46           0.57
                                                                                     (0.11)        (0.16)         (0.18)
                                                              First Stage for Measure of Institutions
Log settler mortality                 -0.58          -1.10             -1.21         -0.91           -1.15         -1.25
                                      (0.13)         (0.26)            (0.24)       (0.16)          (0.36)        (0.35)

R-Squared                             0.24            0.44             0.41          0.34           0.33           0.29
Number of Observations                 64              25               37            68             23             35
                                                   Excolonies                                    Excolonies
                                    Excolonies    above median Excolonies          Excolonies   above median    Excolonies
                                     Sample       world income without Africa       Sample      world income   without Africa
                                        (7)            (8)              (9)           (10)          (11)           (12)
                                   Panel B: Dependent variable is average annual growth of GDP per capita, 1970-97

                                                                    Two-Stage Least Squares
Initial Constraint on Executive        0.75           0.50            0.50         1.57             0.98           1.05
                                      (0.22)         (0.32)          (0.31)       (0.71)           (0.60)         (0.58)
Log GDP per capita in 1970                                                         -1.58            -2.04          -1.42
                                                                                  (1.00)           (2.46)         (0.81)
                                                            First Stage for Measure of Institutions
Log settler mortality                 -0.95          -1.35           -1.31         -0.54           -0.97           -0.98
                                      (0.16)         (0.32)          (0.35)       (0.20)          (0.35)          (0.40)
Log GDP per capita in 1970                                                         0.84            1.21            0.63
                                                                                  (0.27)          (0.56)          (0.39)

R-Squared                              0.37           0.44             0.30          0.45           0.53           0.35
Number of Observations                  63             25               35            61             25             34
Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional with one observation per country. In Panel A the
dependent variable is the level of log GDP per capita in 1995 and in Panel B it is the average annual growth rate of
GDP per capita from 1970 to 1997; both are from the World Bank. The independent variable in columns 1, 2 and 3 of
Panel A is average protection against expropriation risk, 1985-95, from Political Risk Services, as used in Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson (2001); a higher score indicates more protection. In all other columns the independent variable,
Initial Constraint on Executive, is average constraint on executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, which is an average of the
Polity score in each year; countries that are still colonies in a particular year are assigned a score of 1. In both panels
the measure of institutions is instrumented using log settler mortality before 1850 (where mortality is per 1000 per
annum with replacement).
The Excolonies Sample includes all former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson
(2001) report data. Alternative samples are excolonies above median world per capita income in 1970, as measured by
Summers-Heston and reported in Barro and Lee (1993), and without Gabon, and excolonies without any African
countries. For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                     Table 2
                                                              Institutions, Macroeconomic Policies and Outcomes
                                                                                     Panel A: OLS regressions

                                                    Excolonies                      Excolonies                          Excolonies
                                     Excolonies    above median     Excolonies     above median       Excolonies       above median
                                      Sample       world income      Sample        world income        Sample          world income
                                         (1)            (2)            (3)               (4)               (5)               (6)
                                                                                       Dependent variable is:
                                     Government     Government      Log Average       Log Average    Real Exchange      Real Exchange
                                     Consumption    Consumption       Inflation         Inflation   Rate Overvaluation Rate Overvaluation


Initial Constraint on Executive        -0.012        -0.009          -0.061            -0.199            -7.66              -1.99
                                      (0.0041)       (0.076)         (0.09)            (0.18)            (2.29)             (2.93)

R-Squared                               0.12           0.06           0.01              0.05              0.21               0.03
Number of Observations                  67             24             69                24                45                 18

                                                                   Excolonies   Excolonies                                                   Excolonies   Excolonies
                                     Excolonies     Excolonies    above median above median           Excolonies         Excolonies         above median above median
                                      Sample         Sample       world income world income            Sample             Sample            world income world income
                                         (7)            (8)            (9)              (10)          (11)                   (12)              (13)          (14)
                                                                                       Dependent variable is:
                                         Standard Deviation GDP per capita Growth, 1970-97                              Largest Output Drop, 1970-97
Initial Constraint on Executive         -0.56          -0.62           -0.50            -0.55            -1.36              -1.38              -1.03        -0.96
                                       (0.12)         (0.15)          (0.14)           (0.18)            (0.41)             (0.52)             (0.64)       (0.82)
Log Initial GDP per capita                             0.21                             0.28                                 0.06                           -0.33
                                                      (0.32)                           (0.56)                               (1.12)                          (2.58)
R-Squared                              0.28           0.29            0.37              0.38             0.16               0.16               0.11         0.11
Number of Observations                  61             61              24                24               61                 61                 24           24
                                                                               Panel B: Instrumenting for institutions

                                                    Excolonies                      Excolonies                          Excolonies
                                     Excolonies    above median     Excolonies     above median       Excolonies       above median
                                      Sample       world income      Sample        world income        Sample          world income
                                         (1)            (2)            (3)              (4)            (5)                   (6)
                                                                                       Dependent variable is:
                                     Government     Government      Log Average       Log Average    Real Exchange      Real Exchange
                                     Consumption    Consumption       Inflation         Inflation   Rate Overvaluation Rate Overvaluation

Initial Constraint on Executive        -0.018        -0.014          -0.085            -0.640           -13.84              -2.98
                                      (0.0071)       (0.012)         (0.16)            (0.33)           (4.00)              (4.82)
Number of Observations                   67            24              69                24               45                 18
                                                                   Excolonies   Excolonies                                                   Excolonies   Excolonies
                                     Excolonies     Excolonies    above median above median           Excolonies         Excolonies         above median above median
                                      Sample         Sample       world income world income            Sample             Sample            world income world income
                                         (7)            (8)            (9)              (10)          (11)                   (12)              (13)          (14)
                                                                                       Dependent variable is:
                                         Standard Deviation GDP per capita Growth, 1970-97                              Largest Output Drop, 1970-97
Initial Constraint on Executive         -0.83          -1.56           -0.88            -1.34            -2.46              -4.71              -2.93        -4.66
                                       (0.20)         (0.58)          (0.26)           (0.55)            (0.73)             (2.06)             (1.23)       (2.53)
Log Initial GDP per capita                             1.44                             1.78                                 4.42                            6.71
                                                      (0.83)                           (1.21)                               (2.94)                          (5.62)
Number of Observations                  61              61             24                24               61                 61                 24           24

Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional regressions with one observation per country. In the first part of each panel the
dependent variables are measures of macroeconomic policy. Log average inflation is the log of average annual inflation in the Consumer Price Index
from 1970 to 1997, from the World Bank. Government Consumption is the average of the ratio of real government "consumption" expenditure to real
GDP from 1970 to 1989, from Barro and Lee (1993). Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation is an index of real overvaluation of the official exchange rate
during 1960-98, constructed by Easterly and Levine (2002) using the methodology of Dollar (1992). In the second part of both panels, the dependent
variables are the standard deviation of the average annual growth rate of GDP from 1970 to 1997, and the lowest annual growth rate of GDP per capita
from 1970 to 1997 (with the sign changed so that an output fall is a positive number); both are from the World Bank.

"Initial Constraint on the Executive" is average constraint on executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, which is an average of the Polity score in each year;
countries that are still colonies in a particular year are assigned a score of 1. In both panels we instrument for institutions using log settler mortality
(where mortality is per 1000 with replacement). The Excolonies Sample includes all former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu,
Johnson and Robinson (2001) report data. The alternative sample is excolonies above median world per capita income in 1970, using the Summers-
Heston estimates from Barro and Lee (1993), and without Gabon. For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                     Table 3
                                                                     Volatility and Government Consumption
                                                           Dependent Variable is standard deviation of Growth Rate of real GDP per capita between 1970 and 1997

                                                                                                                                                                         Excolonies
                                                                     Excolonies                       Excolonies                        Excolonies                         above
                                                      Excolonies    above median       Excolonies    above median        Excolonies    above median        Excolonies   median world
                                      Whole World      Sample       world income        Sample       world income         Sample       world income         Sample        income
                                          (1)             (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)               (6)             (7)                  (8)        (9)

                                                                                       Macro and Institutions; not         Macro and Institutions;          Macro and Institutions;
                                                 Just macro variables                 instrumenting for institutions    instrumenting for institutions      instrumenting for both
                                                           Panel A: 1970-1997, without controlling for initial income
Government Consumption                   8.09            8.09          4.90          3.30          4.18              0.63                   1.52              -5.13          -3.81
                                        (2.83)          (3.81)        (6.89)        (3.54)        (3.92)            (4.11)                 (4.84)            (5.19)         (6.23)
Initial Constraint on the Executive                                                  -0.52         -0.46             -0.82                  -0.86             -0.92          -0.94
                                                                                    (0.12)        (0.14)            (0.23)                 (0.28)            (0.25)         (0.32)
R-Squared                                0.08           0.07          0.02          0.29           0.40
Number of Observations                    96             61            25             61            24                61                     24               60             24
                                                               Panel B: 1970-1997, controlling for initial income
Government Consumption                   2.89            5.57          1.48          4.70           5.30             3.35                   5.03              -1.29          -1.92
                                        (2.94)          (4.25)        (7.31)        (3.77)         (4.15)           (5.01)                 (5.81)            (6.48)         (7.28)
Log Initial GDP per capita               -0.82           -0.41         -1.06         0.36           0.51             1.56                   1.95              1.46           1.72
                                        (0.21)          (0.32)        (0.84)        (0.34)         (0.58)           (0.83)                 (1.22)            (0.87)         (1.26)
Initial Constraint on the Executive                                                  -0.61          -0.55            -1.56                  -1.31             -1.59          -1.35
                                                                                    (0.15)         (0.18)           (0.83)                 (0.54)            (0.59)         (0.58)
R-Squared                                0.21           0.10          0.08
Number of Observations                    96              61            25            61             24               61                     24               60             24
                                                    Panel C: 5-year panels, 1970-1997, without controlling for initial income
Government Consumption                   4.53            5.27          1.39          2.22           0.13             -1.82                  -1.78
                                        (2.31)          (3.48)        (2.76)        (3.82)         (3.24)           (4.19)                 (4.71)
Initial Constraint on the Executive                                                  -0.39          -0.23            -0.91                  -0.57
                                                                                    (0.14)         (0.12)           (0.27)                 (0.32)
R-Squared                                0.03           0.02          0.02          0.08            0.06
Number of Countries                       95              61            24            61             24               61                     24
                                                       Panel D: 5-year panels, 1970-1997, controlling for initial income
Government Consumption                   -2.07           -2.58         -2.87         2.04           -2.76            0.74                   -1.86
                                        (2.61)          (3.49)        (5.29)        (3.48)         (5.48)           (4.41)                 (6.20)
Lagged Log GNP per capita                -0.68           -0.35         -0.73         -0.04          -0.65            0.71                   -0.03
                                        (0.13)          (0.23)        (0.45)        (0.33)         (0.58)           (0.58)                 (0.79)
Initial Constraint on the Executive                                                  -0.40          -0.06            -1.35                  -0.56
                                                                                    (0.20)         (0.15)           (0.56)                 (0.48)
R-Squared                                0.13           0.10          0.09          0.08            0.09
Number of Countries                       94              60            24            60             24               60                     24
Standard errors are in parentheses. Panels A and B are cross-sectional regressions with one observation per country; Panels C and D are "5-year" unbalanced panels
(1970-75, 1976-80, 1981-85, 1986-90, 1991-95, 1996-1997) with up to 6 observations per country. Panels C and D include time dummies but not country dummies;
we cluster the errors by country. In all Panels the dependent variable is standard deviation of GDP per capita growth rate over either the whole period (Panels A and
B) or the relevant "5-year" subperiod (Panels C and D). Government Consumption is the average of the ratio of real government "consumption" expenditure to real
GDP from 1970 to 1989, from Barro and Lee (1993). For Panels A and B, in columns 8 and 9, government consumption is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e.,
government consumption 1960-69 for government consumption 1970-89). In Panel B log initial GDP per capita is the Summers-Heston estimate for 1970, from
Barro and Lee (1993). In Panel D lagged log GNP per capita is at the start of each "5-year" period (1970 for 1970-75, etc); using GNP rather than GDP increases
our sample size.

"Initial Constraint on the Executive" is average constraint on executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, which is an average of the Polity score in each year; countries that
are still colonies in a particular year are assigned a score of 1. In all panels we instrument for institutions using log settler mortality (where mortality is per 1000
with replacement). Whole World is the set of countries for which we have data on the outcome and the macroeconomic variable. The Excolonies Sample includes
all former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) report data. The alternative sample is excolonies above median world
income (and without Gabon) in 1970, using the Summers-Heston estimates from Barro and Lee (1993). For more detailed data definitions and sources see
Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                        Table 4
                                                                                Volatility and Inflation
                                                        Dependent Variable is standard deviation of Growth Rate of real GDP per capita, 1970-1997
                                                                                                                                                                      Excolonies
                                                                    Excolonies                         Excolonies                      Excolonies                       above
                                                     Excolonies    above median       Excolonies      above median     Excolonies     above median      Excolonies   median world
                                      Whole World     Sample       world income        Sample         world income      Sample        world income       Sample        income
                                          (1)            (2)             (3)              (4)               (5)            (6)              (7)            (8)            (9)

                                                                                       Macro and Institutions; not        Macro and Institutions;        Macro and Institutions;
                                                 Just macro variables                 instrumenting for institutions   instrumenting for institutions    instrumenting for both
                                                                             Panel A: 1970-1997, without controlling for initial income
Log Average Inflation                    0.30           0.12             0.51            0.11          0.41             0.10           0.34              -0.14            0.42
                                        (0.17)         (0.19)           (0.17)          (0.16)        (0.14)           (0.17)         (0.16)             (0.42)          (0.35)
Initial Constraint on the Executive                                                     -0.56          -0.42           -0.83          -0.66              -0.86            -0.62
                                                                                        (0.12)        (0.12)           (0.21)         (0.23)             (0.22)          (0.34)
R-Squared                                0.03           0.01             0.30           0.29           0.55
Number of Observations                    96             61               24             61             24              61             24                  48             19
                                                                               Panel B: 1970-1997, controlling for initial income
Log Average Inflation                    0.21           0.17             0.48           0.09          0.41            -0.04        0.33                  -0.07            0.25
                                        (0.16)         (0.19)           (0.17)        (0.17)         (0.14)          (0.23)       (0.19)                 (0.48)          (0.48)
Log Initial GDP per capita              -0.88          -0.63             -0.55          0.19          0.33             1.47        1.29                   1.25            1.35
                                        (0.19)         (0.29)           (0.46)        (0.32)         (0.48)          (0.88)       (0.96)                 (0.74)          (1.01)
Initial Constraint on the Executive                                                    -0.62          -0.48           -1.57       -1.00                  -1.45            -1.06
                                                                                      (0.15)         (0.16)          (0.61)       (0.45)                 (0.51)          (0.63)
R-Squared                                0.22           0.08             0.35          0.29           0.56
Number of Observations                    96             61               24            61             24              61          24                      48             19
                                                                   Panel C: 5-year panels, 1970-1997, without controlling for initial income
Log Average Inflation                    0.33           0.16          0.33             0.13          0.27            0.11            0.22
                                        (0.10)         (0.12)        (0.16)          (0.12)         (0.15)         (0.12)          (0.16)
Initial Constraint on the Executive                                                   -0.40          -0.27          -0.64           -0.47
                                                                                     (0.09)         (0.07)         (0.15)          (0.16)
R-Squared                                0.11           0.12          0.19            0.18           0.23
Number of Countries                       96             61            24              61             24             61              24
                                                                      Panel D: 5-year panels, 1970-1997, controlling for initial income
Log Average Inflation                    0.16           0.17          0.28           0.057           0.27            0.19            0.25
                                        (0.11)         (0.12)        (0.18)          (0.20)         (0.17)         (0.13)          (0.17)
Lagged Log GNP per capita               -0.48          -0.30          -0.28            0.18          -0.01           0.54            0.52
                                        (0.09)         (0.16)        (0.20)          (0.11)         (0.19)         (0.40)          (0.45)
Initial Constraint on the Executive                                                   -0.43          -0.26          -1.04           -0.78
                                                                                     (0.13)        (0.072)         (0.40)          (0.37)
R-Squared                                0.17           0.14          0.20            0.19           0.23
Number of Countries                       96             61            24              61             24             61              24

Standard errors are in parentheses. Panels A and B are cross-sectional regressions with one observation per country; Panels C and D are "5-year" unbalanced panels
(1970-75, 1976-80, 1981-85, 1986-90, 1991-95, 1996-1997) with up to 6 observations per country. Panels C and D include time dummies but not country dummies;
we cluster the errors by country. In all Panels the dependent variable is standard deviation of GDP per capita growth rate over either the whole period (Panels A and B)
or the relevant "5-year" subperiod (Panels C and D). In Panels A and B log average inflation is the log of average annual inflation in the Consumer Price Index from
1970 to 1997, from the World Bank; in Panels B and C we use the "5-year" subperiod values of the same variable. In Panels A and B, columns 8 and 9, log average
inflation is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., log average inflation over 1960-69). In Panel B log initial GDP per capita is the Summers-Heston estimate for
1970, from Barro and Lee (1993). In Panel D lagged log GNP per capita is at the start of each "5-year" period (1970 for 1970-75, etc); using GNP rather than GDP
increases our sample size.
"Initial Constraint on the Executive" is average constraint on executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, which is an average of the Polity score in each year; countries that are
still colonies in a particular year are assigned a score of 1. In all panels we instrument for institutions using log settler mortality (where mortality is per 1000 with
replacement). Whole World is the set of countries for which we have data on the outcome and the macroeconomic variable. The Excolonies Sample includes all
former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) report data. The alternative sample is excolonies above median world per
capita income in 1970, using the Summers-Heston estimates from Barro and Lee (1993), and without Gabon. For more detailed data definitions and sources see
Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                         Table 5
                                                                    Volatility and Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation

                                                           Dependent Variable is standard deviation of Growth Rate of real GDP per capita between 1970 and 1997
                                                                      Excolonies                         Excolonies                        Excolonies               Excolonies
                                                        Excolonies above median          Excolonies above median           Excolonies above median Excolonies above median
                                        Whole World      Sample      world income          Sample       world income        Sample       world income       Sample world income
                                            (1)             (2)              (3)           (4)            (5)              (6)              (7)           (8)           (9)

                                                                                       Macro and Institutions; not        Macro and Institutions;       Macro and Institutions;
                                                    Just macro variables              instrumenting for institutions   instrumenting for institutions   instrumenting for both
                                                              Panel A: 1970-1997, without controlling for initial income
Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation           0.025           0.028         0.031         0.020          0.024           0.015               0.018         0.013          0.058
                                         (0.0060)        (0.0059)       (0.016)       (0.006)        (0.013)         (0.0078)            (0.016)        (0.03)         (0.05)
Initial Constraint on the Executive                                                     -0.30          -0.49           -0.49               -0.88         -0.62          -0.82
                                                                                       (0.10)         (0.15)          (0.21)              (0.31)        (0.44)         (0.38)
R-Squared                                  0.19            0.35          0.19          0.47           0.51
Number of Observations                      73              44            18             44             18              44                  18            32             16

                                                                Panel B: 1970-1997, controlling for initial income
Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation          0.019           0.026        0.032         0.021          0.023          0.012                 0.013           0.027         0.058
                                          (0.006)         (0.006)     (0.016)       (0.006)        (0.014)         (0.011)               (0.020)        (0.028)       (0.057)
Log Initial GDP per capita                  -0.71           -0.15       -0.54         0.26           0.18            0.93                  1.09           1.07          0.94
                                           (0.17)          (0.23)      (0.59)        (0.25)         (0.54)          (0.62)                (0.98)         (0.71)        (1.15)
Initial Constraint on the Executive                                                   -0.37          -0.51           -0.98                 -1.16          -0.85         -1.08
                                                                                     (0.12)         (0.18)          (0.51)                (0.51)         (0.63)        (0.62)
R-Squared                                  0.36            0.36        0.23           0.48          0.52
Number of Observations                      73              44           18            44             18              44                    18            32             16
                                                      Panel C: 5-year panels, 1970-1997, without controlling for initial income
Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation           0.012           0.013             0.016       0.010           0.014           0.0080            0.012
                                         (0.0030)        (0.0031)          (0.0058)     (0.0030)       (0.0057)         (0.0034)         (0.0064)
Initial Constraint on the Executive                                                       -0.24          -0.33           -0.360           -0.550
                                                                                         (0.08)         (0.10)           (0.13)           (0.17)
R-Squared                                  0.21            0.21             0.27          0.24           0.34
Number of Countries                         73              44               18            44             18               44               18

                                                          Panel D: 5-year panels, 1970-1997, controlling for initial income
Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation          0.011           0.013         0.016         0.010         0.014             0.008               0.012
                                         (0.0029)        (0.0031)      (0.0052)      (0.0029)      (0.0052)         (0.0035)             (0.0057)
Lagged Log GNP per capita                  -0.43           -0.19         -0.48         -0.01          -0.23            0.17               0.0025
                                          (0.07)          (0.11)        (0.24)         (0.11)        (0.22)           (0.26)              (0.40)
Initial Constraint on the Executive                                                     -0.24         -0.28            -0.49               -0.55
                                                                                       (0.09)        (0.09)           (0.30)              (0.33)
R-Squared                                  0.22            0.23          0.31          0.25          0.35
Number of Countries                         73              44            18             44            18               44                  18

Standard errors are in parentheses. Panels A and B are cross-sectional regressions with one observation per country. Panels C and D are "5-year" unbalanced panels
(1970-75, 1976-80, 1981-85, 1986-90, 1991-95, 1996-1997) with up to 6 observations per country. Panels C and D include time dummies but not country dummies;
we cluster the errors by country. In all Panels the dependent variable is standard deviation of GDP per capita growth rate over either the whole period (Panels A and B)
or the relevant "5-year" subperiod (Panels C and D). In Panels A and B, Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation is an index of real overvaluation of the official exchange
rate, 1970-98, constructed by Easterly and Levine (2002) applying the methodology of Dollar (1992); in Panels C and D we use the "5-year" period values of the same
variable. In columns 8 and 9 of Panels A and B we instrument overvaluation 1970-98 using its lagged value 1960-69. In Panel B log initial GDP per capita is the
Summers-Heston estimate for 1970, from Barro and Lee (1993). In Panel D lagged log GNP per capita is at the start of each "5-year" period (1970 for 1970-75, etc);
using GNP rather than GDP increases our sample size.

"Initial Constraint on the Executive" is average constraint on executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, which is an average of the Polity score in each year; countries that are
still colonies in a particular year are assigned a score of 1. In all panels we instrument for institutions using log settler mortality (where mortality is per 1000 with
replacement). Whole World is the set of countries for which we have data on the outcome and the macroeconomic variable. The Excolonies Sample includes all
former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) report data. The alternative sample is excolonies above median world income
in 1970, using the Summers-Heston estimates from Barro and Lee (1993), and without Gabon. For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                    Table 6
                                                         Worst Output Performance and the Three Macroeconomic Variables
                                                       Dependent Variable is largest annual drop in real GDP per capita between 1970 and 1997
                                                                                                                        Excolonies
                                                      Excolonies                          Excolonies                      above                        Excolonies
                                       Excolonies    above median          Excolonies    above median    Excolonies    median world      Excolonies   above median
                                        Sample       world income           Sample       world income     Sample         income           Sample      world income
                                           (1)             (2)                (3)              (4)           (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)
                                      Cross-section, 1970-1997, without controlling for initial
                                                             income                                     Cross-section, 1970-1997, controlling for initial income

                                         Macro and Institutions;             Macro and Institutions;       Macro and Institutions;        Macro and Institutions;
                                      instrumenting for institutions         instrumenting for both     instrumenting for institutions    instrumenting for both
                                                                       Panel A: Macroeconomic Variable is Government Consumption
Government Consumption                     2.29            8.75               -16.60      -23.99        10.67       22.17          -6.04                  -17.26
                                         (14.67)         (22.54)             (18.51)     (30.13)       (17.74)     (27.06)       (22.30)                 (34.60)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                                                                4.78       7.46          4.00                    6.12
                                                                                                        (2.93)      (5.67)        (2.99)                  (5.96)
Initial Constraint on the Executive       -2.42           -2.81                -2.74       -3.27         -4.71       -4.54         -4.58                   -4.76
                                         (0.83)          (1.32)               (0.88)      (1.54)        (2.08)      (2.51)        (2.03)                  (2.75)
Number of Observations                     61              24                   60          24            61          24            60                      24
                                                                        Panel B: Macroeconomic Variable is Log Average Inflation
Log Average Inflation                     0.75            1.35               -0.78        -0.45         0.37        1.31                   -0.62           -0.31
                                         (0.60)          (0.78)             (1.37)       (1.38)       (0.80)       (0.92)                 (1.70)          (2.05)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                                                              4.21        4.78                   4.30            5.18
                                                                                                      (3.06)       (4.69)                 (2.61)          (4.37)
Initial Constraint on the Executive       -2.45           -2.07              -2.71        -2.34        -4.59        -3.32                  -4.84           -4.15
                                         (0.73)          (1.11)             (0.70)       (1.34)       (2.12)       (2.20)                 (1.80)          (2.72)
Number of Observations                     61              24                 49           20           61           24                     48              19

                                                             Panel C: Macroeconomic Variable is Overvaluation of Real Exchange Rate
Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation         0.0056          0.056          0.028          0.22         -0.011       0.036          0.09                       0.22
                                         (0.032)         (0.06)         (0.10)       (0.18)        (0.053)      (0.077)        (0.10)                     (0.21)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                                                            5.04        3.87          4.72                       3.46
                                                                                                    (3.11)       (3.77)        (2.64)                     (4.13)
Initial Constraint on the Executive       -2.17           -2.68          -1.98        -2.51          -4.86        -3.68         -2.98                      -3.47
                                         (0.86)          (1.16)         (1.59)       (1.32)         (2.56)       (1.96)        (2.34)                     (2.23)
Number of Observations                     44              18             32            16             44          18            32                         16
Standard errors are in parentheses. All Panels are cross-sectional regressions with one observation per country. In all Panels the dependent variable is
the lowest annual growth rate of GDP per capita from 1970 to 1997 (with the sign changed so that an output fall is a positive number), from the World
Bank. Log average inflation (in Panel A) is the log of average annual inflation in the Consumer Price Index from 1970 to 1997, from the World Bank.
In columns 3, 4, 7 and 8, log average inflation is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., log average inflation over 1960-69).
Government Consumption (Panel B) is the average of the ratio of real government "consumption" expenditure to real GDP from 1970 to 1989, from
Barro-Lee. In columns 3, 4, 7, and 8, government consumption is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., government consumption 1960-69 for
government consumption 1970-89). Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation (Panel C) is an index of real overvaluation of the official exchange rate during
1960-98, constructed by Easterly and Levine (2002) using the methodology of Dollar (1992). In columns 3, 4, 7, and 8, the real exchange rate
overvaluation measure is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., real overvaluation 1960-69 for real overvaluation 1970-98). Log initial GDP per
capita is the Summers Heston estimate for 1970, from Barro and Lee (1993).
"Initial Constraint on the Executive" is average constraint on executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, which is an average of the Polity score in each year;
countries that are still colonies in a particular year are assigned a score of 1. In all panels we instrument for institutions using log settler mortality (where
mortality is per 1000 with replacement). The Excolonies Sample includes all former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu, Johnson and
Robinson (2001) report data. The alternative sample is excolonies above median world income in 1970, using the Summers-Heston estimates from
Barro and Lee (1993), and without Gabon. For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                          Table 7
                                                                       Growth and the Three Macroeconomic Variables
                                                                 Dependent Variable is Average Annual Growth Rate of Real GDP per capita, 1970-97

                                                      Excolonies                      Excolonies above                      Excolonies                        Excolonies
                                       Excolonies    above median        Excolonies     median world       Excolonies      above median      Excolonies      above median
                                        Sample       world income         Sample          income            Sample         world income       Sample         world income
                                           (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)             (5)                (6)             (7)               (8)
                                        Cross-section, 1970-1997, without controlling for initial
                                                               income                                        Cross-section, 1970-1997, controlling for initial income
                                         Macro and Institutions;            Macro and Institutions;           Macro and Institutions;           Macro and Institutions;
                                      instrumenting for institutions        instrumenting for both         instrumenting for institutions       instrumenting for both

                                                                        Panel A: Macroeconomic Variable is Government Consumption
Government Consumption                   -0.23           -2.11             0.038          3.64             -3.19        -6.90                  -4.31              1.00
                                         (4.58)          (7.03)            (5.51)        (8.86)           (6.07)        (8.57)                 (7.55)           (10.56)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                                                                 -1.68        -2.67                  -1.65             -2.40
                                                                                                          (1.00)        (1.80)                 (1.01)            (1.82)
Initial Constraint on the Executive       0.76            0.58              0.76          0.66             1.57          1.20                   1.53              1.24
                                         (0.26)          (0.41)            (0.26)        (0.45)           (0.71)        (0.80)                 (0.69)            (0.84)
Number of Observations                     61              24                60            24               61           24                     60                24
                                                                         Panel B: Macroeconomic Variable is Log Average Inflation
Log Average Inflation                    -0.36           -0.34             0.21          -0.09           -0.23           -0.30                  0.15              0.20
                                         (0.18)          (0.23)           (0.47)         (0.56)          (0.27)         (0.31)                 (0.57)            (0.86)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                                                               -1.45           -1.99                 -1.24             -2.18
                                                                                                         (1.02)         (1.59)                 (0.87)            (1.83)
Initial Constraint on the Executive       0.76            0.34             0.73           0.46            1.50           0.93                   1.32              1.17
                                         (0.22)          (0.29)           (0.24)         (0.54)          (0.71)         (0.75)                 (0.60)            (1.14)
Number of Observations                     61              25               49             49             61              24                    48                19
                                                                 Panel C: Macroeconomic Variable is Overvaluaton of Real Exchange Rate
Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation         -0.049           -0.018          0.013       0.0072           0.0010           -0.007                -0.0052           0.0094
                                        (0.012)          (0.025)         (0.041)      (0.082)          (0.020)         (0.033)                (0.038)           (0.105)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                                                              -1.79            -2.09                 -1.38             -2.49
                                                                                                        (1.17)          (1.62)                 (0.96)            (2.10)
Initial Constraint on the Executive       0.64             0.46            0.66         0.56             1.60            1.00                   0.96              1.25
                                         (0.33)           (0.49)          (0.66)       (0.61)           (0.96)          (0.84)                 (0.85)            (1.13)
Number of Observations                     44               18              32           16               44              18                     32                16

Standard errors are in parentheses. All Panels are cross-sectional regressions with one observation per country. In all Panels the dependent variable is the average
annual GDP per capita growth rate over 1970-97. Log average inflation (in Panel A) is the log of average annual inflation in the Consumer Price Index from 1970 to
1997, from the World Bank. In columns 3, 4, 7 and 8, log average inflation is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., log average inflation over 1960-69).
Government Consumption (Panel B) is the average of the ratio of real government "consumption" expenditure to real GDP from 1970 to 1989, from Barro-Lee. In
columns 3, 4, 7, and 8, government consumption is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., government consumption 1960-69 for government consumption 1970-
89). Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation (Panel C) is an index of real overvaluation of the official exchange rate during 1960-97, constructed by Easterly and Levine
(2002) using the methodology of Dollar (1992). In columns 3, 4, 7, and 8, real overvaluation is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., real overvaluation 1960-69
for real overvaluation 1970-98). Log initial GDP per capita is the Summers Heston estimate for 1970, from Barro-Lee.
"Initial Constraint on the Executive" is average constraint on executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, which is an average of the Polity score in each year; countries that
are still colonies in a particular year are assigned a score of 1. In all regressions we instrument for institutions using log settler mortality (where mortality is per 1000
with replacement). The Excolonies Sample includes all former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) report data. The
alternative sample is excolonies above median world income in 1970, using the Summers-Heston estimates from Barro and Lee (1993), and without Gabon. For
more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                                            Table 8
                                                                                          Institutions and Volatility: Other Controls

                                                                     Dependent Variable is standard deviation of Growth Rate of real GDP per capita

                                                                                                                                               Standard       Standard
                                                                                                                                               deviation   deviation terms
                                         All macro       All macro     Average Years Average Years                                          terms of trade   of trade x      Without    Without
                                         variables       variables      of Schooling  of Schooling        Money/GDP         Money/GDP       x export share export share      Outliers   Outliers
                                            (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)               (5)               (6)             (7)             (8)           (9)       (10)
                                                                                     Panel A: Cross-Section, 1970-97; instrumenting for institutions
Initial Constraint on the Executive        -0.48            -1.29           -1.54           -1.94             -0.77             -1.59            -0.74          -1.30         -0.71      -1.41
                                          (0.21)           (0.84)          (1.24)          (1.57)            (0.33)            (0.88)           (0.22)         (0.63)        (0.17)     (0.57)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                  -1.63                           0.94                                0.08                            1.04                     1.35
                                                           (1.25)                          (0.77)                              (1.19)                          (0.85)                   (0.82)

p-value for macro variables               [0.25]           [0.17]

Average Years of Schooling in 1970                                          0.60            0.55
                                                                           (0.72)          (0.87)
Log Average Money/GDP Ratio                                                                                   -0.21             1.46
                                                                                                             (0.84)            (0.99)
p-value for terms of trade variables                                                                                                           [0.006]         [0.18]

Number of Observations                      44              44               47              47                61                61               60             60            59         59
                                                                                     Panel B: 5-year panels, 1970-97; instrumenting for institutions
Initial Constraint on the Executive        -0.88            -1.26           -1.54           -1.38             -0.65             -1.04            -0.87          -1.24         -0.58      -0.86
                                          (0.30)           (0.55)          (1.09)          (0.86)            (0.20)            (0.48)           (0.22)         (0.50)        (0.13)     (0.43)
Lagged log GNP per capita                                   0.71                            -0.22                               0.54                            0.55                     0.28
                                                           (0.58)                          (0.44)                              (0.41)                          (0.50)                   (0.25)
p-value for macro variables               [0.99]           [0.69]

Average Years of Schooling                                                  0.61            0.61
                                                                           (0.57)          (0.54)
Log Average Money/GDP Ratio                                                                                   -0.07             -0.11
                                                                                                             (0.44)            (0.51)
Terms of trade shock                                                                                                                            28.88          19.08
 x export/GDP share                                                                                                                            (25.07)        (21.96)

Number of Countries                         58              58               47              47                61                61               60             60            59         59

Standard errors are in parentheses. Panel A reports cross-sectional regressions with one observation per country; Panel B reports "5-year" unbalanced panels (1970-75, 1976-80, 1981-85,
1986-90, 1991-95, 1996-1997) with up to 6 observations per country. Panel B includes time dummies but not country dummies; we cluster the errors by country. In all Panels the
dependent variable is standard deviation of real GDP per capita growth rate over either the whole period (Panel A) or the relevant "5-year" subperiod (Panel B). In Panel B log initial GDP
per capita is the Summers-Heston estimate for 1970, from Barro and Lee (1993). In Panel B lagged log GNP per capita is at the start of each "5-year" period (1970 for 1970-75, etc); using
GNP rather than GDP increases our sample size.
Columns 1 and 2 include: log average inflation, which is the log of average annual inflation in the Consumer Price Index from 1970 to 1997 (Panel A) and the log of average annual CPI
inflation in each "5-year" period (Panel B), from the World Bank; and Government Consumption, which is the average of the ratio of real government "consumption" expenditure to real
GDP from 1970 to 1989 (Panel A) and the average in each "5-year" period for which it is available (Panel B), from Barro and Lee (1993); and Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation (Panel A
only), which is an index of real overvaluation of the official exchange rate during 1970-98, constructed by Easterly and Levine (2002) using the methodology of Dollar (1992). Columns 3
and 4 include average schooling years in the total population over age 25 for 1970 (Panel A) and each "5-year" period for which it is available (Panel B), from Barro and Lee (1993).
Columns 5 and 6 include the log of average money-GDP ratio for 1970-97 (Panel A) and for each "5-year" period (Panel B), from the World Bank. Columns 7 and 8 include the interaction
of standard deviation of terms of trade shocks in 1970-89 times export-GDP ratio in 1970 (Panel A) and the standard deviation of terms of trade shocks times export-GDP ratio in each "5-
year" period (Panel B), from Barro and Lee (1993). The main effects are included in the regressions but not reported to save space. Columns 9 and 10 drop Rwanda and Gabon.
"Initial Constraint on the Executive" is average constraint on executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, which is an average of the Polity score in each year; countries that are still colonies in a
particular year are assigned a score of 1. In both panels we instrument for institutions using log settler mortality (where mortality is per 1000 with replacement). All regressions use our
Excolonies Sample which includes all former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) report data. For more detailed data definitions and sources
see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                              Table 9
                                                                     Institutions and Volatility: Other Controls and Samples
                                                                                                               Share of        Share of
                                         Shareholders'   Shareholders'                                     primary exports primary exports
                                            Rights          Rights     Creditors' Rights Creditors' Rights     in GDP          in GDP          Latitude        Latitude
                                              (1)             (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)             (7)            (8)
Initial Constraint on the Executive          -1.18           -2.18            -0.92             -1.79            -0.82           -1.65           -0.77          -1.48
                                            (0.49)          (1.33)           (0.33)            (0.95)           (0.21)          (0.67)          (0.25)         (0.62)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                   1.41                               1.81                             1.58                          1.42
                                                            (1.18)                             (1.41)                           (0.96)                         (0.81)
Shareholders' Rights                         0.499          0.875
                                            (0.42)          (0.83)
Creditors' Rights                                                            -0.13             0.42
                                                                             (0.23)            (0.56)
Share of exports of primary products                                                                            1.65            (0.09)
 in GNP in 1970                                                                                                 (2.40)          (3.36)
Latitude                                                                                                                                         1.08          -1.43
                                                                                                                                                (2.19)         (2.63)
Number of Observations                        23              23               22                22               60              60              61             61
                                                                        Just former     Just former                                        Just countries Just countries
                                         Just Common Just Common colonies without colonies without                                         below median below median
                                         Law Countries Law Countries the Neo-Europes the Neo-Europes Without Africa         Without Africa world income world income
                                              (9)             (10)             (11)              (12)             (13)            (14)            (15)           (16)
Initial Constraint on the Executive          -0.76           -1.34            -0.99             -1.77            -0.70           -1.24           -1.46          -1.03
                                            (0.24)          (0.83)           (0.36)            (0.83)           (0.24)          (0.47)          (0.77)         (0.77)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                   1.11                              1.40                             1.41                           -1.04
                                                            (1.18)                             (0.89)                           (0.64)                         (0.81)
Number of Observations                        20               20              57                57              34               34              36              36
Standard errors are in parentheses. Cross-sectional regressions with one observation per country. The dependent variable is standard deviation of real GDP per
capita growth rate over 1970-97. Log initial GDP per capita is the Summers Heston estimate for 1970, from Barro-Lee.
Columns 1 and 2 include the measure of "anti-director rights" (i.e., shareholders' rights relative to directors) from La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1998), where a higher score indicates stronger rights for shareholders. Columns 3 and 4 include a measure of creditor rights, in which a higher score
indicates stronger rights for creditors, from La Porta et al (1998). Columns 5 and 6 include the share of primary exports in GDP in 1970 from Sachs and Warner
(1997). Columns 7 and 8 include the absolute normalized value of distance from the equator (i.e., a standardized measure of latitude), in which a higher value
indicates that a country's capital is further from the equator.
Columns 9 and 10 include just Common Law countries (British legal origin), from La Porta et al (1998). Columns 11 and 12 include just former European
colonies, but drop the USA, Canada, Australia and New Zealand. Columns 13 and 14 drop all countries in Africa. Columns 15 and 16 include just countries
below the median world per capita income level in 1970, using the Summers-Heston measure from Barro and Lee (1993).
"Initial Constraint on the Executive" is average constraint on executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, which is an average of the Polity score in each year; countries
that are still colonies in a particular year are assigned a score of 1. In all regressions we instrument for institutions using log settler mortality (where mortality is
per 1000 with replacement). All regressions use our Excolonies Sample which includes all former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu, Johnson
and Robinson (2001) report data. For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                            Table 10
                                      Institutions and Economic Stability: Results by Decade
                                                                     Dependent Variable is
                                      Standard deviation of Growth   Worst Drop Output (GDP per     Growth of Real GDP per
                                      Rate of real GDP per capita              capita)                      capita
                                          (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)             (5)            (6)
                                                               Panel A: Cross-Section for 1970s
Initial Constraint on the Executive      -1.06          -1.92          -1.94        -3.45             0.30          0.43
                                         (0.37)         (0.96)        (0.86)        (2.14)           (0.30)        (0.66)
Log Initial GDP per capita                              1.72                        2.99                           -0.25
                                                        (1.35)                      (3.02)                         (0.93)
Number of Observations                    54             54             54           54               54            54
                                                               Panel B: Cross-Section for 1980s
Initial Constraint on the Executive      -0.70          -1.90          -2.01        -5.30             0.86          1.68
                                         (0.26)         (0.78)        (0.71)        (2.21)           (0.30)        (0.77)
Log Initial GDP per capita                              2.30                         6.30                          -1.57
                                                        (1.07)                      (3.04)                         (1.06)
Number of Observations                    54             54             54           54               54            54
                                                               Panel C: Cross-Section for 1990s
Initial Constraint on the Executive      -0.46          -0.85          -1.46        -3.13             0.81          1.63
                                         (0.25)         (0.70)        (0.57)        (1.90)           (0.32)        (1.07)
Log Initial GDP per capita                              0.71                        2.97                           -1.47
                                                        (0.97)                      (2.66)                         (1.50)
Number of Observations                    47             47             47           47               47            47

Standard errors are in parentheses. All regressions are cross-sectional regressions with one observation per country. In
columns 1 and 2 the dependent variable is standard deviation of GDP per capita growth rate, from the World Bank. In
columns 3 and 4 the dependent variable is the lowest annual growth rate of GDP per capita (with the sign changed so that
an output fall is a positive number), from the World Bank. In columns 5 and 6 the dependent variable is the average annual
GDP per capita growth rate. In Panel A we use outcomes for 1970-79, in Panel B we use outcomes for 1980-89, and in
Panel C we use outcomes for 1990-97. Log initial GDP per capita is the Summers-Heston estimate for 1970 (Panel A),
1980 (Panel B), and 1990 (Panel C), from Barro and Lee (1993).
"Initial Constraint on the Executive" is average constraint on executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, which is an average of the
Polity score in each year; countries that are still colonies in a particular year are assigned a score of 1. In all panels we
instrument for institutions using log settler mortality (where mortality is per 1000 with replacement). All regressions use
our Excolonies Sample, including all former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson
(2001) report data. For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                             Table 11
                                                                            Global Shocks and Institutions: Panel Results

                                         No Fixed Effects   Fixed Effects    No Fixed Effects     Fixed Effects   No Fixed Effects     Fixed Effects   No Fixed Effects   Fixed Effects

                                              (1)               (2)               (3)                (4)             (5)                   (6)              (7)               (8)
                                                                                                Dependent Variable is:

                                             Standard deviation of Growth Rate of real GDP per capita                                Growth of Real GDP per capita

                                       Using World Growth as World          Using World Trade as World            Using World Growth as                 Using World Trade as
                                             Economy varaible                    Economy variable                 World Economy varaible               World Economy variable
Initial Constraint on the Executive         -0.59                               -0.60                               0.74                                  0.73
                                           (0.13)                              (0.14)                              (0.23)                                (0.23)
Initial Constraint on the Executive         -15.67            -11.11            0.021               0.012            -38.66              -40.19            -0.01            -6.36
 x world economy variable                  (19.86)           (18.63)           (0.067)             (0.092)          (17.34)             (18.79)           (0.10)           (47.51)

Number of Countries                            71               71                 71                 71               71                  71               71                71


Standard errors are in parentheses. Dependent Variable is standard deviation of GDP per capita growth rate in "5-year" periods (1970-75, 1976-80, 1981-85,
1986-90, 1991-95, 1996-97) in columns 1 through 4 and growth rates of GDP per capita in "5-year" periods in columns 5 through 8, both from the World Bank.
World growth is annual change in gross domestic product, market exchange rate weighted, from the IMF website. World trade growth is trade volume of goods
and services, from the IMF. Both world growth and world trade growth are annual growth rates averaged over the relevant "5-year" period. All regressions
include period dummies. Odd numbered columns do not use fixed effects and cluster the errors by country. Even numbered columns use fixed effects.
Initial Constraint on the Executive is average constraint on executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, which is an average of the Polity score in each year; countries that
are still colonies in a particular year are assigned a score of 1. In all regressions we instrument for institutions using log settler mortality (where mortality is
deaths per annum per 1000 with replacement). All regressions use our Excolonies Sample, which includes all former colonies of European Powers for which
Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) report data. For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                     Table 12
                                                                    Institutions, State Failures and Volatility
                                           (1)            (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)              (6)            (7)            (8)
                                                       Panel A: Dependent Variable is State Failure Dummy
                                         State Failure in 1970-98      State Failure in 1970-79       State Failure in 1980-89      State Failure in 1990-97
Initial Constraint on the Executive       -0.11          -0.058          -0.019        0.047           -0.060         -0.032          -0.072        -0.031
                                         (0.054)         (0.12)         (0.050)        (0.12)         (0.039)        (0.086)         (0.039)        (0.11)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                -0.11                         -0.13                         -0.050                        -0.068
                                                         (0.17)                        (0.17)                         (0.12)                        (0.15)
Number of Observations                     61             61             61            61             61                61             53             53
                                                      Panel B: Cross-Section for 1970-97, dependent variable:
                                      Standard deviation of Growth   Worst Drop Output (GNP per      Growth of Real GNP per
                                       Rate of real GNP per capita             capita)                       capita
Initial Constraint on the Executive       -0.83           -1.56          -2.19          -4.56           0.73            1.54
                                         (0.23)          (0.60)         (0.78)         (2.06)         (0.25)          (0.72)
State Failure Dummy                      0.003            0.07           2.36           2.58           -0.33           -0.40
                                         (0.54)          (0.67)         (1.87)         (2.31)         (0.59)          (0.81)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                1.45                          4.71                           -1.62
                                                         (0.82)                        (2.83)                         (0.98)
Number of Observations                     61             61             61            61             61                61
                                                      Panel C: 5-year Panels for 1970-97, dependent variable:
                                      Standard deviation of Growth   Worst Drop Output (GNP per      Growth of Real GNP per
                                       Rate of real GNP per capita             capita)                       capita
Initial Constraint on the Executive        -0.60            -1.06          -1.27          -2.32            0.66           1.05
                                          (0.14)           (0.41)         (0.34)         (0.81)          (0.23)         (0.41)
State Failure Dummy                        1.24             1.25           3.88            3.89           -2.28          -2.28
                                          (0.70)           (0.73)         (1.20)         (1.33)          (0.63)         (0.67)
Lagged log GNP per capita                                   0.60                           1.38                          -0.51
                                                           (0.40)                        (0.78)                         (0.40)
Number of Countries                          61              61             61             61              61             61
Standard errors are in parentheses. Panels A and B are cross-sectional regressions with one observation per country. Panel C is "5-year" unbalanced panels
(1970-75, 1976-80, 1981-85, 1986-90, 1991-95, 1996-1997) with up to 6 observations per country. Panel C includes time dummies but not country
dummies; we cluster the errors by country. In Panel A the dependent variable is a dummy variable equal to one if the country experience a "State Failure",
i.e., a civil war, breakdown of social order, major ethnic conflict or major regime transition as defined by the State Failure Project. For Panel A, the dummy
equals one if there was a State Failure in 1970-98 (columns 1 and 2), in 1970-79 (columns 3 and 4), in 1980-89 (columns 5 and 6), and in 1990-97
(columns 7 and 8).
In Panels B and C, columns 1 and 2, the dependent variable is standard deviation of GDP per capita growth rate in 1970-97 (Panel B) and in each "5-year"
period (Panel C), from the World Bank. In Panels B and C, columns 3 and 4, the dependent variable is the lowest annual growth rate of GDP per capita
(with the sign changed so that an output fall is a positive number) in 1970-97 (Panel B) and each "5-year" period (Panel C), from the World Bank. In
Panels B and C, columns 5 and 6, the dependent variable is the average annual GDP per capita growth rate in 1970-97 (Panel B) and each "5-year" period
(Panel C).
Log initial GDP per capita is the Summers-Heston estimate for 1970 (Panels A and B), from Barro and Lee (1993). In Panel C lagged log GNP per capita
is at the start of each "5-year" period (1970 for 1970-75, etc); using GNP rather than GDP increases our sample size. "Initial Constraint on the Executive"
is average constraint on executive in 1950, 1960 and 1970, which is an average of the Polity score in each year; countries that are still colonies in a
particular year are assigned a score of 1. In both panels we instrument for institutions using log settler mortality (where mortality is per 1000 with
replacement).
All regressions use our Excolonies Sample which includes all former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001)
report data. For more detailed data definitions and sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                                      Appendix Table A1
                                                                                                Variable Definitions and Sources
                      Variable                                                                                Description                                                                                                       Source
Log GDP per capita (PPP) in 1995                         Logarithm of GDP per capita, on Purchasing Power Parity Basis, in 1995.                                                         World Bank, World Development Indicators, CD-Rom, 1999. Data on Suriname is
                                                                                                                                                                                         from the 2000 version of this same source.
Log GDP per capita in 1970                               Logarithm of real GDP per capita (1980 international prices) from Summers Heston dataset v.4.0.                                 Barro-Lee dataset, used in Barro and Lee (1993) and available from the NBER website:
                                                                                                                                                                                         www.nber.org.
Log GDP per capita in 1980                               Logarithm of real GDP per capita (1985 international prices) from Summers Heston dataset v.5.5.                                 Barro-Lee dataset.

Log GDP per capita in 1990                               Logarithm of real GDP per capita (1985 international prices) from Summers Heston dataset v.5.5.                                 Barro-Lee dataset.

Growth Rate of GDP per capita, 1970-98                   Annual GDP growth rate minus annual population growth rate.                                                                     World Bank, World Development Indicators, CD-Rom, 1999.

Standard Deviation of Growth                             Standard deviation of GDP per capita growth rate.                                                                               Calculated from the Growth Rate of GDP per capita. From the World Bank, World
                                                                                                                                                                                         Development Indicators, CD-Rom, 1999.
Worst Output Drop                                        Worst annual GDP per capita growth rate. Sign has been changed so that a negative growth rate is a positive "output drop." Calculated from the Growth Rate of GDP per capita. From the World Bank, World
                                                                                                                                                                                    Development Indicators, CD-Rom, 1999.
Log GNP per capita, 1970, 1975, 1980, 1985, 1990,        Logarithm of GNP per capita                                                                                                     World Bank, World Development Indicators, CD-Rom, 1999. Data on Suriname is
1995                                                                                                                                                                                     from the 2000 version of this same source.
Constraint on Executive in 1950, 1960, 1970, 1990 and A seven category scale, from 1 to 7, with a higher score indicating more constraints. Score of 1 indicates unlimited               Polity IV dataset, downloaded from Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social
intervening years.                                    authority; score of 3 indicates slight to moderate limitations; score of 5 indicates substantial limitations; score of 7 indicates Research. Variable described in Gurr 1997.
                                                      executive parity or subordination. Scores of 2, 4, and 6 indicate intermediate values.

Average Protection against Expropriation Risk, 1985-95 Risk of expropriation of private foreign investment by government, from 0 to 10, where a higher score means less risk. We Dataset obtained directly from Political Risk Services, September 1999. These data
                                                       calculated the mean value for the scores in all years from 1985 to 1995.                                                  were previously used by Knack and Keefer (1995) and were organized in electronic
                                                                                                                                                                                 form by the IRIS Center (University of Maryland). The original compilers of this data
                                                                                                                                                                                 are Political Risk Services.
Constraints on Executive in 1950, 1960, 1970, and        A seven category scale, from 1 to 7, with a higher score indicating more constraints. Score of 1 indicates unlimited               Polity III dataset, downloaded from Inter-University Consortium for Political and Social
1990.                                                    authority; score of 3 indicates slight to moderate limitations; score of 5 indicates substantial limitations; score of 7 indicates Research. Variable described in Gurr 1997.
                                                         execut

Log Average Inflation                                    Log of average annual inflation in the Consumer Price Index from 1970 to 1998.                                                  World Bank, World Development Indicators, CD-Rom, 1999.
Government Consumption                                   Average of the ratio of real government "consumption" expenditure to real GDP from 1970 to 1989.                                Barro-Lee dataset.

Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation                         An index of real overvaluation of the official exchange rate in 1960-97.                                                        Easterly and Levine (2002) using the methodology of Dollar (1992).



Variability of Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation          Standard deviation of an index of real overvaluation of the official exchange rate in 1976-85.                                  Dollar (1992).
Average Years of Schooling                               Average schooling years in the total population over age 25 for 1970                                                            Barro-Lee dataset.
Money/GDP                                                Log of average Money-GDP ratio for 1970-97 (and subperiods where specified)                                                     World Bank, World Development Indicators, CD-Rom, 1999.
Shareholders' Rights                                     An index aggregating the shareholder rights which La Porta et al label as "anti-director rights." The index is formed by        La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny 1998.
                                                         adding 1 when: (1) the country allows shareholders to mail their proxy vote; (2) shareholders are not required to deposit their
                                                         shares prior to the General Shareholders' Meeting; (3) cumulative voting is allowed; (4) an oppressed minorities mechanism
                                                         is in place; or (5) when the minimum percentage of share capital that entitles a shareholder to call for an Extraordinary
                                                         Shareholders' Meeting is less than or equal to 10% (the sample median). The index ranges from 0 to 5.

Creditors' Rights                                        An index aggregating creditor rights. The index is formed by adding 1 when: (1) the country imposes restrictions, such as       La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny 1998.
                                                         creditors' consent or minimum dividends, to file for reorganization; (2) secured creditors are able to gain possession of their
                                                         security once the reorganization petition has been approved (no automatic stay); (3) the debtor does not retain the
                                                         administration of its property pending the resolution of the reorganization; (4) secured creditors are ranked first in the
                                                         distribution of the proceeds that result from the disposition of the assets of a bankrupt firm. The index ranges from 0 to 4.


Standard deviation of terms of trade shocks              Standard deviation of an index of terms of trade shock, 1970-89 (and subperiods where specified)                                Barro-Lee dataset.
Export/GDP                                               Ratio of exports to GDP in 1970 (and other dates where specified)                                                               Barro-Lee dataset.
Share of primary exports in GDP                          Exports of commodities divided by GDP in 1970                                                                                   Sachs-Warner dataset, available on the web. Used in Sachs and Warner (1997).

State Failure                                            Dummy equal to one if there was a civil war, breakdown of social order, major ethnic conflict or major regime transition as State Failure Task Force (1998)
                                                         defined by the State Failure Project.
World Growth                                             Growth rate of World GDP                                                                                                        IMF (online)

World Trade Growth                                       Growth rate of World Trade                                                                                                      IMF (online)

Log Settler Mortality                                    Log of estimated mortality for European settlers during the early period of European colonization (before 1850). Settler       Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001), based on Curtin (1989) and other sources.
                                                         mortality is calculated from the mortality rates of European-born soldiers, sailors and bishops when stationed in colonies. It
                                                         measures the effects of local diseases on people without inherited or acquired imm
                                            Table A2
                                       Descriptive Statistics
                                                                   (1)          (2)      (3)
                                                                      Excolonies Sample
                                                                               25%      75%
                                                                Mean value percentile percentile

Annual growth GDP per capita, 1970-1997                            1.07        0.09      1.95

Standard Deviation of Growth (GDP per capita), 1970-1997           4.68        3.44      5.69

Worst Drop Output (GDP per capita), 1970-1997                      9.03        6.05     14.23

Average Constraint on the Executive                                2.33        1.5       3.67
 in 1950, 1960 and 1970

Government Consumption (% of GDP)                                 0.169       0.126     0.211

Log Average Inflation, 1970-98                                     2.42        2.01      3.17

Overvaluation of Real Exchange Rate                               117.3       91.06     145.23

Variability of Overvaluation of Real Exchange Rate                 0.13        0.08      0.22


For detailed sources and definitions see Appendix Table A1.
                                                                                                        Table A3
                                                                       Volatility, Institutions in 1970 and the Three Macroeconomic Variables
                                                                         Dependent Variable is standard deviation of growth rate of real GDP per capita between 1970 and 1997
                                                                                                                                                             Excolonies
                                                             Excolonies                          Excolonies                    Excolonies                      above                          Excolonies
                                              Excolonies    above median        Excolonies      above median     Excolonies   above median     Excolonies   median world        Excolonies   above median
                                               Sample       world income         Sample         world income      Sample      world income      Sample        income             Sample      world income
                                                 (1)               (2)              (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)           (7)             (8)              (9)            (10)
                                                                               Cross-section, 1970-1997, without controlling for initial         Cross-section, 1970-1997, controlling for initial
                                             Cross-section, 1970-1997                                 income                                                         income

                                                                                   Macro and Institutions;        Macro and Institutions;       Macro and Institutions;          Macro and Institutions;
                                                   Institutions only            instrumenting for institutions    instrumenting for both     instrumenting for institutions      instrumenting for both
                                                                                            Panel A: Macroeconomic Variable is Government Consumption
Government Consumption                                                              1.78            2.74         -6.86          -9.20       6.50       12.01                       -3.74         -10.34
                                                                                   (4.65)          (6.88)       (6.79)         (12.10)     (7.33)     (13.68)                    (10.05)        (20.93)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                                                                                                  1.95        4.35                        1.77          3.80
                                                                                                                                           (1.42)      (4.52)                     (1.49)         (4.84)
Constraint on the Executive in 1970              -0.86            -0.92             -0.83           -0.88          -0.99           -1.06          -1.77          -1.91            -1.87           -2.10
                                                (0.25)           (0.41)            (0.28)          (0.42)         (0.33)          (0.59)         (0.99)         (1.68)           (1.07)          (2.12)

Number of Observations                           61               24                61               24             60             24             61             24                60             24
                                                                                          Panel B: Macroeconomic Variable is Log Average Inflation
Log Average Inflation                                                               -0.08        0.07         -0.31          0.52        -0.47                   -2.98            -0.37            0.09
                                                                                   (0.21)      (0.39)        (0.55)        (0.52)       (0.52)                  (5.71)           (0.94)          (2.27)
Log Initial GDP per capita                        1.73             4.05                                                                   2.03                    6.09             2.23            6.61
                                                (1.38)           (4.56)                                                                 (1.71)                 (12.87)           (1.95)         (16.63)
Constraint on the Executive in 1970              -1.77            -2.01             -0.86       -0.87         -1.03         -0.75        -1.94                   -2.98            -2.17           -3.19
                                                (0.98)           (1.81)            (0.26)      (0.54)        (0.34)        (0.68)       (1.19)                  (5.71)           (1.41)          (7.94)
Number of Observations                            61               24                61          24            49            20           61                      24               48              19

                                                                                   Panel C: Macroeconomic Variable is Overvaluation of Real Exchange Rate
Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation                                                  0.0075       -0.020        0.009           0.05         -0.020      -0.280                       0.03            0.02
                                                                                  (0.02)       (0.05)        (0.04)        (0.10)        (0.078)     (1.236)                     (0.04)          (0.53)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                                                                                                  2.35       15.60                       1.58          14.05
                                                                                                                                          (4.11)     (63.22)                     (1.44)         (67.11)
Constraint on the Executive in 1970                                                -0.68        -1.31         -0.64         -1.16          -2.44       -7.29                      -0.99           -6.68
                                                                                  (0.41)       (1.02)        (0.56)        (1.08)         (3.93)     (28.43)                     (1.02)         (30.44)
Number of Observations                                                              44           18            32             16             44         18                          32              16

Standard errors are in parentheses. All Panels are cross-sectional regressions with one observation per country. In all Panels the dependent variable is the volatility of annual growth rate of
GDP per capita from 1970 to 1997, from the World Bank. Log average inflation (in Panel A) is the log of average annual inflation in the Consumer Price Index from 1970 to 1997, from the
World Bank. In columns 5, 6, 9 and 10, log average inflation is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., log average inflation over 1960-69).
Government Consumption (Panel B) is the average of the ratio of real government "consumption" expenditure to real GDP from 1970 to 1989, from Barro-Lee. In columns 5, 6, 9 and 10,
government consumption is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., government consumption 1960-69 for government consumption 1970-89). Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation (Panel C)
is an index of real overvaluation of the official exchange rate during 1960-98, constructed by Easterly and Levine (2002) using the methodology of Dollar (1992). In columns 5, 6, 9 and 10,
the real exchange rate overvaluation measure is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., real overvaluation 1960-69 for real overvaluation 1970-98). Log initial GDP per capita is the
Summers Heston estimate for 1970, from Barro and Lee (1993).
"Constraint on the Executive in 1970" is constraint on executive in 1970 from the Polity dataset. In all panels we instrument for institutions using log settler mortality (where mortality is per
1000 with replacement). The Excolonies Sample includes all former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) report data. The alternative sample is
excolonies above median world income in 1970, using the Summers-Heston estimates from Barro and Lee (1993), and without Gabon. For more detailed data definitions and sources see
Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                                 Table A4
                                                          Worst Output Performance, Institutions in 1970 and the Three Macroeconomic Variables
                                                                          Dependent Variable is largest annual drop in real GDP per capita between 1970 and 1997
                                                                                                                                                       Excolonies
                                                           Excolonies                     Excolonies                     Excolonies                      above                        Excolonies
                                            Excolonies    above median     Excolonies    above median      Excolonies   above median    Excolonies    median world      Excolonies   above median
                                             Sample       world income      Sample       world income       Sample      world income     Sample         income           Sample      world income
                                               (1)               (2)           (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)           (7)             (8)            (9)            (10)
                                                                          Cross-section, 1970-1997, without controlling for initial        Cross-section, 1970-1997, controlling for initial
                                           Cross-section, 1970-1997                              income                                                        income

                                                                             Macro and Institutions;        Macro and Institutions;       Macro and Institutions;        Macro and Institutions;
                                                 Institutions only        instrumenting for institutions    instrumenting for both     instrumenting for institutions    instrumenting for both
                                                                                   Panel A: Macroeconomic Variable is Government Consumption
Government Consumption                                                        2.29          8.75        -21.75         -42.87      20.18      46.31                        -3.09         -46.90
                                                                            (14.67)       (22.54)      (23.14)        (49.10)     (24.12)    (51.41)                     (31.97)        (80.32)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                                                                                          5.96      15.77                         4.90          13.44
                                                                                                                                   (4.68)    (16.98)                      (4.74)        (18.57)
Constraint on the Executive in 1970            -2.56            -3.06         -2.42           -2.81          -2.95           -3.69          -5.35          -6.62          -5.38           -7.38
                                              (0.87)           (1.61)        (0.83)          (1.32)         (1.13)          (2.41)         (3.24)         (6.32)         (3.39)          (8.14)

Number of Observations                         61               24            61               24             60             24             61             24              60             24
                                                                                    Panel B: Macroeconomic Variable is Log Average Inflation
Log Average Inflation                                                         0.24         0.49         -1.38          0.79        -0.90                   -1.92          -1.60           -0.91
                                                                             (0.72)      (1.47)        (1.78)        (1.82)       (1.67)                  (7.97)         (3.20)          (8.78)
Log Initial GDP per capita                      5.28           14.61                                                                5.86                  20.74            7.57           25.70
                                              (4.54)          (17.17)                                                             (5.50)                 (45.29)         (6.64)         (64.21)
Constraint on the Executive in 1970            -5.35            -7.00         -2.56       -2.73         -3.30         -2.90        -5.67                   -9.92          -7.26          -12.45
                                              (3.24)           (6.82)        (0.88)      (2.07)        (1.10)        (2.39)       (3.82)                 (20.10)         (4.81)         (30.66)
Number of Observations                          61               24            61          24            49            20           61                      24             48              19

                                                                              Panel C: Macroeconomic Variable is Overvaluation of Real Exchange Rate
Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation                                             -0.028       -0.064        0.017           0.21          -0.17       -0.897                   0.09            0.10
                                                                             (0.06)       (0.16)        (0.12)        (0.31)         (0.39)      (3.910)                 (0.13)          (1.66)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                                                                                            12.08        49.77                   6.50           45.43
                                                                                                                                    (20.40)     (200.22)                 (4.95)        (212.81)
Constraint on the Executive in 1970                                           -3.03        -3.98         -2.04         -3.55         -12.07       -23.06                  -3.46          -21.38
                                                                             (1.72)       (3.12)        (1.82)        (3.26)        (19.52)      (90.04)                 (3.48)         (96.54)
Number of Observations                                                         44           18            32             16            44           18                      32              16
Standard errors are in parentheses. All Panels are cross-sectional regressions with one observation per country. In all Panels the dependent variable is the lowest annual growth rate of
GDP per capita from 1970 to 1997 (with the sign changed so that an output fall is a positive number), from the World Bank. Log average inflation (in Panel A) is the log of average annual
inflation in the Consumer Price Index from 1970 to 1997, from the World Bank. In columns 5, 6, 9 and 10, log average inflation is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., log average
inflation over 1960-69).
Government Consumption (Panel B) is the average of the ratio of real government "consumption" expenditure to real GDP from 1970 to 1989, from Barro-Lee. In columns 5, 6, 9 and 10,
government consumption is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., government consumption 1960-69 for government consumption 1970-89). Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation (Panel
C) is an index of real overvaluation of the official exchange rate during 1960-98, constructed by Easterly and Levine (2002) using the methodology of Dollar (1992). In columns 5, 6, 9
and 10, the real exchange rate overvaluation measure is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., real overvaluation 1960-69 for real overvaluation 1970-98). Log initial GDP per capita is
the Summers Heston estimate for 1970, from Barro and Lee (1993).
"Constraint on the Executive in 1970" is constraint on executive in 1970 from the Polity dataset. In all panels we instrument for institutions using log settler mortality (where mortality is
per 1000 with replacement). The Excolonies Sample includes all former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) report data. The alternative
sample is excolonies above median world income in 1970, using the Summers-Heston estimates from Barro and Lee (1993), and without Gabon. For more detailed data definitions and
sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                                                     Table A5
                                                                       Growth, Institutions in 1970 and the Three Macroeconomic Variables
                                                                           Dependent Variable is average annual growth of real GDP per capita between 1970 and 1997
                                                                                                                                                          Excolonies
                                                           Excolonies                         Excolonies                    Excolonies                      above                        Excolonies
                                            Excolonies    above median        Excolonies     above median     Excolonies   above median    Excolonies    median world      Excolonies   above median
                                             Sample       world income         Sample        world income      Sample      world income     Sample         income           Sample      world income
                                               (1)               (2)             (3)              (4)            (5)             (6)           (7)             (8)            (9)            (10)
                                                                            Cross-section, 1970-1997, without controlling for initial        Cross-section, 1970-1997, controlling for initial
                                           Cross-section, 1970-1997                                income                                                        income

                                                                                Macro and Institutions;        Macro and Institutions;       Macro and Institutions;        Macro and Institutions;
                                                 Institutions only           instrumenting for institutions    instrumenting for both     instrumenting for institutions    instrumenting for both
                                                                                         Panel A: Macroeconomic Variable is Government Consumption
Government Consumption                                                           -1.31           -2.93        1.45            7.44       -6.35      -13.27                    -1.97           8.74
                                                                                (5.06)          (7.86)       (6.86)         (13.03)     (8.31)     (15.19)                  (10.87)        (22.70)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                                                                                               -2.08       -4.86                    -1.95          -4.31
                                                                                                                                        (1.61)      (5.02)                   (1.61)         (5.25)
Constraint on the Executive in 1970            0.80             0.63             0.77            0.59           0.82            0.74          1.78            1.75           1.79            1.93
                                              (0.28)           (0.47)           (0.30)          (0.48)         (0.33)          (0.64)        (1.12)          (1.87)         (1.15)          (2.30)

Number of Observations                         61               24               61               24             60             24             61             24              60             24
                                                                                       Panel B: Macroeconomic Variable is Log Average Inflation
Log Average Inflation                                                            -0.20       -0.15         0.37          -0.16         0.19                    0.60           0.42            0.37
                                                                                (0.23)      (0.42)        (0.60)        (0.63)       (0.57)                  (2.39)         (0.99)          (2.75)
Log Initial GDP per capita                     -1.86            -4.53                                                                 -1.98                   -6.46          -2.13           -7.98
                                              (1.56)           (5.06)                                                                (1.87)                 (13.58)         (2.05)         (20.08)
Constraint on the Executive in 1970             1.78             1.85            0.79         0.54         0.89           0.57         1.85                    2.78           1.98            3.52
                                              (1.11)           (2.01)           (0.28)      (0.60)        (0.37)        (0.83)       (1.30)                  (6.03)         (1.48)          (9.58)
Number of Observations                          61               24              61           24           49             20           61                      24             48              19

                                                                                Panel C: Macroeconomic Variable is Overvaluation of Real Exchange Rate
Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation                                               0.0051       0.0029        0.017          0.01          0.053        0.250                    -0.01           0.05
                                                                               (0.02)       (0.05)        (0.05)        (1.05)        (0.130)     (1.130)                   (0.05)          (0.62)
Log Initial GDP per capita                                                                                                              -4.11      -14.52                    -1.95          -17.60
                                                                                                                                       (7.00)     (57.67)                   (1.74)         (79.21)
Constraint on the Executive in 1970                                             0.89         0.68          0.68          0.79            3.96        6.24                     1.11           7.70
                                                                               (0.61)       (0.94)        (0.75)        (1.10)         (6.69)     (25.93)                   (1.23)         (35.93)
Number of Observations                                                           44           18            32            16              44          18                       32             16
Standard errors are in parentheses. All Panels are cross-sectional regressions with one observation per country. In all Panels the dependent variable is the average annual growth rate of
GDP per capita from 1970 to 1997, from the World Bank. Log average inflation (in Panel A) is the log of average annual inflation in the Consumer Price Index from 1970 to 1997, from
the World Bank. In columns 5, 6, 9 and 10, log average inflation is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., log average inflation over 1960-69).
Government Consumption (Panel B) is the average of the ratio of real government "consumption" expenditure to real GDP from 1970 to 1989, from Barro-Lee. In columns 5, 6, 9 and 10,
government consumption is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., government consumption 1960-69 for government consumption 1970-89). Real Exchange Rate Overvaluation (Panel
C) is an index of real overvaluation of the official exchange rate during 1960-98, constructed by Easterly and Levine (2002) using the methodology of Dollar (1992). In columns 5, 6, 9
and 10, the real exchange rate overvaluation measure is instrumented using its lagged value (i.e., real overvaluation 1960-69 for real overvaluation 1970-98). Log initial GDP per capita is
the Summers Heston estimate for 1970, from Barro and Lee (1993).
"Constraint on the Executive in 1970" is constraint on executive in 1970 from the Polity dataset. In all panels we instrument for institutions using log settler mortality (where mortality is
per 1000 with replacement). The Excolonies Sample includes all former colonies of European Powers for which Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2001) report data. The alternative
sample is excolonies above median world income in 1970, using the Summers-Heston estimates from Barro and Lee (1993), and without Gabon. For more detailed data definitions and
sources see Appendix Table 1.
                                                                               Figure 1A
Standard deviation of growth rate, 1970-97,
       against log settler mortality
                                                   .

                                              10
Standard Deviation Growth GDP p.c., 1970-97




                                                                                                                    TCD



                                              8
                                                                                                           NIC                                   NGA
                                                                                                                    CMR
                                                                                                                  COG
                                                                                                 SDN                      NER
                                                                                                                                     TGO
                                                                                               DZA                  BDI
                                                                                                 TTO
                                                                                              PER
                                              6                                              CHL                               SLE
                                                                 FJI                         ARG
                                                                                GUY          ECU
                                                                               MUS                                                                     MLI
                                                                                                         KEN
                                                                                                       JAM  PNG   ZAR                GHA
                                                                                                                                     CIV
                                                                       HKG                    SLV
                                                                                             MAR
                                                                                            BRA
                                                                                            BGD            SEN
                                                                                                       HTI PAN      MRT
                                                                                            URY        DOM BLZ      CAF
                                                                                MMR          VEN
                                                                                             PRY
                                                                                               BRB          IDN
                                                                         MYS
                                              4                        ZAF                  MEX
                                                                                          TUN
                                                                                              CRI                   BFA
                                                                                                                   BEN          MDG
                                                                         SGP                                                               GMB
                                                                                             HND
                                                                                       IND EGY
                                                                                            BOL
                                                           NZL                               GTM
                                                                                 PAK
                                                                        CAN
                                                                       USA
                                                                                             COL
                                              2        AUS
                                                                                             LKA


                                                       2                                 4                                 6                           8
                                                                                                log settler mortality
                                                                 Figure 1B
                                            Worst output drop, 1970-97,
                                            against log settler mortality
                                    .
                                                                                                         RWA
                               30                                                               NIC

                                                                                                         GAB
Worst Drop GDP p.c., 1970-97




                                                                                                         TCD
                                                                                                                    SLE

                                                                                                               NER
                               20                                                                                         TGO


                                                                               BGD                     ZAR                            NGA
                                                                               PER          HTI PAN                       CIV
                                                                  GUY            DZA                                      GHA
                                                                   MMR        CHLSLV
                                                                                  TTO                                MDG
                                                                 MUS                                   COG
                                                                                 VEN
                                                                               URY                       CMR
                                                                                                         BDI
                                                                                                         MRT
                                                                                                         CAF
                                                                                 CRI
                               10                                             ARG SDN
                                                                               ECU
                                                                                 MAR            SEN
                                                  FJI                          MEX            KEN
                                                                                            DOM
                                                                                            JAM                                             MLI
                                                                         IND                            BEN
                                                        ZAF                    BRA
                                                                                 PRY            PNG
                                                                               BOL
                                                                               GTMBRB
                                            NZL
                                                         CAN                 TUN HND                     BFA                    GMB
                                            AUS            MYS                                  BLZ
                                                        USASGP     PAK          LKA
                                                        HKG
                                                                                COL
                                                                               EGY               IDN
                               0
                                        2                                  4                                    6                           8
                                                                                      log settler mortality
                                                            Figure 1C
                                  GDP per capita growth rate, 1970-97,
                                     against log settler mortality
                                        .

                                   10
Annual Growth GDP p.c., 1970-97




                                                      SGP

                                                   HKG
                                                                                          IDN
                                    5                 MYS
                                                            MUS

                                                                         EGY
                                                                          LKA
                                                                        TUN
                                                                         CHL        DOMBLZ
                                                              PAK IND     BRA
                                                                          ECU
                                                                          COL
                                                                            PRY
                                            AUS FJI USA
                                                     CAN     MMR           MAR
                                                                          MEX
                                                                          URYTTO
                                                                             BRB
                                                                            CRI                 COG
                                                                          BGD        KEN          GAB
                                            NZL                               SDN      PAN        BFA
                                                                          GTM
                                                                           HND
                                                                         ARGDZA                   CMR
                                                                                        PNG                               NGA
                                                            GUY           PER
                                                                          BOL                    BEN                GMB         MLI
                                                    ZAF                     SLV                   BDI
                                    0                                       VEN
                                                                                    JAM SEN       RWA
                                                                                                  MRT         CIV
                                                                                                              GHA
                                                                                                              TGO
                                                                                                  TCD
                                                                                    HTI           CAF
                                                                                                            MDG
                                                                                                        NERSLE
                                                                                          NIC


                                                                                                ZAR

                                   -5
                                            2                       4                                    6                      8
                                                                            log settler mortality
                                                                                                                      Figure 2
                                                            Volatility and Three Macro Variables
                                                   .                                                                                                                                                   .

                                              15                                                                                                                                                  15
Standard Deviation Growth GDP p.c., 1970-97




                                                                                                                                                    Standard Deviation Growth GDP p.c., 1970-97
                                                                         GAB                                                                                                                                             GAB




                                                                                                 RWA                                                                                                                        RWA
                                              10                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                      TCD                                                                                             TCD


                                                                                         CMR
                                                                                          NIC     NGA                            COG                                                                                      CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          COG          NGA                                               NIC
                                                                                                            SDN                                                                                                                                SDN
                                                                                           NER      TGO                                                                                                               NER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TGO
                                                                                          BDI                                                                                                                                 BDI
                                                               TTO               DZA
                                                                                PER                                                                                                                                         TTODZA                                       PER
                                                                                                CHL                         SLE                                                                                                               SLE    CHL
                                                                     ARG                                                                                                                                                                                           ARG
                                                                                MUS
                                                                                 ECU     FJI MLI                             GUY                                                                                   MLI GUYFJI MUS          ECU
                                                                         JAM                  ZAR KEN                                                                                                                              KEN JAM
                                               5                                       CIV
                                                                                    HTIGHA
                                                                                       MAR                                    BGD PNG                                                              5                   BGDPNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MAR CIV HTI            GHA                                       ZAR
                                                                     BRA
                                                                      DOM    URY             SLV SEN PAN        MRT
                                                                                                              CAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                               PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                               BLZCAF
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MRT        SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    DOM            URY                             BRA
                                                           HKG        BRB
                                                                      VEN                                                                                                                                                  BRB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          HKG        MMR VEN
                                                                         PRY          TUN
                                                                                       ZAF                                                                                                                             TUN       ZAF PRY
                                                               MEX              MDG GMB CRI           BEN                                                                                                        BFA            BENMDGCRI     MEX
                                                                                   HND
                                                                                    IND                                                                                                                                         GMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             INDHND
                                                                 SGP                      BOL                          EGY                                                                                      SGP               EGY                                        BOL
                                                                 GTM            MYS                                                                                                                                MYS           GTM
                                                                            NZL   PAK                                                                                                                                         PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            NZL
                                                                         CAN
                                                                           USA                                                                                                                                        CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     USA
                                                                      AUSIDN
                                                                     COL              LKA                                                                                                                                AUS LKAIDN      COL



                                               0                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                       0                                  .2                                                  .4                                                           0             2                      4                        6                     8
                                                                        Average Government Consumption, 1970-85                                                                                                                   Log Average Inflation, 1970-98

                                                   .

                                              15


                                                                                  GAB
Standard Deviation GDP p.c., 1970-97




                                                                                  RWA
                                              10
                                                                                  TCD


                                                                                         NGA CMRCOG                                     NIC
                                                                                     SDN
                                                                              TGO       NER
                                                                                   BDI
                                                                 TTO          PER      DZA
                                                                                      CHL     SLE
                                                                           ARG
                                                                  FJIECU     MUS
                                                                             JAM
                                                             BGD       PNG
                                                                         GHA   ZAR
                                                                             KEN         CIV
                                               5                   URYBRB
                                                                         HTIMARPAN
                                                                          BRA SLV
                                                                         DOM
                                                                                 SEN
                                                                                  CAF
                                                                                                  MRT
                                                                        VEN
                                                                          PRY
                                                              ZAF
                                                             MEX         TUN
                                                                      MDG
                                                                       CRI       BFA
                                                                                  GMB
                                                                  SGP IND          HND       EGY
                                                                 MYS                BOL
                                                                PAKGTMNZL
                                                                 CANUSA
                                                               IDN
                                                              COLLKA         AUS




                                               0
                                                       0               100                  200                  300                          400
                                                                             Average Real Overvaluation, 1960-97
                                                                                                         Figure 3
          Worst Output Drop and Three Macro Variables
                                    .                                                                                                                                           .
                                                                                     RWA                                                                                                              RWA
                               30                                          NIC                                                                                             30                                                                               NIC

                                                         GAB                                                                                                                                      GAB
Worst Drop GDP p.c., 1970-97




                                                                                                                                            Worst Drop GDP p.c., 1970-97
                                                                                                             TCD                                                                                TCD
                                                                                                                   SLE                                                                                                SLE

                                                                               NER                                                                                                              NER
                               20                                                      TGO                                                                                 20                     TGO


                                                                                 ZAR                                BGD                                                                         BGD                                                         ZAR
                                                                                   NGA                                                                                                                        NGA
                                                                PER HTIGHA                   PAN                                                                                        PAN
                                                                       CIV                                                                                                                         CIV HTI          GHA                            PER
                                                                 DZA                                               GUY                                                                          GUY    DZA
                                                                          SLV
                                                                            CHL                                                                                                                         SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                          MMR             CHL
                                                TTO              MDG                                                                                                                                 TTO MDG
                                                                 MUS                                                      COG                                                                      COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                     MUS
                                                       VEN     URY                                                                                                                                              VEN     URY
                                                                     CMR
                                                                      BDI CRI                          MRT
                                                                                                     CAF                                                                                  CAF   MRTCMRBDI   CRI
                               10                    ARG                                           SDN                                                                     10                                        SDN                     ARG
                                                                ECU MAR               SEN
                                                                                       KEN                                                                                                       SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                MAR       KEN    ECU
                                               MEX   DOMJAM        IND FJI MLI            BEN                                                                                             MLI     FJIINDBENDOMJAM  MEX
                                                    BRA PRY           ZAF                                                 PNG                                                                     PNG ZAF PRY
                                                 GTM BRB                BOL                                                                                                                                                                        BOLBRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                   BRB GTM
                                                           NZL                                                                                                                                      NZL
                                                        CAN       HNDTUN
                                                                     GMB                                                                                                                 BFA   TUN
                                                                                                                                                                                             CAN        HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                       GMB
                                                     AUS       MYS                                                                                                                      BLZMYS   AUS
                                                 SGP      USA                                                                                                                            SGP USA
                                                                 PAK LKA                                                                                                                              PAK
                                                                                                                                                                                                       LKA
                                            HKG                                                                                                                                                   HKG
                                                     COLIDN                                                   EGY                                                                                         IDN COL
                                                                                                                                                                                                         EGY
                                0                                                                                                                                           0
                                        0                               .2                                                            .4                                            0             2                       4                    6                  8
                                                      Average Government Consumption, 1970-85                                                                                                               Log Average Inflation, 1970-98

                                    .
                                                                   RWA
                               30                                                                                               NIC

                                                                   GAB
Worst Drop GDP p.c., 1970-97




                                                                   TCD
                                                                               SLE

                                                                         NER
                               20                            TGO


                                              BGD           ZAR     NGA
                                                       HTI PAN
                                                       GHA PER       CIV
                                                                   DZA
                                                             SLV CHL
                                                  TTOMDG
                                                          MUS             COG
                                                  URYVEN       BDI
                                                              CAF        CMR
                                                                           MRT
                                                     CRI
                               10                         ARG     SDN
                                                   ECU MAR KEN SEN
                                              MEXFJI INDDOM JAM
                                              ZAF     PNGBRA
                                                         PRY
                                                    GTM          BOL
                                                       BRB
                                                        NZL
                                                 CAN TUNAUSBFA
                                                 MYS
                                                                 HND
                                                                GMB
                                                  SGP
                                                   USA
                                                PAK
                                                 LKA
                                              COL
                                               IDN                             EGY
                                0
                                        0             100               200                 300                                       400
                                                         Average Real Overvaluation, 1960-97
                                                                                                                         Figure 4
                                                 Growth and Three Macro Variables
                                         .                                                                                                                                                 .

                                    .1                                                                                                                                                .1
Annual Growth GDP p.c., 1970-97




                                                                                                                                                  Annual Growth GDP p.c., 1970-97
                                                         SGP                                                                                                                                       SGP

                                                 HKG                                                                                                                                                             HKG
                                                                     IDN                                                                                                                                                       IDN
                                  .05                                            MYS                                                                                                .05                  MYS
                                                                                 MUS                                                                                                                                     MUS

                                                              DOM             LKA                                   EGY                                                                            BLZ                EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LKA  DOM
                                                                              TUN        CHL                                                                                                                   TUN                         CHL
                                                            BRA           PAK
                                                                            IND                                                                                                                                  IND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   PAK                                                         BRA
                                                             COL PRY     ECU                                                                                                                                               PRY COLECU
                                                             AUS CAN            MAR                                                                                                                          AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                            MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                          CAN             MMR
                                                        TTO
                                                       MEX    BRB  USA                                                          COG                                                                      USA    COGTTO               MEX URY
                                                                GAB URY           FJI CRI
                                                                                             KEN PAN                      BGD                                                                              BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                               FJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                               BRB
                                                                                                                                                                                                              GAB       KEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                            CRI
                                                                   NZL                                 SDN                                                                                         PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                    BFA          NZL GTM               SDN
                                                         GTM ARG        DZAHNDCMR                                                                                                                               CMR  HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DZA                                         ARG
                                                                                          NGA                                   PNG                                                                           PNG               NGA
                                                                       PER    GMB  BOLMLI       BEN                      GUY                                                                          MLI   GUY GMB  BEN                                                 BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        PER
                                                                                 BDI
                                                                                ZAF   SLV                                                                                                                            BDISLV
                                    0                           JAM                      RWA
                                                                                           SEN                                                                                        0                      SENRWAZAF        JAM
                                                              VEN               CIV
                                                                               GHA          TGO              MRT                                                                                                CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                              TGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                            MRT                  VEN GHA
                                                                            HTI                                    TCD                                                                                     TCD         HTI
                                                                                                         CAF                                                                                         CAF
                                                                                 MDG                                                                                                                                           MDG
                                                                                        NER                              SLE                                                                                   NER                         SLE
                                                                                       NIC                                                                                                                                                                                           NIC


                                                                                          ZAR                                                                                                                                                                                        ZAR

                                  -.05                                                                                                                                              -.05
                                             0                                     .2                                                       .4                                                 0                     2                         4                        6                  8
                                                                 Average Government Consumption, 1970-85                                                                                                                         Log Average Inflation, 1970-98

                                         .

                                    .1
Annual Growth GDP p.c., 1970-97




                                                         SGP


                                                       IDN
                                  .05                    MYS
                                                                     MUS

                                                                                 EGY
                                                       LKA DOMTUN          CHL
                                                      PAK IND BRA
                                                    COL ECU PRY
                                                       CAN
                                                        TTO
                                                   MEXFJI USABRB  AUS
                                                                MAR                 COG
                                                         URYCRI         GAB
                                                   BGD            KEN
                                                                    PAN
                                                                      BFA SDN
                                                           GTMNZL
                                                            PNG ARG     HNDDZANGA CMR
                                                                   PER GMB
                                                                         BOL
                                                    ZAF              SLVBDI
                                    0                             JAM SENRWA CIV
                                                              GHA TGO
                                                             VEN                     MRT
                                                                         TCD
                                                              HTI      CAF
                                                            MDG
                                                                             NER SLE
                                                                                                                                      NIC


                                                                           ZAR

                                  -.05
                                             0                 100                    200                          300                      400
                                                                       Average Real Overvaluation, 1960-97
                                                                                Figure 5
                             Average constraint on executive (1950, 1960,
                                    1970) vs. log settler mortality
                                                  .

                                              8
average constraint on exec 1950, 1960, 1970




                                                          AUS
                                                          NZL   USA
                                                                 ZAF
                                                                 CAN                IND      CRI
                                                                                           LKA



                                              6

                                                                              MMR                      JAM
                                                                                             VEN
                                                                                           EGY
                                                                                            URY
                                                                                            COL
                                                                                           CHL               NIC
                                              4
                                                                  MYS
                                                                  SGP                       BRA
                                                                                              SLV
                                                                                            PER              PAN
                                                                                                              IDN
                                                                          MUS                HND
                                                                                            GTM
                                                                                            MEXTTO                                                    NGA
                                                                           GUY
                                                                             PAK
                                                                                           ECU          LAOSEN
                                                                                                        VNM           BEN    NER          GHA   GMB
                                                                                                                       BFA
                                              2
                                                                                            BOL SDN
                                                                                           ARG
                                                                                            BGD  AFG   DOM
                                                                                                         KEN        COGCMR
                                                                                                                       MRT
                                                                                                                       UGA
                                                                                                                       TZA          MDG                     MLI
                                                                                              MAR
                                                                        ETH               TUN PRY
                                                                                              DZA      HTI GNB
                                                                                                           PNG      ZAR
                                                                                                                      RWA
                                                                                                                      AGO
                                                                                                                      GAB
                                                                                                                      TCD
                                                                                                                      CAF
                                                                                                                       BDI         GIN    TGO
                                                                                                                                          CIV



                                              0

                                                      2                               4                                       6                             8
                                                                                                 log settler mortality
