NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FEASIBLE GLOBALIZATIONS
Dani Rodrik
Working Paper 9129
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9129
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

I am grateful to Michael Weinstein for very helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to
the source.

Feasible Globalizations
Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 9129
September 2002
JEL No. F0

ABSTRACT
The nation-state system, democratic politics, and full economic integration are mutually
incompatible. Of the three, at most two can be had together. The Bretton Woods/GATT regime was
successful because its architects subjugated international economic integration to the needs and demands
of national economic management and democratic politics. A renewed "Bretton-Woods compromise"
would preserve some limits on integration, while crafting better global rules to handle the integration
that can be achieved. Among "feasible globalizations," the most promising is a multilaterally negotiated
visa scheme that allows expanded (but temporary) entry into the advanced nations of a mix of skilled
and unskilled workers from developing nations. Such a scheme would likely create income gains that
are larger than all of the items on the WTO negotiating agenda taken together, even if it resulted in a
relatively small increase in cross-border labor flows.
Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
(617) 495 9454
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu

FEASIBLE GLOBALIZATIONS
Dani Rodrik1
Harvard University
July 2002
Introduction
We want economic integration to help boost living standards. We want democratic
politics so that public policy decisions are made by those that are directly affected by them (or
their representatives). And we want self-determination, which comes with the nation-state. This
paper argues that we cannot have all three things simultaneously. The political trilemma of the
global economy is that the nation-state system, democratic politics, and full economic
integration are mutually incompatible. We can have at most two out of the three. It follows that
the direction in which we seem to be headed—global markets without global governance—is
unsustainable.
The alternative is a renewed “Bretton-Woods compromise:” preserving some limits on
integration, as built into the original Bretton Woods arrangements, along with some more global
rules to handle the integration that can be achieved. Those who would make a different choice—
toward tighter economic integration—must face up to the corollary: either tighter world
government or less democracy.
During the first four decades following the close of the Second World War, international
policy makers had kept their ambitions in check. They pursued a limited form of
internationalization of their economies, leaving lots of room for national economic management.
Successive rounds of multilateral trade negotiations made great strides, but focused only on the
most egregious of the barriers at the border and excluded large chunks of the economy
1

I am grateful to Michael Weinstein for very helpful suggestions.

2
(agriculture, services, “sensitive” manufactures such as garments). In capital markets,
restrictions on currency transactions and financial flows remained the norm rather than the
exception. This Bretton Woods/GATT regime was successful because its architects subjugated
international economic integration to the needs and demands of national economic management
and of democratic politics.
This strategy changed drastically during the last two decades. Global policy is now
driven by an aggressive agenda of “deep” integration—elimination of all barriers to trade and
capital flows wherever those barriers may be found. The results have been problematic--in terms
of both economic performance (relative to the earlier post-war decades) and political legitimacy.
The simple reason is that “deep” economic integration is unattainable in a context where nation
states and democratic politics still exert considerable force.
The title of this essay conveys therefore two ideas. First, there are inherent limitations to
how far we can push global economic integration. It is neither feasible nor desirable to
maximize what Keynes called “economic entanglements between nations.”2 Second, within the
array of feasible globalizations, there are many different models to choose from. Each of these
models has different implications for whom we empower and whom we don’t, and who gains
and who loses. We need to recognize these two facts in order to make progress in the
globalization debate. One implication is that we need to scale down our ambitions with respect
to global economic integration. Another is that we need to do a better job of writing the rules for
a thinner version of globalization.

2

Keynes used this phrase in an essay written in the midst of the Great Depression, in which he appeared to have
given up on free trade altogether: "I sympathize with those who would minimize, rather than those who would
maximize economic entanglements between nations. Ideas, art, knowledge, hospitality and travel should be
international. But let goods be homespun whenever it is reasonable and conveniently possible, and above all let
finance be primarily national." (John Maynard Keynes, "National Self-Sufficiency", Yale Review, 1933.)

3
My argument about the limits to globalization is not (or should not be) self-evident. It
rests on several building blocks, and it may be useful to state these at the outset. The argument
proceeds from the starting point that markets need to be embedded in a range of non-market
institutions in order to work well. These institutions perform several functions critical to
markets’ performance: they create, regulate, stabilize, and legitimate markets.
The second and much less appreciated point is that there is no simple or unique mapping
between these functions and the form that the institutional infrastructure can take. Americanstyle capitalism differs greatly from Japanese-style capitalism; there is tremendous variety in
labor-market and welfare-state institutions even within Europe; and low-income countries often
require heterodox institutional arrangements to embark on development.
The third point is that institutional diversity of this kind is a significant impediment to
full economic integration. Indeed, now that formal restrictions on trade and investment have
mostly disappeared, regulatory and jurisdictional discontinuities created by heterogeneous
national institutions constitute the most important barriers to international commerce. “Deep
integration” would require removing these transaction costs through institutional
harmonization—an agenda on which the World Trade Organization has already embarked.
However, once we recognize that institutional diversity performs a valuable economic (as well as
social) role, it becomes clear that this is a path full of dangers.
Fortunately, there are “feasible” models of globalization that would generate significantly
more benefits than our current version—and a much more equitable distribution thereof. I
discuss towards the end of the paper a modification of global rules that would produce
particularly powerful results: a multilaterally negotiated visa scheme that allows expanded (but
temporary) entry into the advanced nations of a mix of skilled and unskilled workers from

4
developing nations. Such a scheme would create income gains that are larger than all of the
items on the WTO negotiating agenda taken together, even if it resulted in a relatively small
increase in cross-border labor flows.

Markets and non-market institutions
The paradox of markets is that they thrive not under laissez-faire but under the watchful
eye of the state. Here is how Jacques Barzun describes the extensive regulatory apparatus in
place in Venice at the height of its wealth and power around 1650:
There were inspectors of weights and measures and of the Mint; arbitrators of
commercial disputes and of servants and apprentices’ grievances; censors of shop signs
and taverns and of poor workmanship; wage setters and tax leviers; consuls to help
creditors collect their due; and a congeries of marine officials. The population, being
host to sailors from all over the Mediterranean, required a vigilant board of health, as did
the houses of resort, for the excellence of which Venice became noted. All the
bureaucrats were trained as carefully as the senators and councilors and every act was
checked and rechecked as by a firm of accountants.3
What made Venice the epicenter of international trade and finance in 17th century Europe was
the quality of its public institutions. The same can be said of London in the 19th century and
New York in the second half of the 20th.
It is generally well understood that markets require non-market institutions—at the very
least, a legal regime that enforces property rights and contracts. Without property rights and
contract enforcement, markets cannot exist in any but the most rudimentary fashion. But the
dependence of markets on public institutions goes beyond property rights. Markets are not selfregulating, self-stabilizing, or self-legitimating. Businessmen seldom meet together, complained
Adam Smith, without the conversation ending up in a “conspiracy against the public.” In the

3

Jacques Barzun, From Dawn to Decadence: 500 Years of Western Cultural Life, Perennial, New York, 2000, p.
172.

5
absence of regulations pertaining to anti-trust, information disclosure, prudential limits, public
health and safety, and environmental and other externalities, markets can hardly do their job
correctly. Without a lender-of-last-resort and a public fisc, markets are prone to wild gyrations
and periodic bouts of underemployment. And without safety nets and social insurance to temper
risks and inequalities, markets cannot retain their legitimacy for long. The genius of capitalism,
where it works, is that it has managed to continually re-invent the institutional underpinnings of a
self-sustaining market economy: central banking, stabilizing fiscal policy, antitrust and
regulation, social insurance, political democracy.
What is generally less well understood is that the institutional basis of market economies
is not unique. Creating, regulating, stabilizing, or legitimating markets are functions that do not
map into specific institutional forms. Consider property rights, for example. What is relevant
from an economic standpoint is whether current and prospective investors have the assurance
that they can retain the fruits of their investments—and not the precise legal form that this
assurance takes. China, to take an extreme but illustrative example, has managed to provide
investors with this assurance despite the complete absence of private property rights.
Institutional innovations in the form of the Household Responsibility System or the Township
and Village Enterprises, it turns out, have served as functional equivalents of a private-enterprise
economy. How else can we explain the tremendous burst in entrepreneurial activity that has
taken place in China since the reforms of the late 1970s? By contrast, many countries fail to
provide investors with effective control rights over cash flow even though private property rights
are nominally protected. Russia during the 1990s provides a good example of the latter.
Perhaps the best way to observe that market economies are compatible with diverse
institutions is to note the variety that exists among today’s advanced countries. The United

6
States, Europe, and Japan are all successful societies: they have each produced comparable
amounts of wealth over the long term. Yet their institutions in labor markets, corporate
governance, regulation, social protection, and banking and finance have differed greatly.
Scandinavia was everyone’s favorite in the 1970s; Japan became the model to emulate in the
1980s; and the United States was the undisputed king of the 1990s. Such predictable changes in
institutional fashions should not blind us to the reality that none of these models can be deemed a
clear winner in the contest of “capitalisms.” Furthermore, despite much talk about convergence
in recent years, there have been few real signs of it. Financial systems (and to a much lesser
extent corporate governance regimes) have tended to move towards an Anglo-American model.
But labor marker arrangements (as captured by union membership or collective bargaining
coverage rates) have in fact diverged.4
There are good reasons for institutional diversity, and for why national institutions are
resistant to convergence. For one thing, societies differ in the values and norms that shape their
institutional choices. To take an obvious example, Americans and Europeans tend to have
different views as regards the determinants of economic outcomes: compared to Americans,
Europeans put greater weight on luck and smaller weight on individual effort.5 Europeans
correspondingly favor extensive redistribution and social protection schemes. Americans, for

4

On the limited convergence in effective patterns of corporate governance, see Colin Mayer, “Corporate Cultures
and Governance: Ownership, Control, and Governance of European and US Corporations,” Said Business School,
University of Oxford, unpublished paper, March 2002, and Tarun Khanna, Joe Kogan, and Krishna Palepu,
“Globalization and Corporate Governance Convergence? A Cross-Country Analysis,” Harvard Business School,
unpublished paper, October 2001. On divergence in labor market institutions, see Richard Freeman, “Single
Peaked vs. Diversified Capitalism: The Relation Between Economic Institutions and Outcomes,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 7556, Cambridge, MA, February 2000.

5

For an analysis of differences in attitudes towards inequality, see Alberto Alesina, Rafael di Tella, and Robert
MacCulloch, “Inequality and Happiness: Are Europeans and Americans Different?” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 8198, Cambridge, MA, April 2001.

7
their part, tend to focus on equality of opportunity and tolerate much larger amounts of
inequality.
There is a second, subtler reason for the absence of convergence in institutional
arrangements. Different elements of a society’s institutional configuration tend to be mutually
reinforcing. Consider, for example, the manner in which Japanese society provides its citizens
with social protection. Unlike Europe, the Japanese government does not maintain an expensive
welfare state financed by transfers from taxpayers. Instead, social insurance has been provided
in the postwar period through a combination of elements unique to “Japanese-style” capitalism:
lifetime employment in large enterprises, protection of agriculture and small-scale services
(“mom-and-pop” stores), government-organized cartels, and regulation of product markets. All
of these have in turn repercussions for other parts of the institutional landscape. One implication
of these arrangements is that they strengthen “insiders” (managers and employees) relative to
“outsiders” (shareholders) and therefore necessitate a different corporate governance model than
the Anglo-American one: in Japan, “insiders” have traditionally been monitored and disciplined
not by shareholders but by banks.6 In the United States, by contrast, the prevailing model of
shareholder-value maximization privileges profits over the interests of insiders and other
“stakeholders.” But the flip side of this is that profit-seeking behavior is constrained by the
toughest anti-trust regime in the world. It is difficult to imagine governments in Europe or Japan
humiliating their premier high-tech company the way that U.S. has done with Microsoft.
With such mutual dependence among the different parts of the institutional landscape,
anything short of comprehensive change can be quite disruptive, and is therefore difficult to

6

See Masahiko Aoki, "Unintended Fit: Organizational Evolution and Government Design of Institutions in Japan,"
in M. Aoki et al, eds., The Role of Government in East Asian Economic Development: Comparative Institutional
Analysis, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1997.

8
contemplate in normal times. The result is what economists call “path dependence” or
“hysteresis:” once the institutional setup performs reasonably successfully (and often when it is
not), it gets locked in.
The last major category of reasons for institutional diversity has to do with the special
needs of developing nations. Sparking and maintaining economic growth often requires
institutional innovations that can depart significantly from American or Western ideals of “best
practice.” Consider China again, the most spectacular case of success in the developing world in
the last quarter century. A Western trained economist advising China in 1978 would have
advocated the complete overhaul of the socialist economic regime: private property rights in
land, corporatization of state enterprises, deregulation and price liberalization, currency
unification, tax reform, reduction of import tariffs and elimination of quantitative restrictions on
imports. China undertook few of these, and those that it did take on (such as currency
unification and trade liberalization) were delayed for a decade or two after the onset of high
growth. Instead, the Chinese leadership devised highly effective institutional shortcuts. The
Household Responsibility System, Township and Village Enterprises, Special Economic Zones,
and Two-Tier Pricing, among many other innovations, enabled the Chinese government to
stimulate incentives for production and investment without a wholesale restructuring of the
existing legal, social, and political regime.7
The Chinese experience represents not the exception, but the rule: transitions to high
growth are typically sparked by a relatively narrow range of reforms that mix orthodoxy with
domestic institutional innovations, and not by comprehensive transformations that mimic best-

7

See the discussion of “transitional institutions” in Yingyi Qian, “How Reform Worked in China,” in Dani Rodrik,
ed., In Search of Prosperity: Analytic Narratives on Economic Growth, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ,
forthcoming.

9
practice institutions from the West. South Korea and Taiwan since the early 1960s, Mauritius
since the early 1970s, India since the early 1980s, and Chile since the mid-1980s are some of the
more significant examples of this strategy.8
Institutional diversity versus deep integration
When economists talk about obstacles to global economic integration, they typically have
in mind things like import tariffs, quantitative restrictions on trade, multiple currency practices,
restrictive regulations on foreign borrowing and lending, and limitations on foreign ownership.
The past few decades have witnessed unparalleled reduction in such barriers, as all of these have
been eliminated or slashed across the globe. With the textbook impediments gone, one would
have expected national economies to become seamlessly integrated with each other. But, to their
surprise, economists have discovered that economic integration remains seriously incomplete.
To be sure, the volume of cross-border trade and investment flows has increased by leaps
and bounds in recent decades. Still, when measured against the benchmark of national markets,
international markets remain highly fragmented. A well-known study calculated that the volume
of trade between two Canadian provinces is 20 times larger than trade between a province and an
equidistant U.S. state across the border.9 While later academic studies have been able to reduce
this large differential, they all confirm that national borders exert strong depressing effects on

8

This is why studies such as David Dollar and Aaart Kraay’s “Trade, Growth, and Poverty” (Development Research
Group, The World Bank, unpublished paper, March 2001), which purport to show that “globalizers” grow faster
than “non-globalizers,” are so misleading. The countries used as exemplars of “globalizers” in these studies (China,
India, Vietnam) have all employed heterodox strategies, and the last conclusion that can derived from their
experience is that trade liberalization, adherence to WTO strictures, and adoption of the “Washington Consensus”
are the best way to generate economic growth. China (until recently) and Vietnam were not even members of the
WTO, and together with India, these countries remain among the most protectionist in the world.

9

John McCallum, “National Borders Matter: Canada-U.S. Regional Trade Patterns,” The American Economic
Review, Vol. 85, No. 3. (Jun., 1995), pp. 615-623.

10
economic exchange.10 A different strand of the literature has focused on a related phenomenon
trade economists call “missing trade.” This refers to the observation that factor flows (e.g., labor
and capital) embodied in trade fall far short of what standard theories of comparative advantage
predict. Given the very large differences in relative factor endowments across countries and the
apparent absence of formal trade barriers, there is much less trade in “factor services” than there
should be.11
From an economic standpoint, what matters most is not the volume of trade as much as
the degree of price convergence across national markets. Here too, the results have been
disappointing. Prices of tradable commodities often diverge substantially across national
markets, even after indirect taxes and retail costs are purged from the comparison.12 Moreover,
when prices do converge to a common level, the process of convergence tends to be slow, taking
several years.13 All of these pieces of evidence point to the same conclusion: national borders
continue to act as serious impediments to economic exchange, even though formal trade barriers
have all but disappeared.
It may come as a surprise that the situation is not much different in capital markets. In a
world of free capital mobility, households would place their wealth in internationally diversified
portfolios, and the location of enterprises would not affect their access to financing. In reality,

10

See James E. Anderson and Eric van Wincoop, “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border Puzzle,”
National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8079, Cambridge, MA, January 2001.

11

The standard reference on this is Daniel Trefler, “The Case of the Missing Trade and Other Mysteries,” The
American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 5. (Dec., 1995), pp. 1029-1046.

12

For example, Scott Bradford estimates that domestic prices of motorcycles and bicycles exceed world prices by
100% in the U.K., 76% in Bergium, and 60% in Germany. For these and other estimates, see Bradford, “Paying the
Price: The Welfare and Employment Effects of Protection in OECD Countries,” Economics Department, Brigham
Young University, December 2000, unpublished paper, Table 2.

13

See the survey by Kenneth S. Rogoff, “The Purchasing Power Parity Puzzle,” Journal of Economic Literature,
Vol. 34, No. 2. (Jun., 1996), pp. 647-668.

11
financial markets are subject to a great amount of “home bias.” Investments in plant and
equipment are still constrained by the availability of domestic savings and portfolios remain
remarkably parochial.14 Even in periods of exuberance, net capital flows between rich and poor
nations fall considerably short of what theoretical models would predict. And in periods of
panic, which occur with alarming frequency, capital flows from North to South can dry up in an
instant. Global foreign exchange markets may turn over $1.5 trillion in a single day, but any
investor who acts on the assumption that it’s all one big capital market out there and national
borders don’t matter would be in for a big surprise—sooner rather than later.
Where do these border barriers arise from if not from attempts by governments to directly
restrict trade and capital flows? We are now in a position to link this discussion with the
previous one on institutional diversity. The key point is that national borders, and the
institutional boundaries that they define, impose a wide array of transaction costs. Institutional
and jurisdictional discontinuities serve to segment markets in much the same way that transport
costs or import taxes do.
These transaction costs arise from various sources. Most obviously, contract
enforcement is more problematic across national boundaries than it is domestically. Domestic
courts may be unwilling--and international courts unable--to enforce a contract signed between
residents of two different countries. This problem exists across the board, but is particularly
severe in the case of capital flows as financial contracts inevitably involve a promise to repay. A
key reason why more capital does not flow to poorer countries is that there is no good way such

14

Linda Tesar and Ingrid Werner, “The Internationalization of Securities Markets since the 1987 Crash,” in R. Litan
and A. Santomero, eds., Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services, The Brookings Institution, Washington,
DC, 1998.

12
a promise can be rendered binding across national jurisdictions—short of resorting to the
gunboat diplomacy of old.
Often, contracts are implicit rather than explicit, in which case they require repeated
interaction between the parties or side constraints to make them sustainable. In the domestic
context, implicit contracts are often "embedded" in social networks, which allow incentives to be
aligned properly by providing sanctions against opportunistic behavior. One of the things that
keep businessmen honest is fear of social ostracism. The role played by ethnic networks in
fostering cross-border trade and investment linkages (as in the case of the Chinese in Southeast
Asia) is indicative of the importance of group ties in facilitating economic exchange.15 But such
ties are generally harder to set up across national borders, in the absence of fortuitous ethnic and
other social linkages. More broadly, the poor quality of national institutions and the lack of
adequate protection of property rights in many developing countries is a serious handicap for
these countries’ effective participation in the international economy.
Transaction costs also result from national differences in regulatory regimes and in the
rules of doing business—informal as well as legal. That such differences raise the cost of
buying, selling, and investing across national boundaries is one of the most frequent complaints
heard from businessmen around the world. Indeed, trade conflicts are increasingly the
consequence of these differences. When the United States blames Japan’s retail distribution
practices for keeping Kodak out of the Japanese market or when it lodges a complaint against the
EU in the WTO because of the latter’s ban on hormone treated beef, what is at issue is the impact
that different styles of regulation have on international trade. These complaints do not go in a
unique direction. Developing nations have won WTO judgments against the U.S. that centered
15

See Alessandra Casella and James Rauch, "Anonymous Market and Group Ties in International Trade," National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper W6186, September 1997.

13
on gasoline standards and fishing regulations enacted pursuant to the U.S. Clean Air Act and the
U.S. Endangered Species Act—on the grounds that these regulations were harmful to their sales
of gasoline and shrimp, respectively. Trade negotiations have correspondingly become more
focused on harmonizing such regulatory differences away. In the Uruguay Round, a major
victory for this agenda was the Agreement on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPs), which established a minimum patent length requirement. In the area of
international finance, a similar push is under way through the promulgation of a series of codes
and standards on corporate governance, capital adequacy, bank regulation, accounting, auditing,
and insurance.
In sum, national borders stand in the way of deep economic integration because they
demarcate institutional boundaries. One conclusion, and the one that many economists have
drawn, is that the way forward is to offset these centrifugal forces through international
agreements, harmonization and standard setting. That, after all, is how the economic gains from
further integration can be reaped. But, as I have argued earlier, diversity in national institutions
serves a real and useful purpose. It is rooted in national preferences, sustains social compacts,
and allows developing nations to find their way out of poverty. There is no easy choice here.

The political trilemma of the global economy
The tradeoffs can be illustrated with the help of Figure 1, which displays what I call the
political trilemma of the global economy.16 The key message of the figure is that the nation-state
system, deep economic integration, and democracy are mutually incompatible. We can have at

16

The discussion of this trilemma draws heavily on my “How Far Will International Economic Integration Go?”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, Winter 2000.

14
most two out of these three. If we want to push global economic integration much further, we
have to give up either the nation state or mass politics. If we want to maintain and deepen
democracy, we have to choose between the nation state and international economic integration.
And if we want to keep the nation state, we have to choose between democracy and international
economic integration.
To see the logic in this, consider a hypothetical perfectly integrated world economy in
which national borders do not interfere with exchange in goods, services or capital. Transaction
costs and tax differentials would be minor; convergence in commodity prices and factor returns
would be almost complete. Is such a world compatible with the nation-state system? Can we
maintain the nation-state system largely as is, but ensure that national jurisdictions—and the
differences among them—do not get in the way of economic transactions? Possibly, if nation
states were to singularly focus on becoming attractive to international markets. National
jurisdictions, far from acting as an obstacle, would then be geared towards maximizing
international commerce and capital mobility. Domestic regulations and tax policies would be
either harmonized according to international standards, or structured such that they pose the least
amount of hindrance to international economic integration. The only public goods provided
would be those that are compatible with integrated markets.
It is possible to envisage a world of this sort, and in fact many commentators believe we
already live in it. Governments today try to outdo each other in pursuing policies that they
believe will earn them market confidence and attract trade and capital inflows: tight money,
small government, low taxes, flexible labor legislation, deregulation, privatization, and openness
all around. These are the policies that comprise what Thomas Friedman (1999) has aptly termed
the Golden Straitjacket. As Friedman notes, the price of maintaining national sovereignty while

15
markets become international is that politics has to be exercised over a much narrower domain.
"As your country puts on the Golden Straitjacket," Friedman writes (1999, 87),
two things tend to happen: your economy grows and your politics shrinks…. [The]
Golden Straitjacket narrows the political and economic policy choices of those in power
to relatively tight parameters. That is why it is increasingly difficult these days to find
any real differences between ruling and opposition parties in those countries that have put
on the Golden Straitjacket. Once your country puts on the Golden Straitjacket, its
political choices get reduced to Pepsi or Coke--to slight nuances of tastes, slight nuances
of policy, slight alterations in design to account for local traditions, some loosening here
or there, but never any major deviation from the core golden rules.
The crowding out of democratic politics gets reflected in the insulation of economic policy
making bodies (central banks, fiscal authorities, and so on), the disappearance (or privatization)
of social insurance, and the replacement of developmental goals with the need to maintain
market confidence. Once the rules of the game are set by the requirements of the global
economy, domestic groups' access to, and their control over, national economic policy-making
has to be restricted.
No country went farther down this path in the 1990s than Argentina, which looked for a
while like the perfect illustration of Friedman's point. Argentina’s ultimate collapse carries an
important lesson for this discussion. Argentina undertook more trade liberalization, tax reform,
privatization, and financial reform than virtually any other country in Latin America. It did
everything possible to endear itself to international capital markets. Obtaining investment-grade
rating—the ultimate mark of approval by international markets—became the Argentine
government’s first priority.17 Why did international investors nonetheless abruptly abandon the
country as the decade was coming to a close?

17

The much-maligned currency board system, originally aimed at stopping inflation, eventually became part of this
same strategy. A government that was prevented from printing money, it was felt, would be more attractive to
foreign investors.

16
Whatever financial markets feared, it could not have been a lack of commitment by the
political leadership to pay back the foreign debt. Indeed, during the course of 2001 President de
la Rúa and economy minister Cavallo abrogated their contracts with virtually all domestic
constituencies--public employees, pensioners, provincial governments, bank depositors--so as to
not skip one cent of their obligations to foreign creditors. What ultimately sealed Argentina's
fate in the eyes of financial markets was not what Cavallo and de la Rúa were doing, but what
the Argentine people were willing to accept. Markets grew increasingly skeptical that the
Argentine congress, provinces, and common people would tolerate the policy of putting foreign
obligations before domestic ones. And in the end the markets were proven correct. After a
couple of days of mass protests and riots just before Christmas, Cavallo and de la Rúa had to
resign in rapid succession.
So Argentina’s lesson has proved to be a different one than Friedman’s: Mass politics
casts a long shadow on international capital flows, even when political leaders single-mindedly
pursue the agenda of deep integration. In democracies, when the demands of foreign creditors
collide with the needs of domestic constituencies, the former eventually yield to the latter. When
push comes to shove, democracy shoves the Golden Straitjacket aside.
Conceptually, an obvious alternative is to drop nation states rather than democratic
politics. This is the solution of “global federalism” shown in Figure 1. Global federalism would
align jurisdictions with markets, and remove the “border effects.” Politics need not, and would
not, shrink: it would relocate to the global level. This is the United States model expanded on a
global scale. Despite the continuing existence of differences in regulatory and taxation practices
among states, the presence of a national constitution, national government, and federal judiciary
ensures that markets in the U.S. are truly national. The European Union, while very far from a

17
federal system at present, is headed broadly in the same direction. Under global federalism
national governments would not necessarily disappear, but their powers would be severely
circumscribed by supranational legislative, executive, and judicial authorities.
If this sounds like pie in the sky, it is. The historical experience of the U.S. shows how
tricky it is to establish and maintain a political union in the face of large differences in
institutional arrangements in the constituent parts. The halting way in which political institutions
within the EU have developed and the persisting complaints about their democratic deficit are
also indicative of the difficulties involved--even when the union encompasses a group of nations
at similar income levels and with similar historical trajectories. Federalism on a truly global
scale is at best a century away.
The only remaining option is to sacrifice the goal of deep economic integration. I have
termed this the Bretton Woods compromise in Figure 1. The essence of the Bretton WoodsGATT regime was that countries were free to dance to their own tune as long as they removed a
number of border restrictions on trade and generally did not discriminate among their trade
partners.18 They were allowed (indeed encouraged) to maintain restrictions on capital flows, as
Keynes and the other architects of the postwar economic order did not believe that a system of
free capital flows was compatible with domestic economic stability. Even though an impressive
amount of trade liberalization was undertaken during successive rounds of GATT negotiations,
there were also gaping exceptions. Services, agriculture and textiles were effectively left out of
the negotiations. Various clauses in the GATT (on anti-dumping and safeguards, in particular)
permitted countries to erect trade barriers when their industries came under severe competition

18

John Ruggie has written insightfully on this, describing the system that emerged as "embedded liberalism." See
his “International Regimes, Transactions, and Change: Embedded Liberalism in the Postwar Economic Order,” in
Stephen D. Krasner, ed., International Regimes, Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY, 1983.

18
from imports. And developing country policies were effectively left outside the scope of
international discipline.
Until roughly the 1980s, these loose rules left enough space for countries to follow their
own, possibly divergent paths of development. Western Europe chose to integrate within itself
and to erect an extensive system of social insurance. Japan caught up with the West using its
own distinctive brand of capitalism, combining a dynamic export machine with large doses of
inefficiency in services and agriculture. China grew by leaps and bounds once it recognized the
importance of private initiative, even though it flouted every other rule in the guidebook. Much
of the rest of East Asia generated an economic miracle relying on industrial policies that have
since been banned by the WTO. And scores of countries in Latin America, the Middle East, and
Africa generated unprecedented economic growth rates until the late 1970s under importsubstitution policies that insulated their economies from the world economy.
The Bretton Woods compromise was largely abandoned in the 1980s as the liberalization
of capital flows gathered speed and trade agreements began to reach behind national borders.
We have since been trapped in the uncomfortable (and unsustainable) zone somewhere in
between the three nodes of Figure 1. Neither of the alternatives to the Bretton Woods
compromise provides a real way forward. The Golden Straitjacket may be feasible, but it is not
desirable. Global federalism may be desirable, but it is not feasible. If the principal locus of
democratic politics is to remain the nation state, we have to lower our sights on economic
globalization. We have no choice but to settle for a “thin” version of globalization–to reinvent
the Bretton Woods compromise for a different era.

Alternative globalizations: example of labor mobility

19
What kind of globalization should we strive for then? Posing the question is important in
its own right, as it makes us aware that there are real choices to be made. Global economic rules
are not written by Platonic rulers, or their present-day pretenders, academic economists. If WTO
agreements were truly about “free trade,” as their opponents like to point out, a single sentence
would suffice (“there shall be free trade”). The reality of course is that there is considerable
politics in agenda setting and rule making—and those who have power get more out of the
system than those who do not. While this is well understood at some level, advocates of
globalization have to a tendency to present their agenda with an air of inevitability, as if it has a
natural logic that only economic illiterates would reject. Recognizing that there is a multiplicity
of feasible globalizations—as there is a multiplicity of institutional underpinnings for capitalist
economies—would have an important liberating effect on our policy discussions.
To make the point as starkly as possible, consider the following thought experiment.
Imagine that the negotiators who recently met in Doha to hammer out an agenda for world trade
talks were really interested in boosting incomes around the world. Imagine further that they
really meant it when they said the new round would be a “development round,” i.e., one designed
to bring maximum benefit to poor countries. What would they have focused on? Increasing
market access for developing country exports? Reform of the agricultural regime in Europe and
other advanced countries? Intellectual property rights and public health in developing nations?
Rules on government procurement, competition policy, environment, or trade facilitation?
The answer is none of the above. These are areas where the benefits to developing
countries are slim at best. The biggest bang by far lies in something that was not even on the
agenda at Doha: relaxing restrictions on the international movement of workers. This would

20
produce the largest possible gains for the world economy, and for poor countries in particular.
Nothing else comes close to the magnitude of economic benefits that this would generate.
We know this because of a simple principle of economics. The income gains that derive
from international trade rise with the square of the price differentials across national markets.
Compare in this respect markets in goods and financial assets, on the one hand, with markets for
labor services, on the other. Removal of restrictions in markets for goods and financial assets
has narrowed the scope of price differentials in these markets (although not done away with them
completely, as we have seen). Remaining price wedges rarely exceed a ratio of 2 to 1.
Meanwhile, there has been virtually no liberalization of markets for cross-border labor services.
Consequently, wages of similarly qualified individuals in the advanced and low-income
countries can differ by a factor of 10 or more. Applying the economics principle enunciated
above, liberalizing cross-border labor movements can be expected to yield benefits that are
roughly 25 times larger than those that would accrue from the traditional agenda focusing on
goods and capital flows!
It follows that even a minor liberalization of international labor flows would create gains
for the world economy that are much larger than the combined effect of all the post-Doha
initiatives under consideration. Consider for example a temporary work visa scheme that
amounts to no more than 3 percent of the rich countries’ labor force. Under the scheme, skilled
and unskilled workers from poor nations would be allowed employment in the rich countries for
3-5 years, to be replaced by a new wave of inflows upon return to their home countries. A backof-the-envelope calculation indicates that such a system would easily yield $200 billion annually
for the citizens of developing nations, vastly more than the existing estimates of the gains from
the current trade agenda. The positive spillovers that the returnees would generate for their home

21
countries—the experience, entrepreneurship, investment, and work ethic they would bring back
with them and put to work—would add considerably to these gains. What is equally important,
the economic benefits would accrue directly to workers from developing nations. We would not
need to wait for trickle-down to do its job.
Relaxing restrictions on cross-border flows through temporary work contracts and other
schemes has a compelling economic logic, but is it politically feasible? One concern is that such
flows would have adverse distributional implications in labor markets of advanced countries. In
particular, wages of low-skill workers would be depressed. A second concern is that
immigration is already highly unpopular in many industrial countries. Indeed, worries about
crime and other social problems (as well as racism) have made immigration a hot political issue
in an increasing number or rich countries. Third, might increased labor flows enhance the threat
of terrorism in our post-September 11 world? All of these suggest that pushing for larger worker
inflows may well amount to political suicide.
But while opposition to immigration is real, the political factors at work are subtler than
is commonly supposed. Imports from developing countries—which are nothing other than
inflows of embodied labor services—create the same downward pressure on rich country wages
as immigration, and that has not stopped policymakers from bringing trade barriers down. The
bias towards trade and investment liberalization is certainly not due to the fact that that is
politically popular at home (whereas labor flows are not). The median voter in the advanced
countries is against both immigration and imports: fewer than 1 in 5 Americans and Britons
reject import restrictions when they are asked their views on trade policy. In these countries, the
proportion of voters who want to expand imports tends to be about the same or lower than the
proportion that believe immigration is good for the economy. In any case, a well-designed

22
scheme of labor inflows can mitigate much of the concern regarding adverse distributional
implications for the host countries. For example, we can imagine aligning the skill mix of
“guest” workers with that of the natives—allowing in no more than one construction worker or
fruit picker, say, for every physician or software engineer. Finally, there is no clear answer to
the question of whether the world would be a safer place with a small, multilaterally-regulated
regime of registered contract workers than it is presently. Arguments can be made in either
direction.
If substantial liberalization of trade and investment has taken place, it is not because it
has been popular with voters at home, but largely because the beneficiaries have organized
successfully and become politically effective. Multinational firms and financial enterprises have
been quick to see the link between enhanced market access abroad and increased profits, and
they have managed to put these issues on the negotiating agenda. Temporary labor flows, by
contrast, have not had a well-defined constituency in the advanced countries. This is not because
the benefits are smaller, but because the beneficiaries are not as clearly identifiable. When a
Turkish worker enters the European Union or a Mexican worker enters the U.S., the ultimate
beneficiaries in Europe and the U.S. are not known ex ante. It is only after the worker lands a
job that his employer develops a direct stake in keeping him in the country. This explains why,
for example, the U.S. federal government spends a large amount of resources on border controls
to prevent hypothetical immigrants from coming in, while it has virtually no ability to deport
employed illegals or fine their employers once they are actually inside the country. The same
principle also explains why significant relaxations on labor restrictions do come about
occasionally, but only in response to pressure from well-organized interest groups such as
agricultural producers or Silicon Valley firms.

23
The lesson is that political constraints can be malleable. Economists have remained
excessively tolerant of the political realities that underpin the highly restrictive regime of
international labor mobility, even as they continually decry the protectionist forces that block
further liberalization of an already very open trading system.
To ensure that labor mobility produces benefits for developing nations it is imperative
that the regime be designed in a way that generates incentives for return to home countries.
While remittances can be an important source of income support for poor families, they are
generally unable to spark and sustain long-term economic development. Designing contract
labor schemes that are truly temporary is tricky, but it can be done. Unlike previous such
schemes, there need to be clear incentives for all parties—workers, employees, and home and
host governments—to live up to their commitments. One possibility would be to withhold a
portion of workers’ earnings until return takes place. This forced saving scheme would also
ensure to workers would come back home with a sizeable pool of resources to invest. In
addition, there could be penalties for home governments whose nationals failed to comply with
return requirements. For example, sending countries’ quotas could be reduced in proportion to
the numbers that fail to return. That would increase incentives for sending government to do
their utmost to create a hospitable economic and political climate at home and to encourage their
nationals’ return.
In the end, it is inevitable that the return rate will fall short of 100 percent. But even with
less than full compliance, the gains from reorienting our priorities towards the labor mobility
agenda remain significant.

24
Concluding remarks
I have highlighted two shortcomings of the current discussion on globalization. First,
there is inadequate appreciation of the fact that economic globalization is necessarily limited by
the scope of desirable institutional diversity at the national level. Under current political
configurations and economic realities, deep integration is a utopia. Second, there are many
possible models of “feasible globalization,” with different implications for economic benefits
and their incidence. As my discussion of labor mobility illustrates, we are not focusing currently
on areas of economic integration where the biggest gains are. The hopeful message is that it is
possible to squeeze much additional mileage out of globalization, while still remaining within the
boundaries of feasibility I have identified.

25

THE POLITICAL TRILEMMA OF THE WORLD ECONOMY

Deep economic
integration
Golden
Straitjacket

Global
federalism

Nation state

Democratic politics
Bretton Woods compromise

Figure 1: Pick two, any two

