NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INVESTOR BEHAVIOR AND THE PURCHASE OF COMPANY
STOCK IN 401(K) PLANS - THE IMPORTANCE OF PLAN DESIGN

Nellie Liang
Scott Weisbenner

Working Paper 9131
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9131

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve
Board or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank Darrell Cohen, Paul Harrison, George
Pennacchi, Allen Poteshman, Mike Weisbach, and participants at seminars at the Federal Reserve Board and
University of Illinois for helpful comments, and Eric Richards, Robert Paul, and Aldo Rosas for exceptional
research assistance.
© 2002 by Nellie Liang and Scott Weisbenner. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Investor Behavior and the Purchase of Company Stock in 401 (k) Plans The Importance of Plan Design
Nellie Liang and Scott Weisbenner
NBER Working Paper No. 9131
September 2002
JEL No. G11, J30, J32
ABSTRACT

Using panel data for nearly 1,000 companies during 1991 to 2000, this paper documents that the
average share of participant’s discretionary 401(k) contributions in company stock was almost 20
percent, and then relates this share to plan design features and firm financial characteristics. We find
that the number of investment alternatives offered, n, and whether the company requires some of the
match to be in company stock are key factors of the share of total contributions in company stock. We
cannot reject the hypothesis that participants invest 1/n of their contributions in company stock. In
addition, participants do not offset an employer match in company stock with a smaller share of their
own contributions to company stock, contrary to efficient diversification. Workers also appear to view
other plan restrictions as providing cues about the desirability of purchasing company stock. Thus, plan
design is very important in determining the share of 401(k) assets in company stock.

Nellie Liang

Scott Weisbenner

Federal Reserve Board

University of Illinois – Department of Finance

Capital Markets, Stop 89

304C David Kinley Hall, MC-706

20th and C Sts. NW

1407 W. Gregory Drive

Washington, DC 20551

Urbana, IL 61801

Phone: (202) 452-2918
e-mail: nliang@frb.gov

phone: (217) 333-0872, fax: (217) 244-9867
e-mail: weisbenn@uiuc.edu
and NBER

1
I. Introduction
The dramatic collapse of Enron has led to heightened scrutiny of the structure of
401(k) plans and how participants make their investment decisions. Currently, about 45
million workers participate in a 401(k)-type plan, and aggregate assets of these plans
totaled $1.97 trillion in 2001, surpassing assets in traditional defined benefit pension
plans. The trend away from defined benefit towards 401(k)-type plans has forced
employees to assume greater responsibility for their retirement savings, requiring them to
make decisions about how much to save and how to save it. In addition to traditional
investment choices of money market, broad bond and equity funds, employees are often
also given the option to invest their 401(k) contributions in company stock. The Profit
Sharing Contribution / 401(k) Council of America reports that company stock is offered
as an investment option in 72 percent of retirement plans with more than 5,000
participants.1
Markowitz (1952), Sharpe (1964), and Lintner (1965) would predict that
employees would forego investments in their own company’s stock in favor of diversified
portfolio. Indeed, when one considers the human capital and other forms of wealth many
workers already have tied to their firm, investment in company stock would seem an
inefficient choice. However, many workers do not have well-diversified retirement plan
portfolios. At Enron, for example 62 percent of 401(k) assets at year-end 2000 were held
in company stock. Part of the high concentration reflected that the company match was
made in Enron shares, but Enron employees were also allocating a large fraction of their

1

Among plans with 1,000-4,999 participants, 40 percent offer company stock as an investment option. The

smaller percentage offering company stock likely reflects that many of the smaller plans are offered by
private firms.

2
own, discretionary contributions to company stock as well.2
Such a high concentration of new contributions and existing holdings of
retirement assets in company stock is not unique to Enron. For example, at General
Electric, Home Depot, and Pfizer, more than 75 cents of every dollar in defined
contribution plan assets is held in company stock. At the other end of the spectrum, less
than one-eighth of 401(k) assets are in company stock at Dell, Halliburton, and Xerox.
More broadly, several recent studies estimate that among plans that offer company stock
as an investment option, the fraction of assets held in company stock totaled between 30
and 40 percent in recent years, with a large range across companies.3
Holding a portfolio tilted towards company stock is costly to employees, as they
are exposed to firm-specific risk that could have been diversified away. This lack of
diversification will result in an ex ante loss in welfare, and as Meulbrook (2002)
illustrates, the cost to workers can be substantial. To help understand why employees
invest in company stock and the variation in contributions to company stock across firms,
this paper examines factors that influence the investment decisions made by participants
in retirement plans. The paper first documents that the average share of participants’
discretionary 401(k) contributions in company stock was 19 percent at a sample of 994
publicly-traded companies during 1991 to 2000. We then examine how this share is
related to the design of the 401(k) plan and financial characteristics of the firm. In
particular, we examine whether purchases can be explained by the number of investment

2

In 1998, the last date for which detailed contribution data are available in the company’s 11-k filing,

employees allocated 20 percent of their own contributions to company stock purchases.
3

For example, see studies by Holden and VanDerhei (2001) and the Profit Sharing / 401(k) Council of

America.

3
options available, whether there are constraints on investment choices, whether the
company matches with company stock, previous stock returns, and other firm financial
characteristics. The primary contribution of this paper is to document how company
stock purchases are related to the features of the 401(k) plan.
Two recent papers have focused specifically on how company stock purchases in
401(k) plans respond to firm performance. Benartzi (2001) looks at employee decisions
to purchase company stock in 401(k) plans at 136 S&P 500 companies in 1993, and finds
greater discretionary purchases of company stock when the company makes its matching
contribution in company stock, and when previous company stock returns have been
high. He attributes this pattern to two factors: a tendency for investors to view employer
stock contributions as an explicit endorsement of the stock, and a tendency for investors
to extrapolate forward previous returns. This tendency to extrapolate forward past
returns is consistent with “representativeness” theory (Tversky and Kahneman, 1974), in
which people overestimate the probability that stock returns in the next period will be
high if previous returns were high. Sengmuller (2001) examines employee purchases of
company stock in retirement plans for a panel of 239 firms in the S&P 500 index at some
point between 1994 and 1998. Similar to Benartzi, he finds that past returns are a strong
predictor of purchases of company stock, but the relationship is weaker after 1993.
We extend this research in a number of ways by focusing on plan characteristics,
in addition to firm performance, as determinants of company stock purchases. First, we
examine how the number of investment alternatives offered in 401(k) plans affects the
purchase of company stock. If participants simply follow a naïve 1/n diversification rule,
where n represents the number of investment options, fewer investment alternatives

4
would lead to higher purchases of company stock. Second, our time series data also
allow us to examine how purchases of company stock respond to the introduction of more
investment alternatives. For example, as a company increases the number of alternatives
from 5 to 8, does the allocation to company stock decline, and is the effect immediate?
We also consider carefully other plan features, such as whether the plan imposes
minimum or maximum limits on purchases of company stock. Third, we examine, like
Benartzi (2001) and Sengmuller (2001), whether purchases of company stock are higher
when the employer matches in company stock. However, our time series data also permit
us to examine how purchases respond to the introduction of employer matches in
company stock, alleviating the interpretation problem that the positive correlation
observed in the cross-section could reflect an underlying employee preference for
company stock in firms that offer a match in stock. Fourth, we use a considerably larger
data set than previous studies. Our sample is based on 11-k data filed by publicly-traded
companies describing company stock purchases from 1991 to 2000. Our sample has
3,412 observations covering 994 different firms; the years with the greatest number of
observations, more than 600 each, are 1997 and 1998.
We find that the most important determinant of the share of contributions
allocated to company stock is the number of investment options, n, offered by the plan.
We cannot reject that employees follow a naïve 1/n diversification rule, investing 1/n of
their contributions in company stock. This result is consistent with Benartzi and Thaler
(2001) that find that the share of 401(k) assets in equities is largely determined by the
number of equity-type investment options offered. In addition, we find that employees
do not offset employer matches in company stock, leading to a substantial concentration

5
of 401(k) assets in company stock. Finally, we find evidence that employees appear to
interpret an employer match in company stock as the provision of implicit investment
advice, and increase their purchases of company stock accordingly. Additional evidence
on the effects of other restrictions, such as minimum or maximum limits on company
stock purchases, suggest that workers take investment cues from restrictions present in
the plan, also supportive of an endorsement effect.
These results indicate that companies have very large effects on 401(k) asset
holdings through the choice of some key plan features. So, we then turn the question
around – what determines the number of alternatives that a plan offers, and what
determines whether companies match with company stock? One specific area we address
is whether these plan design features are affected by past firm performance, and thus
whether the relationship we find between company stock purchases and plan features is
merely reflecting past firm performance. We also examine whether the decision to match
in company stock could be driven by the desire of firms to reduce future taxes.
Understanding what factors determine the decision to purchase company stock in
401(k) plans is important, as investing a large fraction of retirement savings in company
stock can impose substantially large ex ante welfare costs on employees if its leads to
lack of diversification. Our analysis will also be of use in evaluating the proposals that
have been made, in the wake of Enron’s dramatic failure, to establish new regulations for
participant investments in retirement savings plans. Section II describes our sample and
provides summary statistics. Section III discusses what the previous literature, both from
finance and psychology, suggest may motivate the purchase of company stock, and then
presents the empirical analysis of company stock purchases in retirement plans. Given

6
the importance of plan design, we examine what determines important plan features such
as the number of options offered and match policy in Section IV. A summary of our
findings and public policy implications follows in Section V.

II. Data and Sample Characteristics
Our primary data source for investments in defined contribution plans is the 11-k
form that some plans are required to file with the SEC. This form is required of plans for
which the investment option to purchase company stock is deemed an offering of
securities. In general, companies that offer participants the choice to purchase company
stock with their own contributions and that issue shares for the plan, rather than purchase
shares on the open market, are required to file an 11-k. Data on plans that exclusively
buy shares on the open market are not publicly available, so our results may or may not
generalize to this population. If the employer contribution is in company stock, but the
plan does not allow employees to purchase stock, it would generally not be deemed an
offer of securities, and thus the plan would not be required to file. In our discussion with
SEC staff, the 11-k obligation is almost a fact and circumstance determination, and the
company has an obligation to determine whether it needs to file. Because 401(k) plans
are subject to ERISA, the information provided on the 11-k is in accordance with ERISA
reporting guidelines. In 1999, there was a change in ERISA reporting requirements that
led to fewer companies reporting contributions by asset category, leaving us with
contribution data for far fewer plans in 1999 and 2000 than in 1998.
The data we collect from 11-k filings include total participant contributions,
participant contributions allocated to company stock, employer contributions, employer

7
contribution in the form of company stock, total plan assets, company stock assets,
number of investment alternatives, and descriptions of limits on purchases of company
stock. As in Benartzi (2001), we collect data for the largest plan at each company.
Information on stock prices and standard deviation of returns are from the Center for
Research in Security Prices (CRSP) database. Other firm financial information,
including market-to-book ratios, assets, cash flow (net income plus depreciation), and
employees are from Compustat.
Starting with all U.S. firms listed in Compustat any year from 1993 to 1999, we
identify firms that filed an 11-k at least once during 1994 to 2001 (table 1).4 We were
able to hand-collect data for 994 companies, yielding 3,412 firm-year observations. Most
of the data are in the period 1993 to 1998. On average, there are 3.4 observations per
firm, with 41 percent of the firms with 2 observations or less and 59 percent of the firms
with 3 observations or more. The sample represents a broad cross-section of industries
(table 2), with the largest concentrations in the financial and technology sector. As noted
in the last line of the table, only about one-fourth of our sample was ever a member of the
S&P 500. Our sample is considerably larger than samples for Benartzi (2001) or
Sengmuller (2001), which included only firms that were a member of the S&P 500 in
1993 and at any time during 1994-98, respectively.
To further characterize our sample, we focus on firms in the sample in 1998, one
of the more recent years with the largest number of firms. Almost one-half of the firms
were not in the broad S&P 1500 index in 1998, indicating that the companies are

4

11-k filings are available on the SEC’s Edgar website starting in 1994. The 1994 filing will report plan

activity during 1993. Some firms will report not only plan activity during the past year, but plan activity
over the past three years. Thus, we have 190 observations for 1992 and 51 observations for 1991.

8
considerably smaller than those examined in previous studies (table 3a). As compared to
firms in the S&P 1500, and all publicly-traded firms, there are somewhat fewer
technology firms. As expected, the firms in our sample are smaller, measured by both
assets and employees, and have slightly lower market-to-book ratios than S&P 1500
firms (table 3b). As compared to all public companies, however, the firms in our sample
are larger.
Recall that, in general, companies that issue shares for their retirement plan, rather
than purchase shares on the open market, are required to file an 11-k. This raises the
potential that the sample could be biased to firms that do not repurchase stock at all.
However, as shown in the final row of table 3b, roughly half of the firms in the sample
repurchased stock in 1998 (just evidently not in conjunction with their retirement plan).
The share repurchase yield (an estimate of the fraction of shares repurchased) for the
sample was 1.8 percent in 1998, similar to the yield for the S&P 1500.
We also compare our sample of plans to those at publicly-traded firms as reported
on Form 5500 filed with the Department of Labor.5 In the aggregate, for our sample of
the largest plans at 667 companies in 1998, total plan assets were $274 billion,
representing about 40 percent of the $698 billion in plan assets at all publicly-traded
companies (table 3c). Total contributions by participant and company for our sample
totaled $15.5 billion, as compared with $49.2 billion for publicly-traded firms.
Estimates from the Department of Labor for 1998 for all US companies, public and
private, show $1.65 trillion in assets and $135 billion in contributions.
For our sample of 667 companies in 1998, company stock in aggregate totaled
5

Publicly-traded companies on the DOL Form 5500 data set were identified by whether they had a CUSIP,

and by matching EINs with those in Compustat.

9
$102 billion, representing 37 percent of plan assets. Purchases of company stock as a
percent of total participant contributions are 24 percent. These averages are similar to
those in the samples analyzed by Benartzi (2001) and Sengmuller (2001).6 The
Department of Labor 5500 data indicate that $273 billion of $1.65 trillion of 401(k)-type
assets, or one-sixth, was held in company stock, likely because smaller, privately-held
firms do not offer company stock. The estimated share of defined contribution plan
assets held in company stock at all public firms is 39 percent, similar to the share for our
sample.

III. Empirical Analysis of Purchases of Company Stock
A. 401(k) Plan Design
Table 4 summarizes features of the 401(k) plans that could affect the participants’
purchases of company stock. As suggested by Benartzi and Thaler (2001), one of the
most important features that guide employee contributions is the number of investment
alternatives. For our sample, the average number of investment options offered is 7.5,
with a 25th and 75th percentile range of 5 to 9. These figures are similar to the 170 plans
studied in Benartzi and Thaler (2001) that offered on average 6.8 investment options in
1996. By sample construction, company stock is one of those investment options. For
six percent of the firm-year observations, company stock was offered as an option in the
plan for the first time.
A few companies have explicit guidelines regarding company stock purchases.

6

Benartzi found that company stock represented 33 percent of assets, and Sengmuller found a ratio of 35

percent in 1998. Based on contributions, Benartzi finds that 24 percent of participant contributions went to
company stock and Sengmuller reports 24.5 percent in 1998.

10
For about 4 percent of the firm-year observations, there is a ceiling on how much of the
employee contribution can be made in company stock, ranging from 10 to 50 percent of
total contributions. Among plans with a maximum restriction, about two-fifths have a
ceiling of 50%, and an additional three-tenths have a ceiling of 25%. Less than one
percent of firms put a floor on purchases of company stock. In addition, about one
percent of firms provide an incentive to purchase company stock, through a discount or
larger employer match.
Employers made contributions to the retirement plan in 94 percent of our firmyear observations, similar to other studies that find that nearly all employers offer a
match (e.g., Holden and VanDerhei, 2001). In our sample, 48 percent of employers that
granted a match required that at least part of the match be in company stock, with nearly
two-fifths of the firms requiring that the entire amount of employer contributions be in
company stock. Only about 2 percent stipulate that some part of the employer match not
be invested in company stock.
The remainder of this section examines how these features affect purchases of
company stock, starting with the most prominent features, the number of investment
options and restrictions on the employer match.
B. Previous literature and the effect of the number of investment alternatives
This section tests whether the number of options offered in the 401(k) plan
influences investment in company stock. The principal hypotheses we examine are
diversification and familiarity. The fact that the participant already receives income from
the firm and has a substantial human capital investment in the firm a priori nearly rejects
the hypothesis that any company stock purchases could be consistent with the efficient

11
diversification outlined by Markowitz (1952), Sharpe (1964), and Lintner (1965). Given
their wealth already tied to the firm, efficient portfolio theory would suggest that
employees should invest minimal, if any, contributions to company stock to avoid ex ante
welfare costs due to the lack of portfolio diversification.
Benartzi and Thaler (2001) provide evidence of naïve diversification behavior.
They find that the share of 401(k) assets held in equities is largely determined by the
number of equity-type investment options offered, consistent with participants following
a naive 1/n diversification rule, in which assets are divided equally among the n
investment options offered in the retirement savings plan. Goetzmann and Kumar (2001)
also argue that investors use naive diversification rules in their equity investment
accounts. Specifically, investors will hold numerous stocks but they fail to take into
account the correlations among the stocks they hold, and thus are under-diversified,
perhaps because of high costs of acquiring information to make more informed decisions.
There is some evidence, however, suggesting that participants view company
stock as an asset separate from other equities. Benartzi and Thaler (2001) find that when
plans do not offer company stock as an option, the assets are split about equally between
equity and fixed-income securities; but, among plans that offer company stock,
participants do not reduce non-company equity securities – instead, company stock
accounts for 42 percent of assets, and the remaining 58 percent is split roughly evenly
between other equities and fixed income securities.
Investing in company stock may be viewed differently from investing in other
equities for several reasons. The distinction could owe to pressures that a participant may
feel from the firm or colleagues to purchase stock and increase share ownership, or that

12
the investment is considered to be less risky because of familiarity with the company.
Heath and Tversky (1991) and Langer (1975) present evidence that people suffer from an
“illusion of control” and behave as though familiar gambles are less risky than unfamiliar
gambles, even when they assign identical probabilities of success to the two gambles.
Heath and Tversky (1991) further conclude that this tendency to bet on the familiar
“might also help explain why investors are sometimes willing to forego the advantage of
diversification and concentrate on a small number of companies which they are
presumably familiar.”
There is much evidence of investing in the familiar “home team,” perhaps
because investors perceive familiarity to imply less risk. Huberman (2001), using data on
the ownership of Regional Bell Operating Companies, finds that investors have a strong
tendency to invest in stocks with which they are geographically proximate and familiar.
The unwillingness of investors to diversify internationally - French and Poterba (1991) is
one of many studies to document the home country bias – is another classic example of
investing in the familiar. Coval and Moskowitz (1999) find that U.S. investment
managers exhibit a strong preference for locally headquartered firms in their portfolios.7
In the context of a 401(k) plan, a preference for investing in the familiar would
translate into purchases of own company stock, which is likely the most familiar
investment option. Indeed, annual surveys by John Hancock Financial Services regularly
find that participants view company stock as the most familiar investment option in their
retirement plan. Given their familiarity with company stock, it is thus not too surprising
that workers tend to underestimate its risk. As figure 1 shows, participants surveyed by
7

Investing in the familiar may also be driven by asymmetric information between local and nonlocal

investors, as Coval and Moskowitz suggest for U.S. investment managers.

13
Vanguard view company stock as safer than a diversified portfolio of stocks as well as
the stock of any other individual company. Further, Benartzi (2001) finds that investors
overestimate the likelihood that company stock will outperform the overall stock market.
These results suggest that employees may view company stock in its own
category separate from other equities, and thus may not adopt the simple 1/n
diversification rule for purchases of company stock. If workers adopt the 1/n rule, then
the addition of investment options should reduce purchases of company stock. However,
if the purchase of company stock is driven by the familiarity hypothesis, then adding
more unfamiliar investment options will likely not affect company stock purchases very
much. Since the additional options will likely be less familiar to the employee than
company stock, the additional options will likely not siphon contributions away from
firm stock.
Because we have annual data on plan contributions, we are able to test
implications of the naïve diversification and familiarity hypotheses. Findings by Benartzi
and Thaler (2001) are based on asset holdings, rather than new flows (i.e., contributions
into the plan). Using data on asset holdings could obscure the strength of the relationship
between options offered and allocation decisions. The allocation of assets may just
reflect differences in past returns since participants are slow to rebalance their portfolios
(Samuelson and Zeckhauser, 1988). Our data on flows to 401(k) plans permit us to
directly observe the underlying relationship between plan attributes and subsequent
investment decisions.
The distribution of the dependent variable -- the fraction of participant

14
contributions in company stock -- is shown in table 5.8 This variable represents the
fraction of total firm-wide employee contributions allocated to company stock. For our
sample, the average fraction of participant contributions invested in company stock is 19
percent (median 14 percent), with a standard deviation of 17 percent. In interpreting our
results, we often use this measure to represent the investment decision of the “average”
employee. Unlike the grant of employee stock options, which are highly skewed towards
upper management, nearly all employees are eligible to participate in 401(k) plans.
Moreover, contributions are more evenly distributed across the workforce, since taxdeferred employee contributions are capped (e.g., the limit was $10,000 per employee in
1998), and there are limits relating to participation by highly compensated employees
relative to other employees so as to preserve the tax-exempt status of the plan.
To determine the importance of the number of investment options, we first
tabulate the average fraction of participant contributions invested in company stock by
the number of investment options offered (table 6). As shown in more detail than in table
4, the average number of investment alternatives offered in our sample is 7.5, the median
is 7, and the 1st to 99th percentile range is 3 to 18. Since we have a panel data set,
multiple observations from the same firm over time are used in calculating the averages.
Thus, we allow for within-firm correlation when calculating the standard error, as we do
for all pooled regressions throughout the paper.
We find a very striking and strong relationship between the number of investment
8

This variable has been adjusted for the 92 observations in which company stock was available as an

investment option for only part of the year. For example, if company stock was only available for a quarter
of the year, then total employee contributions for the year will be divided by four when calculating the
share of contributions allocated to company stock. This adjustment is made to reflect that company stock
was a possible choice for only one fourth of the year.

15
options and the fraction of company stock purchases: The purchase of company stock
monotonically declines with the number of investment options offered. If the plan offers
two investment options (company stock and some other asset), the average fraction of
company stock purchased is 59 percent; if the plan offers three options, the fraction is 36
percent; if the plan offers four options, the fraction is 26 percent; and so on until the share
levels out at 13 percent, when plan offerings include 10 or more options. For the firms
that offer 2 through 6 options, we cannot reject that employees adopt a 1/n investment
strategy for company stock. We obtain a similar pattern of results when looking at the
median share of participant contributions allocated to company stock across the number
of investment options.
We next run a regression of the fraction of employee contributions in company
stock on 1/n, for individual years of the sample and the full sample. We specify the
number of investment alternatives as 1/n, not n, because we would expect a nonlinear
relationship between the number of investment alternatives and allocations to company
stock. If the naïve diversification hypothesis is true, an additional option should reduce
contributions to company stock more if the plan initially had only three options than if it
had ten options. Indeed, a coefficient of one on the 1/n variable would suggest that
workers, on average, adopt a naïve diversification rule for company stock. In contrast,
the familiarity hypothesis would predict a coefficient of less than one, and likely close to
zero. Recall under this hypothesis, employees will tend to allocate contributions to
company stock because of its familiarity, and because additional options will likely be
less familiar to the employee, the additional options will likely not reduce contributions
to company stock.

16
Results are reported for the years 1993 to 1998 and the pooled sample from 19912000 (table 7). As suggested by our earlier tabulations, 1/n is a very significant indicator
of employee purchases of company stock. For each year and the pooled sample, the
coefficients are close to one, and we cannot reject that the coefficient equals one for any
of the regressions.9 These estimates imply that when the typical plan offers 5 investment
options, for example, the expected share of participant contributions in company stock is
20 percent. We also find that 1/n by itself explains roughly 10 percent of the variation in
the dependent variable.10 A direct interpretation of these results is that plans can
substantially reduce the share of company stock purchases simply by increasing the
number of investment options. These results provide strong support for a naive
diversification heuristic.
A possible objection to this interpretation is that the number of investment options
might reflect the demands of participants, and that the empirical associations we
document simply reflect that employees with preferences for many investment options
work for companies that offer 401(k) plans with that design. For example, firms with
less risk-averse workers that want to invest in company stock may not feel the need to
offer many other investment options. We would then observe a negative correlation
between the number of options and the investment in company stock, just as predicted by
the naïve diversification hypothesis, but the interpretation of the correlation would be
different.
9

We obtain similar coefficient estimates, statistically indistinguishable from one, when we weight

observations by the number of firm employees and the total amount of employee contributions.
10

We also note that once we control for the number of investment options offered, the estimated constant in

the regression is not statistically different from zero in most of the single-year regressions, and while
significant in the pooled regression, its value is fairly close to zero.

17
To address this issue, we employ the panel nature of our data set to estimate a
fixed-effects regression, which allows us to characterize the change in employee
purchases of company stock to the change in the number of options available for a given
firm. As shown in the last row of table 7, the coefficient estimate on 1/n is .27 and
significant, suggesting that when the number of investment options increases from 5 to
10, participants on average do not fully adjust their purchases of company stock from 1/5
to 1/10 (20 percent to 10 percent), but only adjust one-quarter of the way. Thus, our
results suggest that participants change their allocations in accord with a naive 1/n
diversification approach, but a full adjustment is not immediate, consistent with
documented behavior of investor inertia.
To explore this adjustment process further, we regress the change in the fraction
of employee contributions in company stock on the change in the number of options
offered. The regressions include 2,418 firm-year observations for which data on the
contributions are available for at least two consecutive years. Of these, 667 increased the
number of options offered during a one-year period.11 As shown in column 1 of table 8,
the estimated coefficient on the change in 1/n in the concurrent period is .18 and
significant, suggesting that some (but clearly far from all) participants immediately make
an adjustment to their share of contributions going to company stock when the number of
options increases (1/n declines). Columns 2 through 5 regress the cumulative change in
the share of contributions to company stock for two to five years following the initial
change in the number of options offered. Because only observations for which there
were no additional changes in the number of options were used, there is a substantial

11

A small set of 21 plans decreased the number of offerings.

18
reduction in the sample size as the period lengthens. We find that by three years after the
initial change, for example, the coefficient estimate climbs to .59, and by five years, the
coefficient is .87, not statistically different from one. The coefficient of .27 in the fixed
effect framework in Table 7 can be viewed as a weighted average of the coefficients in
Table 8, with a higher weight on the coefficients from the one-year after change and twoyear after change regressions.12 It is also worth pointing out that, after controlling for the
effect of the number of options on contribution allocation, there is no additional
difference in the change in company stock purchases between firms that increased
investment options compared to firms that did not change the number of options. This is
reflected by the insignificance of the “Did number of options stay the same?” dummy
variable.
These findings could be consistent with two explanations. First, some
participants may simply adjust slowly to the new investment options: Only a fraction of
employees may adjust their contribution allocations each year, with some employees
taking up to 4-5 years after new options are added to reduce company stock purchases.
However, there is an alternative explanation that could possibly explain the results in
table 8. Under the alternative, individual participants never change the fraction of
contributions they allocate to company stock in response to new options, and the
estimated coefficients just reflect that as existing participants leave the firm, they are
replaced by new participants who follow the 1/n heuristic. For the table 8 results to
reflect the employee turnover hypothesis, firms on average would have to replace about

12

Recall the average firm is in the sample 3.4 years, so if the firm changes the number of investment

options during those 3 years it will have one or two observations before the change and two or one
observations after the change.

19
20 percent of their workforce each year, and entirely replace their workforce in 5 years,
an assumption about employee turnover that would seem to be too rapid. For example,
using the Current Population Survey from 1994-2000, Fallick and Fleischman (2001)
estimate that 7 percent of private employees leave their job in a given year, with 5
percent of full-time workers turning over. Thus, these results appear to be more
consistent with a sluggish adjustment by individual employees to changes in the number
of options offered than to employee turnover.
Recall that we observe only the investment decisions of the “average” worker,
and have no information on the distribution of investments across workers within the
firm. Our results suggest that adding more investment options to the plan reduces the
purchase of company stock on average, not that every worker follows the naïve
diversification heuristic. Thus, because the response to more options could differ across
workers, and we do not have information on asset purchases outside the 401(k), the
welfare implications of adding more options to 401(k) plans are difficult to assess.
These findings are also consistent with studies that document that participant
behavior is strongly guided by inertia. Samuelson and Zeckhauser (1988) document that
participants are slow to alter existing investments in their retirement plans. Madrian and
Shea (2000) find that the savings behavior of participants in a 401(k) plan at a large
company changed substantially when the plan switched to automatic enrollment. In
particular, a substantial fraction of 401(k) participants under automatic enrollment stuck
with the default contribution rate and the default fund allocation. Choi, Laibson,
Madrian, and Metrick (2001) confirms these results when they expand the study to
include two other firms, and are able to track participant decisions for a longer period of

20
time following automatic enrollment.
C. Effect of Employer Match in Company Stock
Another key plan feature that could affect the share of participant contributions to
company stock is whether any of the employer match is required to be in company stock.
Diversification theory would predict that a participant’s discretionary contributions to
company stock would decrease to offset a company’s match in stock, i.e., the employee
would act to “undo” the employer’s actions. Contrary to this prediction, Benartzi (2001)
finds that contributions are significantly higher when some of the employer contribution
is required to be in company stock. He finds that the mean allocation of employee
contributions to company stock is 29 percent when some of the employer match is
required to be in company stock, 11 percentage points higher than when the plan allows
the employee free choice to invest the employer match. Supplementing his data with
survey evidence, Benartzi argues that such behavior suggests that employees interpret
company stock matches as an endorsement, i.e., implicit investment advice offered by the
company. In one survey, Benartzi finds that 45 percent of participants would increase
their own allocation to the international stock fund if the employer were to introduce a
match that was all invested in an international stock fund. In another survey, Benartzi
finds that only 3 percent of participants that currently do not receive an employer match
would decrease their own allocation to equities if a match was offered and it was all
invested in a diversified stock fund. Madrian and Shea (2000) also attribute participant
behavior to stay in the default investment vehicle as accepting investment advice on the
part of the company.
In our sample, 94 percent, or 3,201 firm-year observations included an employer

21
match. As shown in table 9, during 1991 to 2000, 48 percent of the firms required some
part of the match to be in company stock. Among plans with an employer match, the
average fraction of participant contributions in company stock is 15 percent if there is no
requirement that some be in company stock, while the average fraction of participant
contributions in company stock is 23 percent if there is some requirement.
We estimate a regression of the fraction of participant contributions to company
stock on the requirement that some part of the employer match be invested in company
stock for each year and for the pooled sample to determine how this requirement affects
participant choice. The significant and positive coefficients indicate that employee
discretionary contributions in company stock are significantly higher when some of the
employer match is also in company stock. For the pooled sample, the estimates imply
that discretionary contributions are about nine percentage points higher, a substantial
effect given the sample average of 19 percent. These results are contrary to
diversification, which would predict a negative coefficient as employees offset the
employer match in company stock, but are consistent with the endorsement effect
proposed by Benartzi.
Again, an objection to the endorsement interpretation is that employees who have
a preference for company stock may work for firms that offer company stock, and the
relationship we document merely reflects the underlying preference for company stock.
Other studies have documented the effects of an underlying strong preference for
company stock or equities, showing that those who hold a high proportion of equities in
pension savings also hold a high fraction of non-pension assets in equities (Bodie and
Crane (1997) and Weisbenner (1999)).

22
To address this issue, we first use a fixed-effects approach, which focuses on
changes in employer match policy within a firm and thus controls for worker risk
preferences. As shown in the last row of table 9, the estimated coefficient on whether
some of the employer match is required to be in company stock is still positive and
marginally significant, although reduced in magnitude substantially. The key point from
the fixed-effect regression is that employees within a specific firm will not decrease, but
will boost slightly (by 1.6 percentage points), their own allocation to company stock
following a change in match policy to company stock.
In a second test of changes in match policy on investment decisions, we look only
at firms that adjusted their match policy. We find that adjustments have not been very
frequent: there are only 31 cases in which the employer match went from total choice (all
cash) to some requirement for company stock, and only 33 cases in which the employer
switched from some requirement on company stock to total choice. In table 10, we
regress the cumulative changes for one year up to five years in discretionary
contributions in company stock on the initial change in the employer match, allowing for
different coefficients depending on whether the employer match was changed from total
choice to company stock requirement, or from company stock requirement to total
choice. Similar to the results in the fixed-effects regression, we find no evidence that
employees adjust their discretionary purchases of company stock to offset either the
increased or decreased company stock exposure caused by a change in match policy,
even over a period as long as five years after the change. If anything, there is a gradual
shift of employee contributions to company stock following a switch to a company stock
match, and a gradual movement away from company stock following a switch to total

23
choice (all the coefficient estimates are very imprecise given the small sample of firms
changing match policy).
These results are more consistent with the endorsement hypothesis than
diversification. First, if participants were guided by diversification they would offset an
increased company stock match by reducing their own contributions. However, if they
view the switch to company stock as an endorsement by the company, they might not
make the offsetting changes. Thus, our result of zero or a slightly positive effect is
consistent with the endorsement hypothesis. Conversely, participants guided by
diversification would boost the share of own purchases of company stock to offset the
decrease in the company match in order to obtain the pre-change level of company stock
purchases. But since we observe zero or a slightly negative effect, it appears that
participants must have reduced their desired total allocation to company stock after the
change, again consistent with the endorsement hypothesis.
Overall, we find no evidence that workers attempt to “undo” the presence of an
employer match in company stock. Indeed, we find cross-sectional evidence to the
contrary; workers in firms with a match all in company stock tend to put more of their
own contributions in company stock as well. This is consistent with the endorsement
hypothesis. We further find that employees do not change the share of own contributions
put in company stock to offset a change in the match policy of the firm. Our fixed-effects
analysis appears to support the hypothesis that an employer match in company stock is
interpreted as an endorsement by the company, that is, implicit investment advice to
purchase company stock, although inertia could also explain the result. In either case,
employees do little to offset a changed employer match policy. This result means that a

24
switch to a match in company stock will result in a large share of 401(k) assets held in
company stock.
D. Effects of other plan features
We now expand the analysis to consider the importance of other plan features, as
well as firm performance and other firm-specific characteristics on discretionary
company stock purchases. The results of this analysis for the pooled sample 1991-2000
are in table 11. Other plan characteristics, displayed in the upper panel of table 11, are
the focus of this section. The effect of past firm performance and other firm
characteristics are discussed in sections E and F below.
Not surprisingly, workers invest less in company stock if it is the first year that it
is being offered in the plan. This inertia effect is sizeable, as the coefficient estimate
suggests that the share of own contributions allocated to company stock is nine
percentage points less if it is the first year company stock is an option in the plan (recall
the unconditional average share is 19 percent).
As mentioned earlier, a small subset of the plans restrict or encourage investment
in company stock. In particular, the plan may have upper or lower bounds on the amount
participants can put in company stock or provide a financial incentive, such as a discount
or larger match for company stock allocations. It is important to note that companies are
loath to provide any investment guidance to plan participants, most likely because if
firms provide investment guidance to employees, they could be held liable for any poor
investment results (Section 404 (c) of ERISA). Since investment advice is not offered,
plan participants may draw cues from plan features that either encourage or discourage
investment in company stock. Just as the endorsement hypothesis predicts that workers

25
may view a match in company stock as a signal from the company that its shares are a
good investment, the endorsement hypothesis would also predict that the presence of any
restrictions on company stock purchases would be viewed as a signal that company
shares are not be a great investment.
As shown in table 11, we find a significant and negative coefficient on the
dummy variable designating the presence of a limit on investment in company stock.
The estimated coefficients for the pooled sample (first two columns), suggest that for the
4 percent of the sample with an explicit limit on the share of employee contributions in
company stock, simply the presence of the limit leads to a reduction in the share by 7
percentage points, from a sample average of 19 percent. However, the amount of the
limit itself does not appear to be important, since the coefficient on the amount of the
limit is insignificant and close to zero. If the limit was binding for all employees, the
coefficient on the limit should be one, as an increase from a limit of 10 percent to 25
percent would increase contributions to company stock by 15 percentage points.
Conversely, a handful of firms had a requirement that some portion of employee
contributions must be in company stock, with a typical requirement being 50 percent
(with a range of 25 to75 percent).13 The coefficient on the variable designating this floor
on the share of contributions is positive and significant, and suggests that the mere
presence of a floor increases employee contributions to company stock by about 17-19
percentage points, even after controlling for the actual amount of the minimum required
contribution to stock. As expected, we also find a greater share of company stock
purchased at the one percent of observations that provide some type of financial incentive
13

Most of the plans with this floor are employee stock ownership plans (ESOPs) that allow participant

choice, subject to the minimum required investment in company stock.

26
to buy company stock.
These findings for variables representing a ceiling or a floor provide additional
evidence consistent with endorsement theory: The mere presence of a floor for company
stock purchases appears to be interpreted as implicit endorsement of the firm’s company
stock as a good investment advice, and appears to be followed by employees, and the
mere presence of a ceiling provides an endorsement or reminder to diversify one’s
portfolio, a warning that appears to be heeded.
Consistent with the earlier bivariate results, whether the plan requires that the
match be in company stock is a significant predictor of the share of contributions in
company stock in the full specification as well. At the other extreme, a small number of
plans, about 2 percent, require a portion of the employer match to not be in company
stock. We find in the cross section that employees of firms that have such a restriction
invest about three percentage points less of employee contributions in company stock,
although the results are not statistically significant (p-value = .19). The effect of
introducing a restriction on workers ability to allocate match contributions to company
stock is more evident in the fixed-effect framework (third column of table 11). If a firm
changes match policy so that part of the match is required to be kept out of company
stock, the allocation of employee contributions to company stock falls a predicted 7.5
percentage points (p-value = .01). Thus, employees appear to take cues from any
introduction of a restriction on company stock investments in the match, and voluntarily
reduce their own, discretionary allocations to company stock as well.
Most of the results outlined above in the pooled cross-section hold qualitatively in
the fixed-effects framework (third column of table 11) as well. The introduction of more

27
plan options reduces purchases of company stock, while adding incentives to purchase
company stock increases purchases. If match policy is changed so that part of the match
is required to be kept out of (kept in) company stock, the allocation of employee
contributions to company stock is predicted to fall (rise slightly). Since no firm in the
sample introduced, dropped, or changed the amount of the floor/minimum for the
allocation of employee contributions to company stock, the amount and indicator
variables for the floor were dropped from the fixed-effect regression (as was the presence
of a ceiling/maximum for the allocation of employee contributions to company stock).
Overall, these results provide additional evidence consistent with endorsement
effects regarding match policy. The presence of a floor or ceiling on company stock
purchases affects purchases significantly, even after controlling for the amount of the
limit.
E. Additional effect of firm financial characteristics
Benartzi (2001) and Sengmuller (2001) have documented that the share of
employee contributions in company stock is higher when previous stock price returns
have been larger. Benartzi (2001) argues that such behavior is consistent with a
representativeness heuristic (Tversky and Kahneman (1974) and Griffin and Tversky
(1992)), whereby investors overweight recent past returns in formulating predictions for
future returns, even when future returns are largely unpredictable. In other words,
workers may view recent past performance as representative of future performance of
their company’s stock. Consistent with this notion, numerous studies find that net
inflows to mutual funds are positively related to past performance (e.g, Patel, Zeckhauser,
and Hendricks (1991), Ippolito (1992), Chevalier and Ellison (1997), and Sirri and

28
Tufano (1998)). Evidence from surveys of stock investors, replicated in Figures 2-5,
demonstrate that realized returns in the past twelve months are an important and
significant predictor of returns expected in the next twelve months, suggesting that
investors may project forward past growth rates.14
The bottom two panels of table 11 present the regression coefficients for past
stock returns and the other firm characteristics. Like other studies, we generally find a
positive and significant coefficient on past stock returns. For the pooled cross-section
and the fixed-effect regressions, the coefficient estimates suggest only a 1.9 to 2.0
percentage point increase in the share of employee contributions allocated to company
stock following a doubling in stock price over the past year. This estimate is about onethird the size of the effect Benartzi found for returns over the past year using a crosssection of firms in 1993. The relationship between returns and subsequent company
stock purchases appears to have waned somewhat over time.15 Thus, past stock
performance is significant, but the overall effect on the share of contributions to company
stock is not that large.
The coefficients on other financial variables are in general similar to those found
in previous studies. Employee purchases of company stock, as a share of total

14

See the UBS PaineWebber Index of Investor Optimism, a monthly survey conducted by The Gallup

Organization.
15

Benartzi’s results implied a 6.0 percentage point increase in company stock allocations following a

doubling in stock price over the past year. This estimate was based on a cross-section of 140 firms in 1993
that were members of the S&P 500. When we focus just on the 1993 cross-sectional regression, the
coefficient suggests a 4.3 percentage point increase in the share of company stock purchases following a
doubling in price over the past year (more than double the effect estimated over our full sample). If we
further restrict the 1993 cross-section to the members of the S&P 500, the estimate rises to 5.2 percentage
points.

29
contributions, is higher at larger firms, at firms with higher market-to-book ratios, and at
firms with lower stock price volatility. Most importantly, the addition of these variables
does not alter the significance or estimated magnitude of the effects of the plan
characteristics, such as the number of investment options, which are the focus of the
study. The coefficient on 1/n, which was .87 in the bivariate specification of Table 7, is
essentially unchanged in the full specification that includes other plan and firm
characteristics. Once the number of investment options is included in the regression,
there is no time trend in the share of contributions going to company stock. The year
dummies are both individually and jointly insignificant.
F. More on firm performance and purchases of company stock
We examine further the effect of past performance by including returns for two
holding periods, in particular for one year and five years. Benartzi (2001) found that
company stock purchases were more sensitive to long-term performance than to shortterm performance. The average past one-year return is 24 percent (median 19) and the
average cumulative five-year return is 154 percent (median 92). There is also substantial
variation in past performance because, in contrast to previous work on S&P 500 firms,
our sample contains some poor performers. Three-tenths of the firms had negative oneyear returns, and one-sixth had negative five-year returns.
Table 12 presents regression results focusing on the relationship between
company stock purchases and past stock price performance measured over both one year
and five years. Because these purchases are retirement savings, employees may not react
to short-term stock price movements, but may be more apt to adjust contributions in
response to long-term firm performance. Also, if investors are subject to inertia,

30
adjustments may not be immediate and extend beyond one year. We also split returns by
whether previous returns were positive or negative because participants may view gains
and losses differently, such as the tendency for investors to hold on to losers and sell
winners (Odean, 1998 and Odean, 1999). We also examine past performance relative to
the S&P 500 index in the third column.
Our results show that the largest and most significant coefficient is on negative
returns in the previous five years, suggesting that participants tend to shy away from
long-term losers. In addition, participants appear to respond to firm performance
asymmetrically. That is, we find no change in the share of contributions going to
company stock following price run ups, but we find that employees pull back
contributions to company stock following long-term price declines. In particular,
coefficients from the full specification presented in column 2 of table 12 indicate that a
90 percent price decline over the past five years is associated with a decline in the share
of contributions allocated to company stock of 8 percentage points.16
These results are counter to Sengmuller (2001) who finds a larger coefficient on
positive past returns than negative past returns. The difference likely owes to our larger
sample. Our sample suffers from no selection bias, and thus, on average, firms in our
sample likely had worse performance than firms in his sample, which were required to be
members of the S&P 500.

IV. What Determines Plan Design?
Our results emphasize the importance of the features of the 401(k) savings plan in
16

We also estimated quadratics of the past gains/losses to allow the coefficient on past performance to

increase with larger returns, but the quadratic terms were insignificant and small in magnitude.

31
determining the share of employee contributions allocated to company stock. Because
the features go far in explaining average levels and the cross-sectional variation in levels
of company stock purchases, it is important to understand how companies determine their
plan features. To some extent, we also want to evaluate whether plan features might
themselves reflect past firm performance, which would cloud the causality of the
relationship between contribution decisions and plan features.
A. Determinants of number of investment options offered
First, we examine whether firm financial performance can explain any of the
variation in the number of investment options offered. As shown in table 13, we regress
the inverse of the number of investment options offered on firm characteristics and past
stock returns. Estimated coefficients indicate only one consistently significant variable:
firms offered more options in later years. In particular, the estimated coefficient for 2000
in the cross-section specification is -.17. Relative to 1991, the omitted year, the
coefficient implies that the number of options increases from roughly 3 (approximately
the inverse of .30) to 8 (approximately the inverse of .30-.17=.13). No doubt that the
increase in the number of option alternatives over time was associated with the
proliferation of different types of mutual funds offered over the past decade. For
example, the ICI reports that the total number of mutual funds rose from 3,405 in 1991 to
8,171 in 2000. In addition, fund types defined by investment objective (with at least 50
funds) rose from 19 categories in 1990 to 33 categories in 2000.17 Firm stock returns,
market-to-book, cash flow, and the standard deviation of stock returns appear to have no
effect on the number of investment options offered. Firm size, measured by the log of the

17

2001 Mutual Fund Handbook, 41st edition, Investment Company Institute, Washington, DC.

32
book value of assets, is significant in the pooled cross-section, but the estimated effect is
very small.
B. Determinants of employer match required to all be in company stock
1. Effects of cash constraints, share ownership, and dividends
Determinants of whether the employer match is required to all be in company
stock could be guided by two models. First, a firm that is cash-constrained may require
that the employer match be in company stock because the firm would be unable to match
in cash (i.e., allow investment choice). This model would predict that firms with less
cash flow will be more likely to offer a match in company stock. In this case, the
company match serves as a source of internal financing, as cash-constrained firms issue
shares in lieu of cash for the employees’ retirement fund.
Alternatively, companies that have a large value in growth opportunities and
intangible assets may find it beneficial to increase share ownership of its employees, due
to the asymmetric information between insiders (employees) and outside shareholders
(Holmstrom and Milgrom (1987)). This model would predict that firms whose value is
comprised of intangible assets and growth opportunities, and hence more uncertainty
about true value, will be more likely to offer a match in company stock in order to
increase insider ownership. However, while increasing stock-based wealth of top
executives may be important to outside shareholders, the benefits of doing this for lower
level employees, whose effort will have less effect on stock price, is less clear.
We estimate a regression for whether the firm requires the employer match to all
be in company stock (right panel of table 13).18 We find that indicators of firms that

18

We estimate a linear regression to provide an easy-to-interpret estimate of the marginal effects of firm

33
might benefit from higher share ownership by employees are not important – estimated
coefficients on market-to-book and the standard deviation of stock returns, proxies for
firms with potential asymmetric information problems, are insignificant. The results also
suggest that firms do not require the employer match to be in company stock because of
low cash flow. In the cross-sectional regressions, results show, if anything, a positive
relationship between cash flow and employer match requirements in company stock. In
the fixed effects regression, the coefficient on cash flow is negative, but it is insignificant.
In addition, past stock price performance is not an important indicator of match policy.
While returns over the past five years are significant, a quadrupling of stock price over
the past five years would reduce the probability that the firm matches with only company
stock by only 2.7 percentage points (-.009*3.0), a small amount relative to the average of
39 percent.
Thus, we find no evidence that firms offer a match in company stock to combat
informational asymmetries between insiders and outsiders, or to alleviate their financial
liquidity constraints. An alternative hypothesis is that companies offer the employer
match in company stock because there is a tax benefit from doing so. Firms that pay
dividends may have an incentive to match in company stock because, while dividends
paid on stock are not usually tax deductible, if firms contribute their employer match to a
leveraged employee stock ownership plan (ESOP), meaning the matching contributions
are all in company stock, dividends paid on that stock may be tax-deductible (Beatty,
1995, and Schultz and Francis, 2002). When an employer makes a contribution of stock
for an employee, the value of the stock contributed by the employer is tax-deductible in

characteristics on the choice of match policy. A Probit model yields very similar results.

34
the year of the contribution, just as would a contribution in cash. However, all future
dividends paid on that stock are tax deductible as well, in effect a “double” deduction.
Because the value of the stock is the discounted stream of dividends, the dividends are
used as a tax deduction twice - originally when the value of the stock is deducted and
then again when the dividend is actually paid.
We find, shown in table 14, that companies that require all of the company match
be in company stock were significantly more likely to pay dividends and had a higher
dividend yield in every year of the sample (shown for 1993-1998), and for the pooled
sample. When we add either a dummy variable for whether the firm pays dividends or
add the dividend yield to the regression to help explain whether companies require the
match to all be in company stock (table 15), we find a positive and significant coefficient
on the dividend variable.19 If the firm pays dividends, the increase in likelihood that the
employer match will be required to be all company stock is 10 percentage points (the
sample average is 39 percent). A one percentage point increase in the dividend yield is
associated with a 3 to 4 percentage point increase in the probability that a firm’s match is
all company stock.
Thus, whether the firm pays dividends is a significant determinant of the
employer match in company stock. This link to dividends likely reflects that when the
match is in company stock, then the match contributions can be paid into a leveraged
ESOP. This is desirable, because then the subsequent dividends paid on the stock will be
considered compensation expense and thus will reduce a firm’s future taxes.

19

We also estimated the regression including the return variables. Their inclusion reduces the sample size

by a quarter to 2294 observations. The coefficient on the pay dividends dummy is .094 (standard error
.049) and the variable on the dividend yield is 2.80 (standard error of 1.20).

35
While firms may enjoy the tax benefit, this match policy is potentially costly to
employees. Because employees do not appear to offset company stock matches, the
match in company stock could lead to a significant concentration of 401(k) assets in
company stock, and thus a very risky retirement portfolio for employees. However, to
the extent that the company match is larger when it is all given in company stock, a
higher employer contribution may offset some of the costs of having a significant
concentration of retirement plan assets in company stock. Perhaps employers pass the tax
benefit to employees via more generous matching contributions.
To assess whether firms that match only with company stock make larger
contributions, we compare the ratio of the amount of the match to the amount of
participant contributions for firms that require all of the match in company stock with
firms that do not (table 16). Our results indicate that when the match is all in company
stock, the mean match-to-participant contribution ratio is 46 percent (median 37 percent),
nearly identical as that for plans without the requirement, which have an average matchto-participant ratio of 48 percent (median 36 percent). These results are confirmed when
we examine the size of the match the year before and the year after a change in match
policy (right panel of table 18). Thus, we do not find that the match is larger for
companies that match in company stock.
2. Effects of market timing
Market-timing behavior has been observed for grants of employee stock options
to top executives, as stock prices tend to rise following new grants (Yermack, 1997). A
natural question to ask is what is the stock price performance following a change in
match policy.

36
To test market timing in the context of match policy, we examine stock price
returns for one year and two years following changes in the company match policy –
from total choice to all in company stock and from all in company stock to total choice.
There are 19 firms in the sample that switch their match policy from offering a match all
required to be in company stock to offering a match with employee investment choice for
all of the match (or vice versa), note the exact date of the switch in the 11-k filing, and
have returns on CRSP for at least two years before and two years after the switch.20
While our sample size is small, because not many firms have changed their company
match policy, we find no evidence that firms timed the change of their match policy to
benefit their employees (tables 17a and 17b).
Returns for companies that switch from choice to all stock show substantially
poor performance after the switch. The company stock underperforms the market (table
17b), as well as the stock’s own historical performance (table 17a) following the switch
of match policy to all stock. On the other hand, companies that switch match policy from
all stock to allowing choice subsequently enjoy large positive returns, both relative to the
market and to their own past performance. Again, caution should be exercised when
viewing these findings due to the small sample size. At a minimum, however, both of
these results run counter to the hypothesis that a firm may switch the match to all
company stock prior to the public revelation of good news (and the subsequent run up in
price) and allow employees to scale back their company stock purchases by eliminating a

20

We identified 32 firms that switched match policy from offering a match all required to be in company

stock to offering a match with total employee investment choice (or vice versa). Five of these firms were
dropped because we could not identify the precise date of the switch in policy. An additional eight firms
were dropped due to an absence of return data for two years before and after the switch.

37
match all in company stock ahead of bad news (and the subsequent fall in price).

V. Summary
We have examined the purchase of company stock in 401(k) plans using panel
data from 1991-2000 for 994 companies. This research examines features of the 401(k)
plan in addition to firm performance as factors determining the decision to purchase
company stock, and includes many more companies than previously studied. Our main
conclusion is that the characteristics of the 401(k) plan strongly influence investment
decisions by participants because they follow naïve diversification rules and view plan
features as implicit investment advice by the firm. Thus, differences in plan design can
help explain differences in the concentration of company stock in retirement plans across
firms.
Our principal findings are these: First, the number of investment alternatives
offered by the plan is a very significant indicator of the share of contributions to company
stock. We find evidence consistent with investors following naive diversification rules,
and that the share of participant contributions allocated to company stock is substantially
lower in plans that offer more alternatives. We cannot reject the simple “1/n”
diversification rule for company stock in our cross-sectional analysis, indicating that
workers appear to put 1/n of their contributions in company stock, where “n” is the total
number of investment options. Following an increase in fund options within a firm,
employees appear to continue to adopt the “1/n” strategy. However, the full reduction in
the share of contributions allocated to company stock in response to an increase in
investment options takes about 4 to 5 years, likely due to inertia in investor behavior.

38
Second, employees do not offset the employer’s match. Employees put a larger
share of their own contributions in company stock when the match is required to be in
company stock. In addition, a switch from allowing the employee to invest the match
without restriction to requiring that the match be all in company stock is not offset by the
employee investing less of his own contributions in company stock.
Third, we present evidence that is consistent with endorsement effects.
Employees appear to interpret restrictions on asset allocation provided by the firm as
providing implicit investment advice regarding the purchase of company stock. In the
cross-section, the employees of firms that have a match in company stock put more of
their own contributions in company stock. The employees of firms that limit the share of
own contributions that can be put in company stock or require that part of the match not
be in company stock invest less of their own contributions in company stock – even after
controlling for the amount of the limit. These findings are consistent with Benartzi
(2001) and Madrian and Shea (2000) that found evidence that participants appear to
interpret the match and the default contribution allocation as implicit investment advice.
Because the plan features are so important in determining the purchase and
holdings of company stock, we examine what determines the number of investment
options offered and the employer match policy. In terms of number of investment
options offered, our results suggest that firms have offered more options in recent years,
possibly because the proliferation of mutual funds has made it easier to offer many
alternatives. In terms of the employer match, we find no evidence that firms offer an
employer match all in company stock because they are cash constrained, and thus have
no other means of making a match. Rather, the only significant determinant of the

39
employer match in company stock is whether the firm pays dividends. This link to
dividends likely reflects that when the match is in company stock, then the match
contributions can be paid into a leveraged ESOP. This is desirable, because then the
subsequent dividends paid on the stock will be considered compensation expense and
thus will reduce a firm’s future taxes. We also test if firms switch to an employer match
in company stock ahead of good news, perhaps to benefit employees, but we find no
supporting evidence.
These results have several implications for public policy. In response to Enron’s
collapse, there has been much concern expressed about the concentration of 401(k) assets
held in company stock. Given the naïve diversification strategies employees appear to
use, absent an explicit cap on company stock purchases or holdings, policy makers could
improve diversification by requiring firms that offer company stock to also offer a
minimum number of alternative investment funds. President Bush has recently proposed
that firms urge workers to diversify their retirement portfolio by including reminders in
the quarterly plan reports. Our results concerning the importance of endorsement effects
on purchases of company stock suggest that such a quarterly reminder could have an
effect on asset holdings. In addition, President Bush has proposed a partial privatization
of Social Security in which two percent of salary would be placed in a worker’s account
to be invested by the worker. The evidence in this paper and others that workers appear
to adopt naïve diversification strategies suggests that the number and type of investment
options the government chooses to offer will have an important effect on the ultimate
composition of the assets in workers’ accounts.

40
References

Beatty, Anne, 1995, The cash flow and informational effects of employee stock
ownership plans, Journal of Financial Economics 38, 211-240.
Benartzi, Shlomo, 2001, Excessive extrapolation and the allocation of 401(k) accounts to
company stock, Journal of Finance 56, 1747-64.
Benartzi, Shlomo, and Richard H. Thaler, 2001, Naïve diversification strategies in
retirement savings plans, American Economic Review 91-1, 79-98.
Bodie, Zvi, and Dwight B. Crane, 1997, Personal investing: Advice, theory, and
evidence, Financial Analysts Journal, 13-23.
Chevalier, Judith, and Glenn Ellison, 1997, Risk taking by mutual funds as a response to
incentives, Journal of Political Economy 105-6, 1167-1200.
Choi, James, Laibson , David, Madrian Brigitte, and Metrick, Andrew, 2001, For better
or for worse: Default effects and 401(K) savings behavior. NBER Working paper
8651, December.
Coval, Joshua D., and Tobias J. Moskowitz, 1999, Home bias at home: Local equity
preference in domestic portfolios, Journal of Finance 54, 1-39.
Fallick, Bruce C., and Charles A. Fleischman, 2001, Employer-to-employer flows in the
U.S. labor market, Working Paper, Federal Reserve Board.
French, Ken R., and James M. Poterba, 1991, Investor diversification and international
equity markets, American Economic Review 81, 222-226.
Goetzmann, William and Kumar, Alok, 2001, Equity portfolio diversification, NBER
Working Paper 8686, December.
Griffin, Dale, and Amos Tversky, 1992, The weighing of evidence and the determinants
of confidence, Cognitive Psychology 24, 411-435.
Heath, Chip, and Amos Tversky, 1991, Preferences and beliefs: Ambiguity and
competence in choice under uncertainty, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 4, 5-28.
Holden, Sarah and VanDerhei, Jack, 2001, 401(k) plan asset allocation, account balances,
and loan activity in 2000, Investment Company Institute Perspective 7(5).
Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom, 1987, Aggregation and linearity in the provision of
intertemporal incentives, Econometrica 55, 303-328.

41
Huberman, Gur, 2001, Familiarity breeds investment, Review of Financial Studies 14(3),
659-680.
Ippolito, Richard A., 1992, Consumer reaction to measures of poor quality: Evidence
from the mutual fund industry, Journal of Law and Economics 35, 45-75.
John Hancock Financial Services, 2001, The seventh defined contribution plan survey.
Langer, Ellen J., 1975, The illusion of control, Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology 32-2, 311-328.
Lintner, John, 1965, The valuation of risk assets and the selection of risky investments in
stock portfolios and capital budgets, Review of Economics and Statistics 47, 13-37.
Madrian, Brigitte, and Shea, Dennis 2000, The power of suggestion: Inertia in 401(k)
participation and savings behavior, NBER Working Paper No. 7682, May.
Markowitz, Harry M., 1952, Portfolio selection, Journal of Finance 7, 77-91.
Meulbroek, Lisa, 2002, Company stock in pension plans: How costly is it?, Working
paper, Harvard University.
Odean, Terrance, 1998, Are investors reluctant to realize their losses? Journal of Finance
53, 1775-1798.
Odean, Terrance, 1999, Do investors trade too much? American Economic Review 89,
1279-1298.
Patel, Jayendu, Richard Zeckhauser, and Darryll Hendricks, 1991, The rationality
struggle: Illustrations from financial markets, American Economic Review 81-2,
232-236.
Profit Sharing/401(k) Council of America, 44th Annual survey of profit sharing and
401(k) plans.
Samuelson, William, and Richard J. Zeckhauser, 1988, Status quo bias in decision
making, Journal of Risk and Uncertainty 1, 7-59.
Schultz, Ellen E., and Theo Francis, 2002, Hot tax break: 401(k)s – Why firms stuff
plans with stock, Wall Street Journal, January.
Sengmuller, Paul, 2001, Performance predicts asset allocation: Company stock in 401(k)
plans, Working paper, Columbia University, November.
Sharpe, William F., 1964, Capital asset prices: A theory of market equilibrium under
conditions of risk, Journal of Finance 19, 425-442.

42

Sirri, Erik and Peter Tufano, 1998, Costly search and mutual fund flows, Journal of
Finance, Vol. 53, no. 5, October, 1589-1621.
Topline, 2002, UBS index of investor optimism, March.
Tversky, Amos and Daniel Kahneman, 1974, Judgement under undertainty: Heuristics
and biases, Science 185, 1124-1131.
Vanguard, 2002, Vanguard Participant Monitor: Expecting lower market returns in the
near term, January.
Weisbenner, Scott, 1999, Do pension plans with participant choice teach households to
hold more equity?, FEDS Working Paper 1999-61, November.
Yermack, David, 1997, Good timing: CEO stock option awards and company news
announcements, Journal of Finance 52, 449-476.

43
Table 1: Sample Composition

Year
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
TOTAL

Number of
observations
51
190
319
371
465
572
637
667
96
44
3412

Number of
years in sample
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
TOTAL

Number
of firms
186
224
186
115
94
79
72
32
4
2
994

Number of
observations
186
448
558
460
470
474
504
256
36
20
3412

Data collected for all U.S. companies listed in Compustat any year from 1993 to 1999 that filed an 11-k at
least once during 1994-2001. See text for further details.

44
Table 2: Industry Composition of Sample

Mining
Oil and Gas
Construction
Food
Basic Materials
Biotech / Medical
Manufacturing
Transportation
Telecom
Utilities
Retail / Wholesale Trade
Financial
Technology
Services
TOTAL
Ever a Member of
S&P 500 (1980-1999)

Number of firms
15
29
14
28
56
93
92
29
37
73
111
206
153
58
994

Percent of sample
1.5%
2.9
1.4
2.8
5.6
9.4
9.3
2.9
3.7
7.3
11.2
20.7
15.4
5.8
100

269

27.1

Data collected for all U.S. companies listed in Compustat any year from 1993 to 1999 that filed an 11-k at
least once during 1994-2001. See text for further details.

45

Index
S&P 500
S&P MidCap 400
S&P SmallCap 600
Not S&P 1500
Total

Table 3a: Composition of 1998 Sample
Number of
firms in sample
Percent of sample
148
22%
86
13
107
16
326
49
667
100%

Percent of all
firms in sample*
30%
22
18
5
9% of all firms

* There were 7,501 U.S. firms with non-missing market value and total assets listed on COMPUSTAT.

Table 3b: Characteristics of 1998 Sample Compared to
S&P 1500 and Universe of Public Firms
Sample
S&P 1500
All Public Firms*
S&P 1500
51%
100%
20%
Technology
16%
19%
24%
Book Assets
7,207
9,773
2,335
($ millions)
121 – 1,004 – 12,048 248 – 1,487 – 18,002
7 – 137 – 2,486
# Employees
13.0
19.9
5.4
(000s)
.5 - 4.3 – 30.3
.9 – 6.6 – 45
.02 - .5 – 10.2
Market/Book
1.8
2.0
2.1
ratio
1.0 - 1.3 – 3.0
1.0 – 1.5 – 3.6
.9 – 1.3 – 4.3
% of firms that
48%
60%
33%
repurchase stock
Repurchase yield
1.76
1.82
1.77
(percent)
Mean is reported in first row, 10th percentile – median – 90th percentile are in second row.
The share repurchase yield is the amount spend to repurchase shares divided by the average of the
beginning- and end-of-year market value.
* There were 7,501 U.S. firms with non-missing market value and total assets listed on COMPUSTAT.

Table 3c: Aggregate 401-k Plan Statistics for 1998 Sample,
Public Firms, and All Firms (public and private) ($ billions)
Sample –
All Public
667 firms
Firms
All Firms
Total 401-k Assets
$274
$698
$1645
Total 401-k Assets in Company Stock
102
273
273
Total Contributions to Plan
15.5
49.2
134.7
(employee and employer) during 1998*
Total Contributions to Plan allocated to
4.9
NA
NA
Company Stock during 1998
Data on 401-k assets for all public firms are from 1998 5500 filings with the Department of Labor; data for
all public and private firms are from Department of Labor. Company stock for all public firms and all
firms excludes any stock indirectly held in trusts and pooled accounts.
Employer contributions constitute 29% of total contributions for the sample and 31% for all public firms.

46
Table 4: Plan Characteristics
Full Sample –
3412 obs.
EMPLOYEE CONTRIBUTIONS
Number of investment options
mean = 7.5
IQR: 5 – 9
Is this the first year company stock is offered
as an option in the plan?
Is there a limit placed on investment in
company stock (i.e., is there a ceiling)?
If so, what is the limit/ceiling?
Is part of the employee contributions required
to be in company stock (i.e., is there a floor)?
If so, what is the minimum/floor?
Is there an incentive provided to invest
contributions in company stock (i.e., larger
match and/or discounted price)?

1998 –
667 observations

mean = 9.6
IQR: 7 - 11

6.4%

8.2%

3.6%

4.0%

ranges from 10-50%
of total contributions

ranges from 10-50%
of total contributions

.5%

.4%

ranges from 25-75%
of total contributions

1.0%

EMPLOYER/MATCH CONTRIBUTIONS
Does the employer make contributions
94%
(offer a match)?

ranges from 25-75%
of total contributions

1.0%

96%

Does the employer require at least part of the
match to be in company stock?*

48%

41%

Does the employer require all of the match to
be in company stock?*

39%

32%

Does the employer require at least part of the
match not be in company stock?*

1.8%

1.1%

mean = .47
median = .37

mean = .45
median = .37

45%

40%

Ratio of employer contributions (match)
to employee contributions

Is at least part of employee or employer
contributions required to be in company stock?

* Conditional on the employer making contributions to the plan (offering a match).

47
Table 5: Distribution of Employee Contributions Invested in Company Stock and
Number of Investment Alternatives Across Sample (3412 firm-year observations)

1st %

Fraction of Employee Contributions
Invested in Company Stock (percent)
.4

Number of Investment
Alternatives Offered
3

25th %

6.7

5

Median

13.7

7

th

75 %

26.5

9

99th%

72.8

18

Mean

18.9

7.5

Std. Deviation

16.6

5.3

48
Table 6. Investment in Company Stock by Number of Investment Options
(Standard error of average in parentheses)

Share of participant
contributions in
company stock
(average)
Share of participant
contributions in
company stock
(median)
Number of firmyear observations

Number of Investment Options
4
5
6
7
8

2

3

9

10+

.59
(.08)

.36
(.04)

.26
(.02)

.22
(.01)

.18
(.01)

.18
(.01)

.17
(.01)

.14
(.01)

.13
(.01)

.61
(.05)

.31
(.02)

.21
(.01)

.18
(.01)

.13
(.01)

.15
(.01)

.12
(.01)

.11
(.01)

.10
(.01)

17

128

406

483

561

456

423

274

664

The standard error calculations allow for heteroskedasticity and correlation across observations of the same
firm.

49
Table 7: Regression of the Share of Own Contributions in Company Stock
on the Number of Investment Options Offered
Dependent variable =
Employee Contributions in Company Stock / Total Employee Contributions
Independent variable =
1 / # of investment options

Sample
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1991-2000
1991-2000

Coefficient on (1 / # of options)
Standard error in parentheses
.73
(.18)
.78
(.17)
1.04
(.15)
.99
(.15)
1.08
(.15)
1.02
(.16)
.87
(.08)
.27
(.04)

Constant
.07
(.04)
.06
(.03)
.02
(.02)
.03
(.02)
.02
(.02)
.04
(.02)
.05
(.01)
-

Firmeffect
No

R2
.070

# obs.
319

No

.073

371

No

.120

465

No

.105

572

No

.117

637

No

.093

667

No

.124

3412

Yes

.044
within

3412

All regression estimation allows for heteroskedasticity. The standard error calculation in the pooled crosssection regression allows for correlation across observations of the same firm as well.

50
Table 8: Regression of Change in Share of Own Contributions in Company Stock
Upon Change in the Number of Investment Options Offered
(standard error in parentheses)
Dependent variable =
Change in (Employee Contributions in Company Stock / Total Employee Contributions)

∆ in (1 / #options)
(t+1) – t

Did number of
options stay the
same?
R2
# obs.

(1)
∆ CS/T

(2)
∆ CS/T

(3)
∆ CS/T

(4)
∆ CS/T

(5)
∆ CS/T

(t+1) - t

(t+2) – t

(t+3) - t

(t+4) – t

(t+5) - t

.18
(.07)
-.001
(.004)

.34
(.12)
-.001
(.009)

.59
(.09)
-.018
(.012)

.71
(.20)
-.029
(.027)

.87
(.27)
-.053
(.055)

.014
2418

.032
1148

.059
476

.055
185

.080
65

CS/T = employee contributions in company stock / total employee contributions.
1 / #options = 1 / total number of investment options offered.
“Did number of options stay the same?” is a dummy variable that will test whether, after controlling for the
effect of the number of options on contribution allocation, there is any additional difference in the change
in company stock investment between firms that did not change the number of options relative to those
firms that did.
Specifications (1) – (5) examine how the fraction of employee contributions invested in company stock
changes (∆ CS/T) in response to a change in the number of options during year t (∆ 1/funds). There are
2418 firm-year observations where data on the firm’s plan is available for the next year. Of these 2418
observations, 1730 had no change in the number of investment options offered, 667 increased the number
of options offered, and 21 decreased the number of funds available to employees.
To isolate the effect of a specific increase in investment options on contribution allocation decisions over
time, specifications (2) – (5) focus on firms that had no subsequent change in the number of investment
options after the initial change during time t. It also includes the firms that had no change in fund options,
even in year t. Thus, specification (5) measures how the fraction of contributions allocated to company
stock has changed over the next five years for firms that either made no change in fund options or the group
of firms that increased investment options (decrease in 1/funds) during year t, but had no further change in
the number of options after year t.

51
Table 9: Regression of the Share of Own Contributions in Company Stock
Upon whether Part of Employer Contribution is Required to be in Company Stock

Sample
1993

Fraction with
part of match
required to be
in company
stock
.55

1994

.49

1995

.48

1996

.47

1997

.45

1998

.41

19912000
19912000

.48

Dependent variable =
Employee Contributions in Company Stock /
Total Employee Contributions
Coefficient on
(Is part of match
required to be in
company stock?)
Standard error
in parentheses
.066
(.021)
.089
(.018)
.085
(.016)
.075
(.014)
.079
(.013)
.084
(.012)
.085
(.012)
.016
(.008)

Constant

.20
(.01)
.17
(.01)
.16
(.01)
.15
(.01)
.13
(.01)
.13
(.01)
.15
(.01)
-

Firmeffect?
No

R2
.031

# obs.
291

No

.066

340

No

.062

433

No

.055

541

No

.067

604

No

.078

637

No

.064

3201

Yes

.002
within

3201

Averages and regressions calculated using firm-year observations where the employer made contributions
to the plan. The employer did not make contributions to the plan for 211 firm-years, leaving 3201
observations (3412-211).
All regression estimation allows for heteroskedasticity. The standard error calculation in the pooled crosssection regression allows for correlation across observations of the same firm as well.

52
Table 10: Regression of Change in Share of Own Contributions in Company Stock
Upon Change in Employer Match Policy
(standard error in parentheses)
Dependent variable =
Change in (Employee Contributions in Company Stock / Total Employee Contributions)

Did employer switch from
no requirement to some
required company stock?
Did employer switch from
some required company
stock to no requirement?
Constant
R2
# obs.

(1)
∆ CS/T

(2)
∆ CS/T

(3)
∆ CS/T

(4)
∆ CS/T

(5)
∆ CS/T

(t+1) - t

(t+2) - t

(t+3) - t

(t+4) – t

(t+5) - t

.004
(.008)

.014
(.015)

.014
(.023)

.030
(.039)

.026
(.080)

-.010
(.008)

-.012
(.019)

-.011
(.029)

-.053
(.055)

-.101
(.118)

-.002
(.001)
.001
2247

-.008
(.003)
.001
1448

-.019
(.005)
.000
900

-.028
(.008)
.003
543

-.043
(.011)
.006
293

CS/T = employee contributions allocated in company stock / total employee contributions.
“Did employer switch from no requirement to required company stock?” represents whether such a change
occurred from year t to t+1.
There are 2247 firm-year observations where data on the firm’s plan is available for the next year, and the
employer made contributions both years. Of these 2247 observations, 2183 had no change in the employer
match policy from this year to next year, 31 went from having no restrictions on how employer
contributions can be invested this year to requiring at least part to be in company stock next year, and the
remaining 33 switched from having a requirement that at least part of the employer contributions had to be
in company stock to having no restrictions on investment choices for employer contributions next year.
To isolate the effect of a specific change in the employer match policy on contribution allocation decisions
over time, specifications (2) – (5) focus on firms that had no subsequent change in the match policy after
the initial change during time t. It also includes the firms that had no change in fund options, even in year t.
Thus, specification (5) measures how the fraction of contributions allocated to company stock has changed
over the next five years for firms that either made no change in match policy or the group of firms that
changed match policy during year t, but had no further change in match policy after year t.

53
Table 11: Regression of Share of Own Contributions in Company Stock
Upon Plan Characteristics, Firm Characteristics, and Past Firm Performance
(standard error in parentheses)
Dependent variable =
Employee Contributions in Company Stock / Total Employee Contributions
1991-2000
1991-2000
1991-2000
1 / # of options
.83
.84
.44
(.08)
(.11)
(.05)
Is this the first year company stock
-.09
-.09
-.028
is offered as an option?
(.01)
(.01)
(.005)
Is investment in
-.07
-.07
company stock limited?
(.03)
(.03)
Maximum fraction that
-.10
-.06
.22
can be in company stock
(.09)
(.11)
(.14)
Is part of employee contributions
.19
.17
required to be in company stock?
(.09)
(.07)
Minimum fraction that
.33
.38
must be in company stock
(.24)
(.18)
Is there an incentive to
.11
.12
.34
invest in company stock?
(.06)
(.06)
(.06)
Is part of the match required
.05
.05
.015
to be in company stock?
(.01)
(.01)
(.008)
Is part of the match required
-.034
-.027
-.075
to NOT be in company stock?
(.026)
(.021)
(.029)
Stock return over past year
.020
.020
(.005)
(.005)
Log (price beginning of year)
.028
(.005)
Standard deviation of
-.080
-.059
.004
past stock returns
(.032)
(.032)
(.028)
Market-to-book ratio
.021
.025
.017
(.004)
(.005)
(.004)
Log (assets)
.024
.021
.006
(.003)
(.004)
(.006)
Constant
-.14
(.03)
Year effects
No
Yes
No
Industry effects
No
Yes
No
Firm effects
No
No
Yes
R2
.341
.362
.188 within
# of observations
2927
2927
2930
All regression estimation allows for heteroskedasticity. The standard error calculation in the pooled crosssection regression allows for correlation across observations of the same firm as well.

54
Table 12: Regression of Share of Own Contributions in Company Stock
on Alternative Measures of Past Firm Performance
(standard error in parentheses)
Dependent variable =
Employee Contributions in Company Stock / Total Employee Contributions

Stock return over past year

1991-2000
.012
(.006)

Stock gain over past year

.007
(.006)
-.012
(.016)
.004
(.004)
.003
(.003)
.089
(.023)

Stock loss over past 5 years
Stock return over past 5 years
relative to S&P 500 (if > 0)
Stock return over past 5 years
relative to S&P 500 (if < 0)
Other variables
R2
# of observations

1991-2000

.009
(.006)
-.008
(.021)

Stock loss over past year
Stock return over past year
relative to S&P 500 (if > 0)
Stock return over past year
relative to S&P 500 (if < 0)
Cumulative stock return
over past 5 years
Stock gain over past 5 years

1991-2000

Yes
.346
2437

Yes
.351
2437

.002
(.003)
.053
(.009)
Yes
.361
2437

Stock gain over past year and stock gain over past 5 years equal the respective return over that period if the
return was positive, and are zero otherwise. Thus, these variables are either zero or positive.
Stock loss over past year and stock loss over past 5 years equal the respective return over that period if the
return was negative, and are zero otherwise. Thus, these variables are either zero or negative.
The stock return relative to the S&P 500 index is broken up into two variables to allow for differential
effects for firms that outperformed the S&P 500 versus those that underperformed the S&P 500.
“Other variables” include all the other explanatory variables included in the Table 11 regressions.
All regression estimation allows for heteroskedasticity. The standard error calculation in the pooled crosssection regressions allows for correlation across observations of the same firm as well.

55
Table 13: Regression of Plan Characteristics Upon Firm Performance and Size
Dependent Variable:
Dep. Variable: All Match
1 / # options
Required in Company Stock?
Stock return over
-.001
-.009
past year
(.002)
(.016)
Stock return over
.0003
-.009
past 5 years
(.0004)
(.004)
Std. deviation
-.009
-.30
of stock returns
(.015)
(.18)
Market-to-book
-.001
-.001
-.001
-.005
.020
.003
ratio
(.001)
(.002)
(.001)
(.015)
(.022)
(.005)
Cash Flow /
-.006
.002
-.005
.11
.21
-.09
Assets
(.004)
(.018)
(.004)
(.14)
(.24)
(.10)
Log (assets)
-.003
-.003
-.002
.024
.007
.001
(.001)
(.001)
(.003)
(.010)
(.013)
(.017)
1992
-.04
-.03
-.04
-.05
-.07
.04
(.01)
(.01)
(.01)
(.06)
(.07)
(.03)
1993
-.06
-.06
-.06
-.08
-.11
.03
(.01)
(.01)
(.01)
(.07)
(.07)
(.03)
1994
-.09
-.09
-.09
-.14
-.17
.03
(.01)
(.01)
(.01)
(.07)
(.08)
(.03)
1995
-.11
-.11
-.11
-.18
-.18
.03
(.01)
(.01)
(.01)
(.07)
(.08)
(.03)
1996
-.13
-.13
-.12
-.19
-.20
.02
(.01)
(.01)
(.01)
(.07)
(.08)
(.03)
1997
-.15
-.14
-.14
-.22
-.24
.02
(.01)
(.01)
(.01)
(.07)
(.08)
(.03)
1998
-.16
-.15
-.15
-.24
-.25
.01
(.01)
(.01)
(.01)
(.07)
(.08)
(.03)
1999
-.16
-.15
-.16
-.12
-.14
.02
(.01)
(.01)
(.01)
(.09)
(.10)
(.03)
2000
-.17
-.17
-.16
.04
-.04
.04
(.01)
(.01)
(.01)
(.10)
(.12)
(.04)
Constant
.30
.30
.40
.66
(.01)
(.02)
(.11)
(.16)
Firm effects
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
2
R
.345
.350
.475
.029
.034
.007
within
within
# of observations
3278
2437
3278
3073
2294
3073
The match policy regressions are estimated using firm-year observations where the employer made
contributions to the plan.
All regression estimation allows for heteroskedasticity. The standard error calculation in the pooled crosssection regressions allows for correlation across observations of the same firm as well.

56
Table 14: Dividend Policy and Employer Match Policy
(standard error of difference in parentheses)
Percent of firms that pay dividends
Match all
Match
required in
not all in
co. stock
co. stock
Difference

1993

78.0

67.8

1994

72.8

60.6

1995

68.8

58.6

1996

67.7

55.1

1997

66.5

55.4

1998

65.3

52.2

19912000

70.7

57.6

10.2
(5.2)
12.2
(5.1)
10.2
(4.7)
12.6
(4.3)
11.1
(4.1)
13.2
(4.1)
13.1
(3.4)

Average dividend yield (percent)
Match all
required in
co. stock

Match
not all in
co. stock

2.20

1.86

2.30

1.66

1.83

1.30

1.72

1.32

1.46

1.09

1.69

1.14

1.94

1.36

Difference

.33
(.21)
.63
(.23)
.53
(.17)
.39
(.16)
.36
(.14)
.55
(.16)
.57
(.14)

57
Table 15: Regression of Whether Employer Match is Required to be in
Company Stock Upon Firm Dividend Policy
Dependent Variable: All Match Required in Company Stock?
Does the firm pay dividends?
Dividend yield
(div / price)
Other variables
# observations

.134
(.035)

No
3182

.097
(.040)

Yes
3073

3.77
(.95)
No
3182

2.89
(1.05)
Yes
3073

Other variables include the market-to-book ratio, cash flow-to-assets, total assets, and year effects.
The match policy regressions are estimated using firm-year observations where the employer made
contributions to the plan.
Regressions estimated over pooled data 1991-2000. All regression estimation allows for
heteroskedasticity. The standard error calculation in the pooled cross-section regressions allows for
correlation across observations of the same firm as well.

58
Table 16: Ratio of Employer Contributions to Employee Contributions
(1991-2000 data pooled)

Match all required in company stock

Mean*
(std. error)

Median

Yes
.46
(.03)
.37

No
.48
(.01)
.36

Firms that change from having a
match all in company stock to not
having any requirement**
Before change –
After change –
with requirement
no requirement
.34
.36
(.07)
(.10)
.24
.29

* Weighted by the amount of employee contributions, the weighted average ratio of employer / employee
contributions is .41 for firms that require the match to all be in company stock and .43 for firms that do not.
** There are 18 firms in the sample that change from having a match required to all be in company stock to
either having a match with no requirement (13 firms) or eliminating the match entirely (5 firms) and have
at least one full year of data pre- and post-change. The last two columns report the ratio of employer /
employee contributions the year before the change and the year after the change for these 18 firms.

59
Table 17a: Raw Stock Returns Following a Change in the Company Match Policy
Average raw stock return over period reported
[median reported in brackets]

Switched
from choice
to all stock
(9 firms)
Switched
from all stock
to choice
(10 firms)

Return over
next year
7.0%

Return over
next two years
36.0%

Return next
year – return
past year
-7.9%

Return next two
years – return
past two years
-8.9%

[-4.9]

[-10.5]

[-1.7]

[-59.5]

22.7%

55.5%

13.8%

28.9%

[6.8]

[33.6]

[-3.1]

[17.4]

There are 19 firms in the sample that switch there match policy from offering a match required to all be in
company stock to offering a match with employee investment choice for all of the match (or vice versa),
note the exact date of the switch in the 11-k filing, and have returns on CRSP for at least two years before
and two years after the switch.

Table 17b: Excess Stock Returns Following a Change in the Company Match Policy
Average excess stock return over period reported
[median reported in brackets]

Switched
from choice
to all stock
(9 firms)
Switched
from all stock
to choice
(10 firms)

Return over
next year
-10.7%

Return over
next two years
-2.1%

Return next
year – return
past year
-6.9%

Return next two
years – return
past two years
-14.6%

[-11.9]

[-27.6]

[6.8]

[-64.2]

8.6%

20.6%

24.5%

26.3%

[-9.7]

[8.2]

[13.7]

[7.7]

Excess return is the raw stock return over the period less the return of the S&P 500 index over the period.

60
Figure 1: Mean Risk of Various Investments Reported by Participants
(scale is 1 for “not risky at all” to 10 “extremely risky”)
Risk of Investments
7

6.3

6

Risk

5

4.9
4.2

5.2

4.4

4
3
2
1
0
Bond Mutual
Funds

Money Market
Investments

Company
Stock

Stock Mutual
Funds

Individual
Stocks

Based on a telephone survey of 500 participants in defined contribution plans conducted
by Vanguard and reported in the January 2002 Vanguard Monitor.

61
Figure 2: Average Return on Stock Portfolio Expected Over the Next Year
vs. the Average Actual Return Received on Stock Portfolio Over the Past Year
Average Annual Return
20

Return (in %)

15

10
Expected Next Year
Actual Previous Year

5

0

-5
Time (June 1998 - March 2002)

Figure 3: Median Return on Stock Portfolio Expected Over the Next Year
vs. the Median Actual Return Received on Stock Portfolio Over the Past Year
Median Annual Return
16
14

Return (in %)

12
10
Expected Next Year

8

Actual Previous Year

6
4
2
0
Time (June 1998 - March 2002)

The average and median realized and expected returns are based on monthly telephone
interviews with approximately 1000 investors aged 18+ conducted by the Gallup
Organization for the UBS PaineWebber Index of Optimism.

62
Figure 4: Fraction of Survey Respondents that Expect to Receive a
Return < 10% Over the Next Year vs. the Fraction of Survey
Respondents that Received a Return < 10% Over the Past Year
Fraction of Returns < 10%
0.9

Fraction of Respondents

0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5

Expected Next Year

0.4

Actual Previous Year

0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Time (June 1998 - March 2002)

Figure 5: Fraction of Survey Respondents that Expect to Receive a
Return > 19% Over the Next Year vs. the Fraction of Survey
Respondents that Received a Return > 19% Over the Past Year
Fraction of Returns > 19%

Fraction of Respondents

0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
Expected Next Year
Actual Previous Year

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0
Time (June 1998 - March 2002)

Based on monthly telephone interviews with approximately 1000 investors aged 18+
conducted by the Gallup Organization for the UBS PaineWebber Index of Optimism.

