                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             IN SEARCH OF THE HOLY GRAIL:
                        POLICY CONVERGENCE, EXPERIMENTATION,
                             AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE


                                             Sharun Mukand
                                              Dani Rodrik


                                          Working Paper 9134
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9134


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




We thank Daron Acemoglu, Abhijit Banerjee, Georges de Menil, Jeffrey Frieden, Peter Gourevitch, Ricardo
Hausmann, Yannis Ioannides, Sanjay Jain, Simon Johnson, Doug North, Jim Robinson, Gerard Roland, and
seminar participants at Harvard, the NBER, and the Board of Governors of the Fed for very helpful
comments. The Ford and Rockefeller Foundations have provided financial support for this research, which
we gratefully acknowledge. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Sharun Mukand and Dani Rodrik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
In Search of the Holy Grail: Policy Convergence, Experimentation,
and Economic Performance
Sharun Mukand and Dani Rodrik
NBER Working Paper No. 9134
September 2002
JEL No. O10, O40
                                         ABSTRACT


        We consider a model of policy choice in which appropriate policies depend on a country’’s own

circumstances, but the presence of a successful leader generates an informational externality and results
in too little ““policy experimentation.”” Corrupt governments are reined in while honest governments are

disciplined inefficiently. Our model yields distinct predictions about the patterns of policy imitation,
corruption, and economic performance as a function of a country’’s location vis-àà-vis successful leaders.
In particular, it predicts a U-shaped pattern in economic performance as we move away from the leader
in the relevant space of characteristics: close neighbors should do very well, distant countries moderately
well on average with considerable variance, and intermediate countries worst of all. An empirical test

with the experience of post-socialist countries provides supportive results.


Sharun Mukand
Department of Economics
Tufts University
Braker Hall: Economics
Medford, MA 02155
(617) 627 5476
smukand@tufts.edu

Dani Rodrik
John F. Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 Kennedy Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
(617) 495-9454
dani_rodrik@harvard.edu
                      IN SEARCH OF THE HOLY GRAIL: POLICY CONVERGENCE,

                        EXPERIMENTATION, AND ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE

                                 Sharun Mukand and Dani Rodrik

I. Introduction

       There has been a remarkable convergence of views over the last two decades among both

scholars and policy makers on what constitutes desirable economic policies to promote growth

and development. Yet economic performance is more heterogeneous across the world than it has

ever been. Growth rates in the developing world have been lower on average in the past two

decades than they were in the 1960s and 1970s. And the spread in growth rates across countries

has been wider (see Table 1). Why this disappointing performance if we have apparently learned

so much about what we need to do foster economic convergence?

       One possible answer to this question is that the divergence in performance is due to the

fact that not all governments around the world have adopted the requisite policies. Perhaps what

is going on is that countries that have latched on to the consensus view have increased their

growth rates, while others are lagging. There are reasons to view this explanation with great

suspicion, however.

       One bit of telling evidence comes from Latin America, where there has been greater

enthusiasm for Washington Consensus-style reforms than in any other corner of the world.

Morley et al. (1999) have put together an index of structural reform for Latin America that

quantifies the policy changes in the areas of trade liberalization, tax reform, financial

liberalization, privatization, and opening up to capital flows. The average value of this index for

the continent rises from around 0.47 in the early 1970s (out of a maximum of 1) to around 0.55

in the early 1980s, and then jumps up to 0.82 by 1995. Yet economic performance in Latin
                                                        2

America has been quite disappointing during this period. Even if we leave aside the debt-crisis

decade of the 1980s (and ignore the natural rebound from it subsequently), one can count on the

fingers of one hand those countries that have done better in the 1990s than they did during 1950-

80. And of those, only Chile is a genuine success.1 Of course, the relationship between

“reform” and growth is a complex one, and there is only a limited conclusion that one can draw

from such a broad-brush look at the evidence. But the Latin American experience does suggest

that the growth payoff reaped by the most ambitious reformers has been meager at best.

        Another important strand of evidence comes from the last two decades’ success cases.

China and India stand out here. These two large countries have experienced significant increases

in their growth rates—China since the late 1970s, and India since the early 1980s—in a period

when most other developing countries have gone the opposite way.2 Indeed, China’s and India’s

performance overshadows the disappointing outcomes elsewhere, making the last two decades a

developmental success on a population-weighted basis (see Table 1). The policies that have

enabled this performance present a very awkward fit with the usual list that has been on the

agenda of reformers in Washington and elsewhere. China’s reforms have been marked by partial

liberalization, two-track pricing, limited deregulation, financial restraint, an unorthodox legal

regime, and the absence of clear private property rights. India’s reforms have been less

distinctive, but still marked by significant departures from the rulebook. Even after the trade

reforms of the early 1990s, for example, India remained one of the world’s most protected

economies. One could argue that these economies would have grown even faster had they


1
 Argentina has since collapsed, and Uruguay and Bolivia (the other “successes”) have anemic growth rates that look
good only in relation to an even worse performance in the earlier period. Mexico, Brazil, and the other Latin
American countries have yet to attain the growth rates they experienced during 1950-80.
2
 India was the world 10th fastest growing economy in the 1980s, and the 12th fastest in the 1990s. China was second
(behind Korea) in the 1980s and the first in the 1990s.
                                                       3

embarked on a more orthodox reform agenda. But the difficulty with this argument is that those

countries that adopted the orthodox policies—such as Latin American countries—for the most

part did worse than China and India, not better.3

        We entertain a different possibility in this paper. We consider a world in which

appropriate policies and institutional arrangements have a large element of specificity, and

experimentation is required to discover what works locally. Reforms that succeed in one setting

may perform poorly or fail completely in other settings. Two-track reform may work well in

Deng’s China but not in Gorbachev’s Soviet Union. Gradualism may be appropriate to India,

but not Chile. Import-substitution may foster competitive industries in Brazil, but not in

Argentina. Industrial policy may produce results in South Korea, but not in much of Africa.

Export processing zones may work wonders in Mauritius, but not in most other countries that

have created them. Privatization of utilities may be necessary in Latin America, but not Asia.

Openness to capital flows may enhance efficiency and growth in rich countries but wreak havoc

in poor countries. Centralized wage bargaining may be feasible and desirable in Europe but not

in Latin America.

        Such specificity could arise from differences in historical trajectories, geography,

political economy, institutional settings, or other initial conditions. It could help explain why

successful countries—China, India, South Korea, and Taiwan among others—have almost

always combined unorthodox elements with orthodox policies. It could also account for why

important institutional differences persist among the advanced countries of North America,

Western Europe, and Japan—in the role of the public sector, the nature of the legal systems,

3
 One might also point to the growth miracles of earlier decades, such as South Korea and Taiwan—countries that
also employed a mix of orthodox and unorthodox policies. On the orthodox side, these countries emphasized fiscal
conservatism, exports, and human resources. On the unorthodox side, they protected their domestic markets and
made extensive use of industrial policies.
                                                       4

corporate governance, financial markets, labor markets, and social insurance mechanisms,

among others.

        We do not mean to suggest that economic principles work differently in different places,

or that economics itself needs to be tailored to local conditions. We make a distinction instead

between economic principles and their institutional embodiment. Most first-order economic

principles come institution-free. Incentives, competition, hard-budget constraints, sound money,

fiscal sustainability, property rights are central to the way that economists think about policy and

its reform. But these principles do not map directly into institutional solutions. Property rights

can be implemented through common law, civil law, or, for that matter, Chinese-type socialism.

Competition can be maintained through a combination of free entry and laissez-faire, or through

a well-functioning regulatory authority. Macroeconomic stability can be achieved under a

variety of fiscal institutions. Institutional solutions that perform well in one setting may be

inappropriate in other setting without the supporting norms and complementary institutions. In

the words of North:

        economies that adopt the formal rules of another economy will have very different
        performance characteristics than the first economy because of different informal norms
        and enforcement. The implication is that transferring the formal political and economic
        rules of successful Western economies to third-world and Eastern European economies is
        not a sufficient condition for good economic performance. (North 1994, 8)4

In addition, since policy makers always operate in second-best environments, optimal reform

trajectories—even in apparently straightforward cases such as price reform—cannot be designed




4
 See for example Khanna, Kogan, and Palepu (2001) on convergence in corporate governance practices around the
world in the last two decades. These authors find some evidence of convergence in form, but no evidence of
convergence in practice, indicating that implementation has been problematic in varying local conditions. Pistor
(2000) provides a general treatment of the issue of legal transplantation, and shows how importation of laws can
backfire. On the role of the WTO in policy convergence in the area of trade, see Morissey and Nelson (2001).
                                                  5

without due regard to prevailing conditions and without weighting the consequences for multiple

distorted margins.

       A paper that takes these issues seriously has a triple burden. It must explain why

countries do converge on “consensus” policies even when their circumstances call for different

arrangements. Second, to the extent that some countries choose to experiment rather than

imitate, it must provide a reason why they do so. Finally, it must provide a plausible accounting

of the pattern of economic performance that emerges when there is a tendency for countries to

converge on similar policies. This paper contains some first steps in all three directions.

       We consider a model in which policies (or equivalently, institutional arrangements) can

vary on two dimensions. One, which we refer as “appropriateness,” corresponds to the fit

between policies and a country’s circumstances. Policies that are well matched with

circumstances produce higher output than policies that are not. The second dimension, which we

refer to as “transparency,” relates to the conduciveness of policies to skimming and corruption

by politicians. Some policies are transparent, and therefore are relatively immune to

manipulation for corrupt purposes, while others are not. We take transparency to be independent

of a country’s circumstances, in the sense that a policy that is transparent in one country is

transparent in all other countries. We also assume that all appropriate policies are transparent,

while all transparent policies need not be appropriate. The justification is easy to provide. It is

hard to see why non-transparent policies, in the sense of policies that are easily corruptible, could

ever really be appropriate. On the other side, one could always limit corruption by legislating a

rule that prohibits all policy making; this would root out corruption by eliminating discretion, but

it is hard to see how it could be appropriate in general.
                                                  6

       Governments, in turn, can be of two types: honest and corrupt. They face electorates that

are more likely to throw them out of office if they are perceived as being of the corrupt type.

Governments receive a private signal about their country’s underlying “state of the world” that is

not observed by their electorates. We focus on the stage game where the governments and their

electorates in a “follower” country have already observed a successful policy in a neighboring

country (called the “leader”). We assume that the leader’s policy is so successful that the

electorate in the follower can deduce the policy is of the transparent type. The follower

government then faces this dilemma. It can imitate the leader’s policy, and thereby communicate

that there will be no corruption, but at the cost of adopting a policy that may not be appropriate.

Or it can choose a policy that targets as closely as possible its private signal, in which case it

incurs the costs of “experimentation” (along with the cost of being perceived as corrupt).

       Our model captures several elements that we believe are plausible. First, and key to our

argument, is the idea that there is considerable context-specificity to desirable policies. Second,

we also incorporate a universal element to policies, which we model with the notion of

transparency. Third, we assume there is an element of uncertainty inherent in a country's search

for the “ideal” policy. Governments either lack perfect knowledge on the right course of action,

or face uncertainty in carrying out the actual implementation of a policy. We capture this aspect

of policy making by assuming that there is uncertainty in implementing an untested policy.

Fourth, our framework incorporates the obvious fact that some governments are more committed

than others to searching for policies that are in the long-term interest of a country. The shadow

of corrupt governments imposes a cost on honest governments. Finally, our framework captures

an important aspect of policy choices in a globalizing world, namely the existence of

informational externalities. In particular, countries observe the success or failure of alternative
                                                 7

“paths of development” and have the option of mimicking these policies in the hope of matching

their success. Our framework is rich enough to capture all of these tensions inherent in policy

making.

       We show that the informational externality created by successful leaders results in both

an upside and a downside. Countries whose underlying “state” is close to the leader—i.e., the

leader’s neighbors by the relevant metric—choose to mimic the leader’s policies, even when

their governments are of the corrupt type. This yields a double benefit to the neighbors: they can

forego the costs of experimentation, while reaping the benefits of the discipline that is exercised

on potentially corrupt governments. Countries in the far periphery are unaffected by the leader’s

example, as governments of both types choose to experiment. The cost is borne by honest

governments in the near periphery—i.e., by countries that are too far from the leader for

mimicking to be welfare improving, but close enough for the informational externality to

generate an incentive for honest governments to mimic. The last case entails inefficient

disciplining of government policies.

       Therefore our model yields distinct predictions about the patterns of policy imitation,

corruption, and economic performance as a function of a country’s position vis-à-vis successful

leaders. In particular, it predicts a U-shaped pattern in economic performance as we move away

from the leader in the relevant space of characteristics: close neighbors should do very well,

distant countries moderately well on average with considerable variance, and intermediate

countries worst of all.

       We believe this framework helps account for some of the salient features of the economic

landscape of the last few decades. Countries in the vicinity of growth poles such as Japan and

later the East Asian tigers have tended to do very well, in part by imitating many of the policies
                                                  8

followed by these leaders. Countries whose underlying characteristics or geographic distance

place them very far from the leaders have experienced highly variable fortunes. Superstars like

China and Mauritius, which have achieved success on the back of a great degree of policy

experimentation, have occasionally emerged from this group. Some of these experimenters in

turn have become examples for others to follow, such as China in the case of Vietnam. And we

would claim that many countries in between have been “inefficiently disciplined,” adopting

policies that are surely less corrupt and more transparent than in the past, but also perhaps less

appropriate to their circumstances. The Latin American economies of the 1990s may constitute

the chief examples of this last group.

       We also undertake a simple empirical test of our framework in this paper, by focusing on

the experience of post-socialist countries. These countries were forced to search for alternative

policies once they abandoned socialism, so they constitute a useful sample for our purposes. For

most of them, the model to emulate, if any, was the Western European example. We hypothesize

that the geographic distance between each of these countries and Western Europe is an adequate

(inverse) proxy for the suitability of European-style institutions to their circumstances. We then

demonstrate that there is a robust U-shaped relationship between these countries’ distance from

Brussels and their post-transition growth rates. Strikingly, the U-shaped relationship survives

when we control for a variety of other determinants, including the extent of “structural reform”

undertaken. While some previous studies have noted the negative gradient in performance in the

vicinity of Western Europe, we are not aware of any that have picked up the upwards-sloping

part of the relationship, nor of any theory (other than ours) that would account for the latter.

Measures of corruption and policy imitation also behave broadly in the way the theory predicts.
                                                         9

While the sample of countries covered is necessarily small, we are greatly encouraged by the

strength of these results.

        There are many antecedents in the literature to this line of thought. Economic historians

have long emphasized that the fragmentation and diversity of early modern Europe was a source

of economic strength that allowed Europe to eventually overtake the centralized empires in

China, the Middle East, and the Indian sub-continent. Central here is the idea that

decentralization enabled competition, not only in the market for goods and services, but also in

market for institutional arrangements. As David Landes puts it, “only societies with room for

multiple initiatives, from below more than from above, could think in terms of a growing pie”

(1998, 32). With reference to the failure of China and Islam, Douglass North points out:


        Centralized political control limits the options, the alternatives that will be pursued in the
        context of uncertainty about the long run consequences of political and economic
        decisions. … In [the] competitive decentralized environment [of Europe] lots of
        alternatives were pursued; some worked, as in the Netherlands and England; some failed,
        as in the case of Spain and Portugal; and some, such as France, fell in between these two
        extremes. But the key to the story is the variety of the options pursued and the increased
        likelihood (as compared to a single unified policy) that some would turn out to produce
        economic growth. (North 1993)

Jared Diamond (2001) has emphasized the geographic sources of these different historical

trajectories.5 Ironically, decentralized experimentation appears to have taken root in China in the

last three decades, and is often pointed to as the source of that country’s recent success

(Naughton 1995; Jefferson and Rawski 1994).

5
 “China has a smooth coastline. Europe has an indented coastline, and each big indentation is a peninsula that
became an independent country, independent ethnic group and independent experiment in building a society: the
Greek peninsula, Italy, the Iberian peninsula…Europe is transected by mountain ranges that split up Europe into
different principalities: the Alps, the Pyrenees, Carpathians – China does not have mountain ranges that transect
China. In Europe big rivers flow radially….and they don’t unify Europe. In China the two big rivers flow parallel to
each other, are separated by low lying land, and were quickly connected by canals. For those geographic reasons,
China was unified in 221 B.C. and stayed unified most of the time since then, whereas fore geographic reasons,
Europe wasn’t. Augustus couldn’t do it, Charlemagne couldn’t do it and Napolean and Hitler couldn’t unify Europe”
(Diamond, 2001).
                                                10

        In the recent literature on development strategies, Evans (2001) and Rodrik (2000) have

argued for the importance of local deliberation in ensuring a good fit between institutions being

adopted and local conditions. Evans dubs the 1990s convergence on Anglo American

institutions the “institutional monocropping” approach. Besley (2000) has also emphasized the

importance of policy experimentation, noting that “adopting a policy is analogous to adopting

new technologies with uncertain benefits.” Dewatripont and Roland (1995) and Roland (2000)

underscore the importance of uncertainty and experimentation in the context of transition

economies. Unger (1998) has forcefully argued that the institutional arrangements we observe

presently among the successful advanced industrial countries constitute only a subset of the full

range of institutional possibilities.

        Perhaps most directly relevant to our research is a recent paper by Berkowitz, Pistor, and

Richard (2001). This paper analyzes the historical process of legal evolution in forty-nine

countries to ascertain why some legal systems are more effective than others. The authors’

dependent variable is the quality of legal institutions and enforcement (which they call

“legality”). The paper’s central argument is that the manner in which the legal order develops

makes a significant difference to legality. In particular, the authors make a distinction between

two types of countries: those that developed their formal legal orders internally (“origins”),

adapted imported codes to local conditions, or had familiarity with foreign codes (“receptive

transplants”), and those that acquired their formal legal order from abroad without much

adaptation and/or familiarity (“unreceptive transplants”). Their main finding is that the second

group of countries has ended up with significantly lower levels of legality. Equally important,

they find that the “unreceptive transplant” effect is a more important determinant of legality, and

ultimately of economic growth, than the family from which the legal regime was drawn. What
                                                11

seems to matter is not common versus civil law, but the suitability of the laws to local

conditions.

       Our paper is also related to Kremer, Onatski, and Stock (2001), who analyze the

statistical properties of the distribution of per-capita incomes around the world and present a

simple framework to account for it. They too consider the role of experimentation in driving the

pattern of incomes around the world. In particular, in order to explain why some poor countries

grow rich while rich countries hardly ever get poor, they develop a model in which countries

search among policies until they reach a satisfactory income level, at which point they stop

experimenting. Their framework is based on the assumption that the requisite policies are

country-specific, but they also discuss informally the likelihood that countries may learn from

each other. Our framework puts more structure on these issues, and also, more importantly,

endogenizes the choice between experimentation and imitation.

       The plan of the paper is as follows. Section II presents a stripped-down version of the

model to drive home the central message of the paper as directly as possible. Section III

describes the full model, providing political-economy underpinnings to the choice of policy by a

“follower” government. Section IV presents an empirical test with the post-socialist sample of

countries. Section V presents some concluding remarks.


II. The Benchmark Model

       We describe the complete model in two stages. We present in this section the essential

features of a minimal benchmark model, in order to illustrate the dilemma at the heart of our

argument in a transparent way. In the next section we further elaborate on this model and

provide political underpinnings for the government’s decision making.
                                                   12

        We assume that the governments in all countries are divided into two cohorts—a

“leader” and a “follower” cohort. A government in a follower country has one of two policy

choices: it can choose to “imitate” or mimic the policy chosen by a leader country, or it may

prefer to “experiment” with its choice of policy. This decision is a function of several factors,

which we describe below.



Countries: Location and Policy Specificity

        The world is made up of a large, discrete number of countries. Countries differ from each

other in terms of their geography, historical trajectory, culture and other local conditions, which

make any given policy more or less appropriate across countries. We capture these country

specific local conditions by assuming that each country i has a unique “state of the world” zi. We

assume that countries are distributed uniformly on a circle, whose circumference we normalize to

two units. Therefore each country i has a location zi, on this circle (Figure 1). Reducing all

differences in underlying characteristics across countries to a single dimension makes it easy to

assess whether countries are proximate or distant from each other. In particular, if two countries

are located at zi and zj, then the “distance” between these countries is defined as ∆ij = | zi - zj |.

        The government in any given country gets to choose a policy aj that affects national

income. The important feature of a policy that we emphasize is its “specificity” or state-

contingent nature, with the impact of a policy on national output depending on the country’s

location. If a country whose underlying location is zi chooses the policy aj, then national income

is given by y i = −θ (a j − z i ) 2 . As is clear from this formulation, the closer or more

“appropriate” is a policy to a country's underlying state; the higher is national income. Therefore,
                                                         13


if two countries j and k are “neighbors” (i.e. ∆jk is small), then it is less costly to adopt the policy

of a neighbor.



The Government, Information and Policy Choices

         We are interested in capturing the uncertainty inherent in the policy making process.

There are two ways of modeling this: either we assume that the government is imperfectly

informed or we can assume (as we do in this paper) that the government has imperfect control

over the policy implementation process. For simplicity, we follow the latter route and assume

that the government receives a perfectly reliable private signal, zˆ i = z i . This would seem to

suggest that a government's “ideal policy” choice is a simple matter: match the policy to the

appropriate state. However, even if government i knows the “ideal policy,” it can determine the

actual policy implemented only up to a random error term, ai′ = z i + η , with η distributed with

mean zero and variance σ 2 . This is a relatively simple way to represent the costs as well as the

benefits of experimenting with a policy that no other country has successfully tried before. On

the other hand, if country i imitates and picks up an off-the-shelf policy that has been tried and

successfully tested in some other country, then we assume there is no uncertainty associated with

its implementation.6

         Given our assumptions so far, and assuming that the follower government maximizes

(expected) national income, the choice of experimentation versus imitation is a simple function

of two factors: the distance between the follower country and the successful leader and the

6
  We have made these assumptions in order to capture the gains and costs of experimentation in policy making in the
simplest possible way. An alternative more intuitive (though more complicated to work with) assumption is that
governments receive noisy signals about zi. In this case in order to learn about the true zi, the government will have
to experiment and will gradually converge to the ideal policy ai = zi. The crucial aspect of the assumption is that the
government has more reliable information about its true location, than the citizen does.
                                                  14

uncertainty associated with policy experimentation. If the distance is large relative to the

uncertainty, then the government will prefer to experiment. We now introduce an additional

complication, which drives a wedge between the government’s utility function and overall social

welfare. We assume that the government’s preferences are given by vi = yi − λ K , where K>0

is a private (not social) fixed cost borne by the government and λ is a dummy variable that

equals zero or one, depending on whether the government imitates (λ = 0) or experiments (λ =

1). Hence the government incurs this private cost only when it chooses to experiment. For the

moment we simply take as given the existence of this private cost. In the next section we will

provide microfoundations for this assumption, based on political-economy considerations.



To Experiment or to Imitate: A Heuristic Analysis

       Suppose that country 1 from the first cohort becomes a successful leader by

implementing policy a1, such that a1 =z1 and y1 = 0, thereby achieving the highest possible

output. We now analyze the policy dilemma confronting a follower country that is located at z2,

The government of country 2 observes policy choices of the first cohort including those made by

the successful leader. In addition the government receives a private signal about its country’s

location zˆ 2 = z 2 . If the government imitates the successful leader’s policy choice a1, its payoff

equals v2 (a1=a2)= y2 = -θ( a1- z2)2. This payoff is solely a function of the distance between the

leader and the follower country. In contrast, if it chooses to experiment and follow a policy in

accordance with its own private signal, the payoff to the government is given by

v 2 (a 2 = a 2' = zˆ 2 ) = E(y) - K = E{-θ( z2 +η - z2)2} – K = -θσ2- K. Here the government incurs

both the cost of an uncertain technology as well as the private fixed cost of experimenting.

Follower country 2 will prefer to imitate the successful leader rather than experiment if the
                                                      15


following inequality holds: v 2 (a1 = a 2 ) ≥ v 2 (a 2 = a 2' = zˆ 2 ) . This implies that the follower

government will choose to imitate if z2 lies in the interval [a1 -(σ2+K/θ)1/2, a1+(σ2 + K/θ)1/2],

and to experiment otherwise. In the absence of the private fixed cost, the interval of imitation

would have been [a1 -σ, a1 + σ] instead. Clearly, the larger the government’s private fixed cost,

the larger the zone of “inefficient imitation”—the zone within which a country ends up imitating

even though it would have been better off experimenting.

        Despite the very simple structure of our model, we are able to generate some fairly

striking implications. The pattern of economic performance that results can be summarized with

the help of Figure 3, which we will refer to again when we lay out the full model in the next

section. In particular, our framework yields a U-shaped relationship between economic

performance and “distance” from the leader. Specifically:

(i)     In the immediate neighborhood of the successful leading country, countries prefer to

        imitate the leader’s policies, and achieve high economic performance. There is a “growth

        pole” around the successful leader.

(ii)    Countries that are very far from the leader—located in the zone we call the “far-

        periphery”—choose to experiment, rather than imitate. Their economic performance is

        on average worse than that of countries in the close neighborhood of the leader. But

        these also exhibit much greater variance in performance (due to the uncertainty in the

        policy implementation process). So some experimenters could achieve better

        performance than imitators in the neighborhood of the leader.

(iii)   Countries located in the intermediate zone between these groups—countries in the “near-

        periphery”—are strictly worse off than both of those groups (compared to a situation
                                                16

       where there was no successful leader). These are countries whose governments choose to

       mimic, even though they are too distant from the leader to benefit.

(iv)   Extending the model dynamically (if informally), we can see that growth poles are likely

       to develop sometime down the line in the far periphery, but not in the center or the near-

       periphery. That is because experimentation takes place only in the far periphery.

While the above analysis is somewhat heuristic, it has the merit of delineating most of the key

results of the full model in a transparent manner. The key to the U-shaped pattern is the

inefficiency that arises from the government’s private cost, K. In the next section, we dispense

with K, and extend the model to provide a direct explanation as to why governments may incur a

private cost if they choose to experiment rather than imitate.



III. Political Underpinnings of the Search for Prosperity: the Full Model

Transparency, Corruption and Policy Universality

       It is useful to keep in mind that in our analysis a “policy” has very broad connotations

and is not necessarily just related to the economic policy choice per se. A policy may consist of

any institutional arrangement that affects a country’s national income and welfare. This broader

interpretation of policies becomes particularly relevant in understanding the additional aspect of

a policy that we now introduce. We assume that some policies or institutional choices are

conducive to the inefficient siphoning away of national income (i.e. through corruption and

wastage), while others encourage discipline. We call this element of policy "transparency," to

distinguish it from the notion of "appropriateness" developed in the preceding section. We

assume that all appropriate policies are transparent in that they encourage discipline and prevent

wastage and corruption. Hence any transparent policy that disciplines one country is assumed to
                                                          17

discipline the government of any other country that adopts it. However, all transparent policies

are not appropriate in that they need not be well matched with the underlying state of the country

in question.7

         Our framework therefore encapsulates in a relatively parsimonious form two aspects of

policies. First, our formulation captures the notion of specificity—that policies need to be suited

to country-specific local conditions. Second, we also capture aspects of policies that are

universal, in that greater transparency, the rule of law and accountability are useful under all

conditions regardless of local context.



Government and the Citizen

         Everything else being the same, all governments would normally prefer to boost national

income and enhance the well being of their citizens. However, governments have additional

motives as well. They prefer remaining in power, and, furthermore, some are corrupt and

beholden to special interests. We capture these additional motivations for a government of type tk

from country i by using the following utility function: vik = y i + λ Rk + ε , where ε > 0

represents the “ego rents” from being in office, and where governments can be honest (th) with

probability ph or corrupt (tc) with probability 1-ph. The “economic rents” from having a non-

transparent policy that allows corruption is given by Rk, where Rc> Rh ≥ 0. For reasons that will

become clear shortly, we shall assume that each period is made up two stages. The “economic”

and “ego” rents both accrue to the government at the end of the second stage of the period.



7
 This assumption is much stronger than what is required for the analysis that follows. All that is required is that the
citizens have the perception that (in expected terms), any 'appropriate' policy is more likely to be 'transparent'. For
example, all that is required for is that the citizen in Hungary perceives that EU style institutional arrangements, if
adopted by his country, will reduce corruption.
                                                           18

Similarly, the impact on national income of having a corrupt government becomes visible to the

citizen only at the end of the second stage.8

           Finally, each country i has a single representative citizen, who lives one two-stage period

and has preferences given by ui = ∑t =1δ t −1 [ yit − Rkt ] , where δ is the discount factor and t is the
                                              2




stage. However, this representative citizen does more than just consume national income. He is

in a position to organize a coup, a revolt or to force mid-term elections at the end of the first

stage, if he is dissatisfied with the incumbent government. The probability that a citizen will

successfully replace an incumbent is a linear function of his perception that resources will be

siphoned away. We further elaborate on this subsequently.



The Timing in the Complete Model

           The entire set of countries is divided into two cohorts, where countries that make policy

choices at the beginning of the first period constitute the first period cohort. The governments in

these countries receive private signals and choose policies. Once selected, policies remain in

place during both stages of the period, regardless of whether a government remains in office

throughout. At the end of the first stage, citizens in these countries observe the government's

policy choice and choose whether to retain or attempt an ouster of the government. At the end of

this second stage output is publicly observed and payoffs are realized to the government and the

citizen.

           Citizens and governments in the second “follower” cohort observe policy choices of the

first cohort and their national income. The government receives a private signal about the state

8
  This assumption simplifies the analysis of the political game since it ensures that the citizen’s attempt to replace
the government is a function only of observed policy choice. The qualitative direction of the results will remain
                                                          19

and then makes its policy choice at the beginning of this second period. Once again citizens

observe the policy choices and make a decision of whether to retain the incumbent or replace it

at the end of the first stage of this second period. The preceding sequence is repeated. This

timeline is illustrated in Figure 2.

         We now examine the equilibrium policy choices of a government. As will soon be

evident, the results are similar to the heuristic analysis in the last section.



Discipline and Corruption in the Search for Prosperity: Equilibrium Analysis

         We analyze a government’s choices in the following scenario. We consider a situation

where at the end of the first period, there has emerged a sole successful leader that has

successfully implemented policy a1. This perfect match of the transparent policy a1 to the

appropriate state z1, has resulted in the maximum possible national income of

y1 = −θ (a1 − z1 ) = 0 , where we assume a1 = z1 = 1 (see Figure 1).9
                    2




         We then focus on the dilemma faced by the follower government. Should it minimize

uncertainty by picking an off-the-shelf policy a1 or should it experiment in its choice of policy?

In order to facilitate our analysis, we propose the following equilibrium to the sub-game

involving the follower governments. All honest follower governments whose private signal ẑ i

lies in the interval [z h , 2 − z h ] will be “disciplined” into imitating the policy chosen by the

successful leader. Similarly, corrupt governments who receive private signals in the range




unchanged even if we allow for observability of interim ouput by the citizen, so long as its realization(or its
observability to the citizen) is sufficiently noisy.
9
  Allowing for the process of policy experimentation in the first period, to result in more than one successful leader,
does not qualitatively alter any of the implications of the analysis that follows.
                                                         20


[z c , 2 − z c ] , will also be “disciplined” into mimicking the successful leader, where zh < zc.10 All
other countries with honest governments (e.g. those with zj ∈ [0,zh)), will pursue a policy in

accordance with their private signal, while corrupt governments in the range zj∈[0, zc) will

pursue policies which though positively correlated with their private signal, do allow the

siphoning away of resources. Citizens will keep in power those governments that are disciplined

into pursuing incorruptible policies. Governments that pursue any other policy will, with positive

probability, be successfully replaced at the end of the first stage by a randomly drawn challenger.

         Given that we have a finite two-stage game, we analyze our proposed equilibrium

backwards, from the beginning of the second stage of the second period. At this stage the

citizen has to decide whether to attempt to replace or retain the government. Depending on the

political structure specific to the country he may try to force a mid-term election or carry out a

revolt. The citizen will attempt to replace the government if he believes that his second stage

utility will be higher with a randomly drawn government than with the incumbent. Remember

that, once implemented, a policy is in place for both stages of a period. Therefore, if the policy

in place is not transparent, then in the second stage a corrupt government can siphon away

resources and lower national income. In this case, if the incumbent is perceived to be corrupt,

then the citizen may prefer to replace the incumbent with a randomly drawn challenger. On the

other hand, if the policy in place is transparent and guarantees discipline, then the citizen is no

better off by replacing the incumbent, who will therefore be retained.11




10
   Since in our proposed equilibrium, there are always a non-empty set of governments that prefer to not imitate the
leader, we do not worry about out-of-equilibrium beliefs.
11
   This is always true since under the proposed equilibrium, the difference in the citizen’s second stage payoff from
having a government that pursues its own signal and replacing it with a randomly drawn incumbent equals: [1-
zhph/(zhph + zc(1-ph) ) ]Rc - (1-ph)Rc, which is strictly negative for all ph>0.
                                                            21

         Consider the payoff from mimicking obtained by an honest follower government j that is

on the margin of indifference between mimicking and pursuing its own private signal ẑ h , where

zˆ h = z h . This is given by − θ ( z h − a1 ) − Rh + P(t h | a j = a1 )ε , where P(th|aj=a1) is the
                                              2




probability that an honest government that imitates the leader will remain in power. Given that

the countries are uniformly distributed on the circle,12 the above simplifies to:

                   v h ( z h , a j = a1 ) = −θ ( z h − a1 ) − Rh + ε = −θ ( z h − a1 ) + ε .
                                                        2                              2




The first expression on the right hand side is the national income that results from the

government's policy choice. Since we assume that Rh equals zero, there is no loss of economic

rents if the incumbent is honest. Furthermore, since the government has been disciplined into

enacting a transparent policy (in place for both stages), the citizen-voter has no incentive to

replace the incumbent with a randomly drawn challenger. Hence the incumbent retains power

with probability one (i.e. P(th|aj=a1) =1 ) and earns “ego rents” of ε .

         Similarly, the (expected) payoff to an honest government from experimenting and

pursuing a policy aj, in accordance with its private signal ẑ j is given by:


                     [                   ]                          [       ]
v h ( z h ,a j ≠ a1 ) = − θ Ε( z ′h − z h ) + P(t h | a j ≠ a1 )ε = − θσ 2 + 
                                           2                                            z h ph          
                                                                                                        ε .
                                                                              z h p h + z c (1 − p h ) 

A government faces uncertainty when it pursues an untried policy. Therefore, if the technology

of policy making is poorly understood, this uncertainty results (in expected terms) in a loss of

output, which gives rise to the term in the first square bracket.13 The second term is the expected


12
  Without loss of generality, the analysis that follows only considers the policy choices of countries uniformly
distributed on half the diameter of the circle i.e. those located in the range [0,1]. By symmetry, including the
complementary set of countries located on the other half, will not alter our results.
13
  Since policies are chosen from a continuum, we assume that even if a particular policy is incorruptible, there
exists a policy that is arbitrarily ‘close’ which a corrupt government may prefer to take, since it allows diversion of
resources. Therefore a government of type k does not have to lose economic rents, Rk when it chooses to experiment.
                                                                22

payoff from remaining in power. As is evident, the probability of remaining in power is a linear

function of the probability of being perceived honest. This implies that, given uniformity of the

underlying distributions, the probability of being re-elected is given by the expression in the

second square bracket. Therefore, the net payoff to an honest government that prefers to imitate

rather than pursue its private signal zˆ h = z h is given by:

Z (t h ; a1 , a h ) = v h ( z h , a j = a1 ) − v h ( z h , a j ≠ a1 ) , which simplifies to:


                              [                             ] 
          Z (t h ; a1 , a jh ) = − θ ( z h − a1 ) − R h + ε − − θ σ 2 +
                                                 2                               z h phε         
                                                                                                  = 0.
                                                                         z h p h + z c (1 − p h )
                                                                                                              (1)
                                                              

Similarly, the net payoff to a corrupt government from mimicking rather than pursuing a policy

in accordance with its private signal zˆ c = z c is given by,


                              [                             ]
          Z (t c ; a1 , a jc ) = − θ ( z c − a1 ) − Rc + ε − − θ σ 2 +
                                                 2                              zh phε          
                                                                                                 = 0.
                                                                        z h p h + z c (1 − p h )
                                                                                                              (2)
                                                             

          The above expressions capture the payoffs to a follower government from pursuing

alternative courses of action. We can now summarize our basic results on policy choice.



Proposition I. There exists an equilibrium zh*< zc*, such that the policy choices made by a

follower country j are a function of its location zj, and whether its government is corrupt or

honest, such that if the successful leader is located at z1 = 1, the following is true:

(a) all countries run by honest governments with z j ∈ [ z h* ,1] are disciplined into imitating policy

a1, while those with z j ∈ [0, z h* ) experiment and pursue policy aj in accordance with their private

signal,


However, since voters perfectly observe the policy choice of the government, the government will be vulnerable to
overthrow and losing ego rents, even if the policy choice of the government is arbitrarily close, but not equal to a1.
                                                         23


(b) all countries run by a corrupt government with z j ∈ [ z c* ,1] , are disciplined into imitating a1,

while those with z j ∈ [0, z c* ) , experiment and pursue a policy aj in accordance with their private

signal and earn rents Rc.

Proof: See Appendix.



This proposition establishes the existence of an equilibrium where some countries mimic and

others pursue their own course of action. The mechanism is a simple one. While governments are

interested in enacting policies that enhance national income, they would also like to remain in

power. All governments would prefer to signal through their policy choice that they are

relatively honest, and hence increase their chances of remaining in power. This gives rise to the

possibility of governments deliberately choosing to imitate a successful leader, even though such

a policy might result in lower national income.

           It is important to keep in mind that the precise mechanism that generates this incentive to

imitate is not important. In reality, alternative mechanisms may be at work so long as not

imitating results in a private cost of some kind (as in the previous section). For instance, suppose

international capital markets expect that policies that constitute the Washington consensus are

more likely to work for developing countries. If a government has information that suggests an

alternative independent course of action might be superior, it is likely to be punished in the form

of low capital inflows. In turn these lower capital flows, by lowering employment, may have a

negative impact on the political survival of the government. Therefore, fear of lower capital

flows (and its adverse political and economic consequences) may prevent governments from

pursuing policies they know are likely to work best.14


14
     See Mukand (1999) for an elaboration of this argument.
                                                    24

        We are particularly interested in evaluating the welfare impact of this disciplining of

nations. To facilitate our analysis, we first characterize as a benchmark the socially optimal

policy choice, equivalent to the policy choice made by an honest government in the absence of

any global informational externality. If the citizens of a country cannot observe the policy

choices (or the economic outcomes) in the rest of the world, then they are not in a position to

make any assessment of the honesty or corruptibility of the incumbent merely by looking at its

policy choice. Therefore, in the absence of an informational externality, a honest government,

which has received the private signal zˆ h = z h , will prefer to imitate the successful leader, if

Z (t h ) ≥ 0 , which is true iff − θ (1 − z h ) ≥ −θ σ 2 . Therefore, the socially efficient policy choice
                                          2




implies that a government prefers to imitate the successful leader so long as:

z j ≥ z eff
        j   = a1 − σ 2 − Rh θ = 1 − σ , since Rh equals zero and a1 =1. As is evident, the set of

honest governments that will imitate the policy choice of a successful leader is increasing in the

uncertainty associated with the implementation of the new policy. In what follows, we label all

countries, with underlying states of the world z j ≥ z eff
                                                       j , as being “neighbors” of the leader



country. The country-specific socio-cultural or geographical conditions of such a “neighbor” are

relatively similar to that of the leader. In contrast countries that are in the region z j < z eff
                                                                                               j , are



labeled as being located in the “periphery” of the leader country. Therefore, in the absence of the

global informational externality an honest government behaves in a socially efficient manner

while a corrupt government engages in too little imitation.

        In the next proposition, we demonstrate that the global informational externality exerts a

disciplinary influence on all governments and results in the following: zh decreases for honest
                                                   25

governments, which get inefficiently disciplined, while zc also decreases for corrupt government,

which get efficiently disciplined.



Proposition II. The relationship between national income and a follower country's location is

given by the following:

(i) all governments (whether corrupt or honest) in the range z cj* ∈ [ z eff
                                                                         j ,1 ) , that are



“neighbors” of the successful leader, get efficiently disciplined into imitating the successful

leader and have average incomes that are higher than the other countries;

(ii) the set of honest governments located in the “near-periphery” i.e. the range z h ∈[ z hj* , z eff
                                                                                                   j ),



are inefficiently disciplined into imitating the leader and enact policies that lower national

income, while the set of corrupt governments in this range experiment;

(iii) all governments in the “far-periphery” i.e. z j ∈[ 0, z h* ) , experiment with their choice of

policies and have higher average incomes than those in the near-periphery.

Proof: See Appendix.



We examine facets of the above proposition by studying the associated Figures 3 and 4, where

we observe the following:

        Region A. Neighbors: Location is z j ∈[ z eff
                                                  j ,1] . There exists a growth pole in the close



proximity of the successful leader. Governments in the close proximity of the leader, whether

corrupt or honest, mimic its policies. Here, we should expect that national income gradually

comes down with distance, as the ideal policy of a mimicking country moves further away from

the leader’s policy choice a1. Moreover, in this group of follower countries, the variance in
                                                 26

national income should also be low, since both honest and most corrupt governments get

disciplined. So in the immediate proximity of the leader, average corruption is also low.

       Region B. Near-Periphery: Location is z j ∈ [ z h* , z eff
                                                              j ) . Countries that are located at some



intermediate distance from the successful leader display (on average), lower incomes than those

that are neighbors. This is because of two reasons. First, the countries in this region are located

further from their ideal points than the neighboring countries, resulting in lower income.

Second, countries located in this region can find themselves saddled with either an undisciplined

corrupt government, or with honest governments that have been inefficiently disciplined into

enacting inappropriate but transparent policies. For both of these reasons, average national

income is lower. Moreover, the variance in corruption is (moderately) higher than that of the

countries in the immediate proximity of the leader, since a larger proportion of all governments

are likely to be corrupt.

       Region C. Far-Periphery: Location is z j ∈ [0, z h* ) . Countries that are sufficiently far

from the successful leader have (on average) higher incomes than those located in the near

periphery. This is because we now have a large set of governments (both corrupt and honest)

that prefer to experiment with policies, adapting rather than merely transplanting them.

Therefore, while some countries are likely to do very badly, others are also likely to perform

very well. Countries that perform poorly do so in part because some of them are saddled with

undisciplined corrupt governments or because they get unlucky and obtain a poor draw as they

experiment. However, given that (unlike in region B) the honest governments experiment, we are

likely to have some countries that achieve phenomenal success and a high income, as well as

some that witness colossal failure. Therefore, conditional on being honest, countries in the far-

periphery have an (expected) income equal to the expected income of the marginal efficient
                                                         27


government z eff --as displayed in Figure 3. Countries located in this region will display higher

variance in both their incomes and the degree of corruption than countries in the near-periphery.

(Outcomes for corrupt governments are shown in Figure 4.)

         The above proposition argued that the global informational externality resulted in a

disciplinary effect being exercised on all follower governments. On the margin, the honest

government was inefficiently disciplined, while the corrupt government was efficiently

disciplined.15 However, our analysis did not suggest what kinds of countries (and associated

political structures) are most likely to be prone these inefficiencies in policy choices. We would

conjecture that the effects of the global informational externality are likely to be sharpest in new

democracies. In countries that are just emerging from authoritarian rule, politicians and parties

do not have a track record and they have not had the opportunity to accumulate a reputation for

honesty. Governments may then have a strong incentive to signal their honesty through their

policy choice, even if it implies choosing policies that are not adequately targeted on domestic

conditions.



IV. An Empirical Test

         The model discussed in the previous two sections has clear testable empirical

implications. Assume we can identify a “leader” country (indexed by 1) and a metric that

measures—in terms of their respective “states of the world”—the distance between the leader

and individual follower countries (indexed by i). Let this metric be denoted by ∆i ≡ |zi – z1|.

Then the predictions of the model are the following:

15
   Under what conditions may we expect that the overall impact of this discipline exerted on aggregate world
income is negative? Our analysis suggests that two factors play a role – the size of the rents earned by corrupt
governments and the probability that the incumbent may be corrupt. In particular, if the rents earned by a corrupt
                                                        28

    (a) Followers with low ∆ should adopt policies that are very similar to those in the leader,

        while followers with high ∆ should “experiment.”

    (b) Policy transparency should be very high in followers with low ∆ and low (on average) in

        followers with high ∆.

    (c) Economic performance should exhibit a U-shaped pattern when plotted against ∆i. The

        worst performing followers should be those with intermediate values of ∆. Low-∆

        countries should do well, while high-∆ countries should (on average) do better than

        intermediate-∆ countries.

    (d) Measures of policy similarity, transparency, and economic performance should all exhibit

        larger variance for high-∆ countries than for low-∆ countries.

Of these implications, the one that we think is the most interesting and the hardest to square with

other possible explanations is (c). So, while we will provide evidence on all four implications,

our empirical analysis will focus on testing whether there exists a U-shaped relationship in

economic performance as we move “away” from the leader.

        We choose as our testing ground the former socialist countries. The experience of these

countries provides several advantages from our current perspective. First, there is no ambiguity

about the fact that these countries were on a search for new policies. Once they abandoned

socialism, they had to replace it with something else. We can date the beginning of this search

process cleanly and measure performance since that break. Second, for most of these countries,

particularly those in the proximity of the European Union, there was an obvious leader. Western

Europe provided a clear model to emulate. Third, there is also a plausible metric for ∆i in this

case, which consists of the geographic distance between a follower country and Western Europe.


government Rc are not too large, and ph not too low, the negative impact on aggregate world income of inefficiently
disciplining honest governments is likely to outweigh the beneficial impact of disciplining corrupt governments.
                                                          29

It is not too difficult to believe that geographic distance is a good proxy for the differences in

historical trajectories, initial conditions, and institutional preconditions that determine whether a

given “imported” policies are appropriate or not. Uzbekistan’s distance from Western Europe is

much greater than the Czech Republic’s—and Moldova’s intermediate between those two—not

only geographically, but also in the economic sense we have been using throughout.

           Our sample consists therefore of all countries that have formally renounced socialism in

the last two decades. The universe of such countries is shown in Table 2, along with the basic

data we shall use in the empirical analysis. The table contains all countries that were or have

been socialist, as listed in Kornai (1992, Table 1.1). A few of these have not formally renounced

socialism,16 and we shall therefore exclude them from the analysis to be on the conservative side.

Of those that are excluded on this ground, perhaps the most important are China and Vietnam.

These two countries have experienced extremely high growth rates since embarking on their

highly unorthodox version of market-oriented reforms within a predominantly socialist legal

setting.17 Since they are also among the most distant countries from Western Europe, their

inclusion in the analysis would, as will become clearer later on, strengthen our results. Note also

that in addition to the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union (EESU), the

sample of former socialist countries includes a few from Africa (such as Ethiopia, Mozambique,

and Congo) and a single Latin American country (Nicaragua). Since these are all countries that

have been transitioning from socialism, we think it is appropriate to include them in the




16
     These are indicated by “n.a.” in column B, “year socialism abandoned.”
17
  For a good analysis of China’s experimentalism and adoption of “transitional institutions” that differ greatly from
those in the West, see Qian (2001). We may in fact consider China the leader country, which Vietnam has chosen to
emulate.
                                                        30

analysis.18 However, to be on the safe side once again, we shall also present results with the

sample restricted to EESU countries.19 The resulting sample covers 32 countries (25 when

restricted to EESU).

        Table 2 shows the average annual growth rate experienced by each country since the

onset of its transition, and its distance from Brussels, which we take to be the “center” of

Western Europe. Distance is measured as the direct-line distance (“as the crow flies”) between a

country’s capital and Brussels in miles. (Sources for all the data are listed at the bottom of the

table.) In Figure 5 we plot the simple relationship between growth and distance from Brussels.

The top panel shows the whole sample while the bottom panel is restricted to the EESU

countries. In each case, we fitted an nth-order polynomial to the relationship, which is also

shown on the plots. We selected n to maximize the adjusted R2 obtained from regressing growth

on the polynomial of the distance. The best fit is provided with n=3 for the whole sample and

n=2 for the EESU sample. The estimated coefficients on the polynomials turn out to be highly

significant and the fits quite tight: the adjusted R2 is 0.42 and 0.53, respectively, for the two

samples.

        Most importantly, the Figure reveals a strong U-shaped pattern in both cases. The

countries that have done the worst are those that are generally intermediate in their distance from

Brussels. Moldova and Ukraine are particular standouts, while the experiences of Russia,

Georgia, and Azerbaijan also seem illustrative. Countries close to Western Europe (the central


18
  It may be questioned however to what extent Western Europe, as opposed to the U.S., was the relevant “leader”
for Nicaragua. Our results are robust to substituting distance from the U.S. for distance from Europe in the
Nicaraguan case.
19
  The EESU sample is restricted to those countries where the entry in column (I) is 1. There is a question whether
Mongolia belongs in the EESU sample. In many ways, Mongolia’s position is no different than the former Soviet
republics in Central Asia. Its inclusion makes the results reported with the EESU sample stronger, so we exclude it
to be on the conservative side once again.
                                                         31

European and Baltic states) have done much better, as is well known. Less well recognized is

that the average performance of the farther-out Central Asian republics has also been better than

that of the intermediate countries. And if we travel even further away to look at non-EESU

countries, we find some (like Ethiopia and Mozambique) whose performance has matched

Poland’s or Slovenia’s. While standard gravity-type explanations might account for the

negatively-sloped part of this relationship, we are not aware of any other theories that would

account for the positively-sloped part. Moreover, had we included China and Vietnam in our

sample, the upwards-sloping part of the U-curve would have been even more evident, as these

two have done better than any of the others in our sample. We shall probe these results further

below, but their conformity with implication (c) is quite striking.

         We note also that there is greater dispersion in growth rates in the sample of countries

with above-median distance than in those with below-median distance. The standard deviation

of growth rates in the first group is 4.5 percentage points versus 4.1 in the second. However, this

difference is not statistically significant, and therefore there is at best weak support for prediction

(d) of the model.

         Since our sample is necessarily small and the performance-distance relationship is open

to diverse interpretations, we next undertake a number of robustness tests. Our basic strategy is

to check in both of our samples whether the U-shaped relationship survives the inclusion of other

control variables typically found to be important in this kind of exercise.20 We consider initial

income, number of years a country has been under socialism, a dummy for Sub-Saharan African

20
   For analyses of the growth performance of post-transition countries, see Berg et al. (1999), de Melo et al. (1997),
Fischer and Sahay (2000), Falcetti et al. (2000), and de Menil (2001). Some of these studies have used distance
from Europe as an explanatory variable, but we are not aware of any that have looked for non-monotonic effects in
distance. Our interpretation of this literature is that it has not been very successful in identifying the deeper
determinants of the cross-country variation in performance. The usual explanations offered in this literature—such
as the degree of macroeconomic instability, adoption of structural reforms, and corruption—beg the question of why
transition economies have differed so much along these dimensions.
                                                        32

countries, and an index of structural reform constructed by the EBRD. As the results in Table 3

show, the U-shaped pattern is robust to all these additions. The estimated coefficients on

distance and distance squared remain negative and positive, respectively, in all cases and they are

always statistically significant (typically at 95% or better).21

        We briefly discuss some of the more important results that emerge from Table 3. First,

we find that initial income has little explanatory power in either the full or the EESU samples.

This is true even when we control for the extent of structural reform (not shown). So there is no

evidence of convergence, conditional or unconditional, among this group of countries. Second,

there is a significant negative relationship in the full sample between the number of years a

country has been socialist and its post-transition growth rate. This relationship exists in the

EESU sample only when we do not control for distance (not shown). Third, the estimated

coefficient on the Africa dummy is positive—this is perhaps the only growth regression in which

location in Africa appears to have been advantageous to growth!—but it is not significant. The

reason that controlling for Africa may be appropriate this context is that it may be argued the

African socialist countries applied a “softer” version of the socialism that prevailed in EESU,

and therefore experienced fewer problems in the transition. While this may be true, our results

indicate that this does not alter the U-shaped pattern of economic performance. A more direct

way of confronting this criticism is to restrict the sample to the EESU countries. As Table 3

shows, the results with the EESU sample are in fact stronger econometrically: the fit is better,

and the estimated coefficients and t-statistics are generally larger.



21
  Another robustness check consists of checking whether the result survives the inclusion of data on the unofficial
economy. Estimates of the increase in the unofficial economy are patchy and do not cover our whole sample, so it is
difficult to do this systematically. But the available evidence (Kaufmann and Kaliberda 1996) does not indicate that
our results would be seriously affected. In any case, official GDP data have increasingly incorporated such
estimates, so that our growth data for the entire post-transition period should not be subject to systematic biases.
                                                          33

         The results with the EBRD index of structural reform are particularly noteworthy. We

have computed this index as a simple average of the 1999 values of four indices constructed by

the EBRD (as reported in Raiser et al. 2001). The four components are governance and

enterprise restructuring, competition policy, banking reform and interest rate liberalization, and

reform of securities markets and non-bank financial institutions.22 The EBRD gives each a

country a rating between 1 and 4 on these dimensions (with some pluses and minuses, which we

converted to a numerical scale by adding or subtracting 0.25 points). The index is available only

for the EESU countries. We shall discuss later on how this index relates to our concepts of

policy imitation and experimentation. For now, we draw attention to the results in columns (8)

and (9) of Table 3. When growth is regressed only on the reform index, we get a very strong

positive relationship (col. 9). However, when distance is included, the reform index becomes

insignificant, while the distance terms are still highly significant (col. 8). We find it a

remarkable result that economic performance has been driven by distance (in the non-linear

manner predicted by our theory) rather than by the implementation of the reforms viewed as

important by the EBRD.23

         There is little that we can do about the small size of our sample—other than point out, in

our defense, that we cover essentially the universe of the relevant countries, i.e., countries that

were once socialist and made a decisive break from it.24 Adding other possibly relevant cases,

most notably China and Vietnam, would strengthen our findings, as we argued above. So under


22
 A fifth component, overall legal effectiveness and extensiveness is not used, because it is not available for all
EESU countries in 1999.
23
  A further indication of the presence of non-linearity in distance is this: when we regress growth on the EBRD
index and just distance (dropping the distance-squared term), the index is significant, while distance is not.
24
  The only countries not included, as can be seen from Table 1, are Somalia and Bosnia and Herzegovina, in both
cases due to the unavailability of data.
                                                34

the circumstances we find our results quite supportive of the central implication of our

framework (point (c) above). We now turn to the issues of policy choice and transparency.

       With regard to policy choice, our theory’s implications are as follows: close neighbors

should imitate, distant countries should experiment, and in between there should be a mix.

Ideally we would like to have a measure of how closely transition countries have tried to follow

“best-practice” institutional arrangements in Western Europe. The EBRD index we have already

used gives us a plausible measure: the EBRD ratings are presumably based on the degree of

correspondence of each country’s reforms with a uniform, idealized set of rules and regulations,

closely approximated by the prevailing institutional setting in Europe. However, there are two

important sources of slippage between this index and our desired measure ‌ ai – a1 ‌ .

       First, there is an obvious bias due to the fact that the individuals who do the ratings are

not oblivious to the economic performance of the country being evaluated. So countries that are

doing well even without copying will be rated higher than they would otherwise merit, while

countries that are doing poorly despite significant imitation will be rated lower. This will impart

a positive correlation to the relation between the index and performance, even where the true

correlation is zero. Second, there is a more subtle bias. Countries that attempt to emulate

European-style arrangements, but ultimately fail to implement them because they turn out to be

inappropriate to local conditions (political or otherwise), will be rated low even though they are

by our standard “imitators.” The EBRD index captures implementation, not good-faith effort.

This relates to an ongoing controversy in the literature on whether countries like Russia have

done poorly because they have attempted to implement inappropriate policies (as in the so-called

shock therapy program of 1992), or because they have not adequately implemented what

otherwise would have been perfectly appropriate policies. From our standpoint, this distinction
                                                35

is not that important. The fact that “off-the-shelf” reforms could not be implemented is prima

facie evidence that they were inappropriate. For both reasons, we would expect the relationship

between the EBRD index and distance to take a U-shaped form, even when the underlying

relationship may be a step function.

       With these caveats in mind, Figure 6 presents a scatter plot of the EBRD reform index

against distance from Brussels. As expected, the index has a clear negative gradient in the

vicinity of Western Europe, and the relationship eventually flattens out as we get farther away.

We take this to be consistent with implication (a). Recall also from Table 3 that the reform index

has no explanatory power over performance once a quadratic in distance is included in the

regression. Countries that are very distant from Brussels have performed better than would have

been expected on the basis of their lack of adoption of European-style reforms, while countries

that are neither too far nor too close have performed badly even though their record of adoption

of such reforms is no worse.

       We can point to the respective experiences of Russia and the Central Asian republics to

illustrate this point. Russia’s attempted shock therapy in macroeconomic policy in early 1992

and its rapid implementation of mass privatization are perhaps good illustrations of inappropriate

imitation. Shock therapy ended in failure because of domestic political opposition, while

privatization is widely judged to have produced undesirable outcomes—massive appropriation

by insiders of state assets—due to the absence of a supportive legal and institutional

environment. Central Asian states, by contrast, felt much less constrained by conventional

orthodoxies on reform. They may not have been self-conscious experimenters in the mold of

China, but they were generally much more cautious in their adoption of mass privatization
                                                 36

procedures, more hesitant in their moves towards price and trade liberalization, and less rushed

in making their currencies convertible.

       Finally, we turn to the question of transparency and corruption. Our model predicts

strong “disciplining” effects in the neighborhood of the leader country. Figures 7 and 8, which

plot two indices taken from Kaufmann et al. (1999a and 1999b) against distance, show this to be

the case. The two indices are measures of “voice and accountability” and “control of

corruption.” When we compare these to Figure 5, the main thing that stands out is that countries

in the far periphery have had (on average) more corruption and less accountability than countries

in the neighborhood of Europe despite comparable growth rates. Moreover, EESU countries

with an intermediate distance have (on average) had higher accountability and lower corruption

than those EESU countries further out. The figures reveal clearly that the “discipline” effect

diminishes as a function of distance from Europe.

       These indices of accountability and corruption are subject to the same subjective bias

noted for the EBRD reform index. In particular, countries that are performing better are more

likely to be rated high. So one needs to take the indices with a considerable grain of salt, and not

read too much into it.



V. Concluding Remarks

       Countries do not select policies at random. Historically economic policymaking has been

often subject to fads and fashions. Prior to the free-trade revolution of the 19th century,

mercantilist policies were the norm in Europe. Once Britain went the way of free trade, most

European countries eventually followed suit. Few countries avoided the retreat to protectionist

policies in the interwar period. Import-substitution and planning were the rage for most
                                                           37

developing countries that became independent in the postwar period. Following the success of

the East Asian tigers, outward orientation became the rallying cry of reformers everywhere. The

Washington Consensus of the late 1980s and 1990s eventually got morphed into “second

generation reforms.”25

           The principal innovation of this paper is a richer conception of policy making which

allows for country-specificity of policies as well the possibility of learning from successful

leaders. In our framework experimentation and imitation both have a useful role to play, but

they also each have a downside. Experimentation allows countries to discover policies closer to

their “ideal,” but it necessarily involves taking risks. Imitation avoids those risks, but creates the

possibility that imported policies will prove inappropriate. By endogenizing policy choice, we

have shown that the informational externality generated by successful leaders benefit those

countries that have a “close” degree of similarity to the leaders in their underlying circumstances,

while it hurts countries that have an “intermediate” degree of similarity.

           In our framework, the informational externality generates a sub-optimal level of

experimentation. The reason is that the shadow of corrupt governments restricts the options

available to honest governments. But by making the distinction between transparent and corrupt

policies clearer to observe, it also reduces the scope for corruption. We end by emphasizing that

countries may be able to escape this tradeoff in the longer run by establishing political systems

with a better track record of accountability and honesty.




25
     For an entertaining account of recent fads and fashions, see Naim (1999).
                                                                 38


Appendix

Proof of Proposition I. Observe that both the implicit functions Z(th), Z(tc) are continuous. We
are interested in finding out whether there exist cut-offs to the solutions to this pair of
simultaneous equations. Consider first the equation Z (t c ;.) = 0 . Totally differentiating the above

gives us dz h dz c = (− ) Z c Z h , where Zj is the partial with respect to zj. Observe that

Z c ( z h , z c ) > 0 and Z h ( z h , z c ) < 0 . This implies that since dz h dz c > 0 , we have a positive slope
to the function Z(tc.;.)=0. Similarly, take the other equation for the honest government,
Z (t h ; z h , z c ) = 0 . Notice that Z c > 0 . However, Z h > 0 if

2θ (1 − z h ) > [ p h (1 − p h ) z c ε ]   [(z h ph + z c (1 − ph )]2 . Therefore, for θ   large enough, this second

function is monotonically decreasing and together with Z c > 0 implies that dz h dz c < 0 .
Therefore, the two equations are continuous and monotonic with opposite slopes. However, we
also need to check whether they intersect over the relevant [ 0, 1] range of the (zh, zc) axis. To
check this observe that Z(th; zh →1,zc →0) > Z(tc;zh→0,zc →0), so long as Rc>0. Further, also
notice that Z(th;zh→0,zc→1) < Z(tc;zh→1,zc→1). Therefore, given the continuity of the
underlying functions and the fact that the two functions have opposite slopes, we have a cut-off
in the relevant parameter space of the (zh, zc) axis, such that there exist cut-offs z h* , z c* which (     )
solves both Z (t h ,.) and Z (t c ,.) .
          While we have demonstrated the existence of a cut-off, to complete the argument we
need to further demonstrate that z h* < z c* . The argument is by contradiction and we begin by

assuming that the opposite is true, i.e. z h* > z c* . First, consider the payoff of an honest

government which is located at z, such that z = z h* − δ , where δ → 0 . Since z < z h* , such a
government prefers to follow its own signal, which implies that
− θ (1 − z ) + ε < −θσ 2 + p(t h | a j ≠ 1)ε . In contrast consider the payoff of a corrupt government
             2



which is also located at z, where z > z c* . Since such a government prefers to imitate, the

following inequality must be true: − θ (1 − z ) + ε > −θσ 2 + Rc + p (t c | a j ≠ 1)ε . Since
                                                             2



p(tc|.)=p(th|.), so long as Rc > 0 , the two preceding inequalities cannot simultaneously both be

true and hence we have a contradiction. Using a similar argument we can prove that z h* ≠ z c* .
                                                     39

        We now just need to check whether the citizen’s political retention rule is optimal and he
will attempt to overthrow a government that is perceived to lower his utility. The citizen of
country j will retain the incumbent for the second stage if u j 2 (a1 = a j = 1) > u j 2 (a j ≠ 1) . This is

straightforward, since once enacted, policies are fixed for the entire two stages, the only
incentive to replace an incumbent is if the policy is conducive to corruption. Under the proposed
equilibrium and under the difference in the expected second stage payoff from a government that
experiments and the payoff from replacing the incumbent with a random government is : [1-
zhph/(zhph + zc(1-ph) ) ]Rc - (1-ph)Rc, which is negative ∀p h < 1 , which implies that the voter will

find it optimal to attempt to replace the incumbent who experiments.
        Proof of Proposition II. Consider the behavior of the marginal corrupt government in the
absence of the global informational externality. Observe that such a government will prefer to

imitate if z j > zˆ cj = a1 − σ 2 − Rc θ . However, it is socially efficient for the government to

imitate only if z j > a1 − σ = 1 − σ . Therefore, in the absence of any `discipline' imposed by the

global informational externality, we have the inefficiency of `too little' imitation i.e. zˆ cj > z eff
                                                                                                    j , so


long as Rc >0. We are interested in assessing whether the governments that have been
`disciplined' into enacting policy a1, have done so at the cost of national welfare. In order to
evaluate this consider once again equations (1) and (2). Now observe that for both these
equations the following is true, i.e. : [1-zhph/(zhph + zc(1-ph) ) ]ε>0, i.e. the net electoral payoff
from imitating rather than experimenting is positive. Since in each of the above equations, the
equality with zero has to be maintained, it immediately follows that the net income payoff from
imitating rather than pursuing its private signal is strictly lower, in the presence of political
imperatives. This can only be true if both zh and zc decrease. The above argument suggests that
national income (in expected terms) for the marginal honest government that imitates and
chooses a1 is lower than what it would have been for in the absence of the global information
externality and implies that z h* < zˆ jh = zeff. Therefore, there exists a set of governments that have

been `disciplined' into enacting policies that lower national welfare. Similarly, since zc comes
down, this implies that inefficient corrupt governments are disciplined into enacting policies that

increase national welfare, so long as z eff < zˆ jc where zˆ cj = a1 − σ 2 − Rc θ . However, this is

only true so long as the parameters are such that the following inequality does not hold: [1-
                                                    40


zhph/(zhph + zc(1-ph) ) ]ε>Rc>0. If the preceding inequalities are satisfied, then even corrupt
governments get inefficiently disciplined and zc < zeff. Finally, observe that countries located
with z j ∈ [0, z h* ) experiment and achieve expected income Ey(th)=-θ(1-zeff)2, if incumbent is

honest and Ey(tc)=-θ(1-zeff)2-Rc if corrupt. Therefore, if government type is not known, expected
income equals -phθ(1-zeff)2-(1-ph)θ(1-zeff)2-Rc. This can be seen to be strictly greater(compare
Figures 3 and 4) than the expected income of countries located in the ‘near-periphery’ i.e.

                 j ) , since Ey(th)=-θ(1-z ) < Ey(th)=-θ(1-zj)
                                          eff 2               2
z j ∈ [ z h* , z eff                                            since zj<zeff., while Ey(tc) is identical.



REFERENCES


Berg, A., E. Borensztein, R. Sahay, and J. Zettelmeyer, “The Evolution of Output in Transition
Economies: Explaining the Differences,” IMF Working Paper WP/99/73, 1999.

Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard, ”Economic Development,
Legality, and the Transplant Effect,” September 2001 (European Economic Review,
forthcoming).

Besley, Timothy, “Political Institutions and Policy Competition,” 2000, available on the web at
www.dse.de/ef/instn/besley.htm.

De Melo, M., C. Denizer, A. Gelb, and S. Tenev, “Circumstances and Choice: The Role of Initial
Conditions and Policies in Transition Economies,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
No. 1866, 1997.

De Menil, Georges, “Structural Change and Productivity in the European Transition Countries:
What Lessons for the Analysis of Growth?” in Dani Rodrik, ed., Analytical Country Studies on
Growth, 2001, forthcoming.

Dewatripont, Mathias, and Gerard Roland, “The Design of Reform Packages under Uncertainty,”
American Economic Review, vol. 83, no. 5, 1995.

Diamond, Jared, "How to Get Rich" (2001) available at
http:\\www.edge.org/3rd_culture/diamond_rich/rich_p1.html

Evans, Peter, “Beyond “Institutional Monocropping”: Institutions, Capabilities, and Deliberative
Development,” University of California at Berkeley, November 2001.

Falcetti, Elisabetta, Martin Riaser and Peter Sanfey, “Defying the Odds: Initial Conditions,
Reforms and Growth in the First Decade of Transiton,” EBRD Working Paper No. 55, July
2000.
                                              41



Fischer, S., and R. Sahay, “The Transition Economies After Ten Years,” IMF Working Paper
WP/00/30, 2000.

Jefferson, Gary, and Thomas Rawski, “Enterprise Reform in Chinese Industry,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 8(2), Spring 1994, 47-70.

Kaufmann, Daniel, and Aleksander Kaliberda, “Integrating the Unofficial Economy into the
Dynamics of Post-Socialist Economies,” Policy Research Working Paper 1691, The World
Bank, Washington, DC, 1996.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton (1999a), "Aggregating Governance
Indicators," World Bank Policy Research Department Working Paper No. 2195, 1999.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton (1999b), "Governance Matters," World
Bank Policy Research Department Working Paper No. 2196, 1999.

Khanna, Tarun, Joe Kogan, and Krishna Palepu, “Globalization and Corporate Governance
Convergence? A Cross-County Analysis,” Harvard Business School, October 2001.

Kornai, Janos, The Socialist System: The Political Economy of Communism, Princeton
University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1992.

Kremer, Michael, Alexei Onatski, and James Stock, “Searching for Prosperity,” NBER Working
Paper No.w8250, April 2001.

Landes, David S., The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, W.W. Norton, New York, 1998.

Morissey, Oliver, and Douglas Nelson, “The Role of the WTO in the Transfer of Policy
Knowledge on Trade and Competition,” Leverhulme Centre for Research on Globalisation and
Economic Policy Research Paper 2001/32, September 2001.

Mukand, Sharun, "Globalization and the Confidence Game"; Tufts University Working Paper,
1999

Naim, Moises, “Fads and Fashion in Economic Reforms: Washington Consensus or
Washington Confusion?” October 26, 1999.

Naughton, Barry, Growing Out of the Plan: Chinese Economic Reform, 1978-1993,
Cambridge University Press, New York, 1995.

North, Douglass C., “Economic Performance Through Time,” The American Economic
Review, Vol. 84, No. 3. (Jun., 1994), pp. 359-368.

North, Douglass C., “The Paradox of the West,” available on the web at
http://netec.mcc.ac.uk/WoPEc/data/wpawuwpeh.html, September 1993.
                                             42



Pistor, Katharina, “The Standardization of Law and its Effect on Developing Economies,” G-
24 Discussion Paper No. 4, July 2000
(http://ksghome.harvard.edu/~.drodrik.academic.ksg/g24-pistor.pdf).

Raiser, Martin, Maria L. Di Tommaso, and Melvyn Weeks, “The Measurement and
Determinants of Institutional Change: Evidence from Transition Economies,” EBRD Working
Paper, 2001.

Rodrik, Dani, "Institutions for High Quality Growth: What they Are and How to Acquire Them",
Studies in Comparative International Development, vol. 35, no.3, Fall 2000.

Roland, Gerard, Transition and Economics: Politics, Markets, and Firms, Cambridge, MA, The
MIT Press, 2000.

Unger, Roberto Mangabeira, Democracy Realized: The Progressive Alternative, Verso, London
and New York, 1998.
                                                      Period 1
                                                      'leader'
                                                      a1=1=z1



                                     zc




                            zh




                                                           0
                                                         Figure

                                                        Figure I



Govt. i
receives ẑ i      Citizen                         Output, net of
then takes         observes ai and                 rents, realized
policy ai          decides to                      Citizen, govt.
                   retain/eject                    get payoff
                   govt.




                                                                        Stage 1         Stage 2
                Stage 1           Stage2                                          Period II
                    Period I, Cohort I                                    'Follower' Cohort II

                                          Govt. + citizen in
                                                                          (preceding sequence repeated)
                                          follower country observe
                                          leader success. Govt.
                                          receives zj and then
                                          chooses policy




                                               Figure 2: The Timeline
                                           44



                                                      Expected
                                                      National
    C           B                  A                  Income
      Periphery                 Neighbors
    `Far'     'Near'
                                                                         Income of
                                                                          `Leader’




0           zh *        zeff    zc*        z1=1=a1
                                                                         Country
                                      Honest government                  Location

                                         Figure 3

                                                      National
                                                      Income
    C               B               A
        Periphery              Neighbors




                                                     Rc




0          zh *         zeff zc* ẑ cj     z1=1=a1
                                                                 Country Location


                                Corrupt government

                                          Figure 4
                          grow th since onset of reform                          Fitted values

  .034557       POL                                                                                            MOZ
              SVN
                                                                          ET H
                  HRV                                             BEN

                 HUN
                     ALB                                                                                        NIC
               SVK
            CZE
                     EST
                          MKD                                             YEM
                                                                                         MNG
                          BLR
                           BGR
                                                                  UZB              COG


                        LVA
                        LTU                                             KAZ
                            ROM                  ARM

                                     RUS                            KGZ




                                                            TKM

                                                 GEO
                               UKR

                                                  AZE              TJK
                               MDA
  -.10982
            448                                                                                                5600
                                                   distance from Brussels (miles)

Figure 5.A: Relationship between growth and distance from Europe (whole sample)



                          grow th since onset of reform                          Fitted values
                         POL
   .03399         SVN


                    HRV

                         HUN
                                     ALB
                   SVK
            CZE
                                     EST
                                     MKD

                                     BLR
                                       BGR
                                                                                                       UZB


                                 LVA
                                 LTU                                                                            KAZ
                                           ROM                          ARM

                                                   RUS                                                       KGZ




                                                                                                 TKM

                                                                    GEO
                                           UKR

                                                                          AZE                            TJK
                                           MDA
  -.10982
            448                                                                                              3327
                                                   distance f rom Brussels (miles)


Figure 5.B: Relationship between growth and distance from Europe (EESU only)
                                          HUN
                     3.375

                                          POL     EST
                             CZE




                                   SVN
                                    SVK
                                                LVA
                                                LTU
EBRD reform index




                                    HRV



                                                      BGR
                                                       ROM

                                                       MDA                     ARM                        KGZ
                                                                                                            KAZ
                                                  ALB UKR
                                                   MKD                                              UZB
                                                             RUS
                                                                             GEO

                                                                                   AZE


                                                  BLR




                                                                                              TKM     TJK
                    1.1875
                             448                                                                          3327
                                                             distance from Brussels (miles)

Figure 6: Relationship between "reform" and distance
                                    CZE HUN
                           1.201
                                     SVNPOL

                                                                                                    MNG
                                               EST
                                              LTU
                                      SVK
                                                                               BEN
                                             LVABGR

                                                   ROM
voice and accountability




                                                   MDA
                                                MKD                                                        NIC
                                                ALBUKR         ARM

                                                                                                          MOZ
                                                                                 KGZ
                                      HRV                RUS   GEO
                                                                                       YEM
                                                BLR                                    ET H

                                                                                     KAZ
                                                                                              COG
                                                                AZE




                                                                               UZB
                                                                         TKM
                                                                                TJK
                           -1.565
                                    448                                                                   5600
                                                                distance f rom Brussels (miles)

Figure 7: Relationship between voice and accountability and distance



                                     SVN
                           1.023


                                          HUN EST
                                          POL
                                    CZE
 control of corruption




                                      SVK     LTU

                                                                                                    MNG
                                             LVA
                                            BIH
                                                   MDA
                                      HRV         ROM                                  ET H
                                                MKD                                                       MOZ
                                                 BGR
                                                       RUS                                    COG
                                                BLR
                                                               GEO
                                                                ARM            BENKGZ
                                                                                   KAZYEM                  NIC
                                                  UKR
                                                ALB                            UZB
                                                                 AZE



                                                                         TKM    TJK
                           -1.316
                                    448                                                                   5600
                                                                distance from Brussels (miles)

Figure 8: Relationship between control of corruption and distance
                                                 Table 1


Summary indicators for per-capita GDP growth, by decade

                               1960s      1970s        1980s      1990s
                                        All available countries
mean (unweighted)              2.96%      2.16%        0.73%      0.38%
standard deviation             2.45%      2.58%        2.46%      3.13%
coefficient of variation        0.83        1.20        3.35       8.33
no. of countries                 90         100         109        130

                                     Constant sample of countries
mean (unweighted)              2.82%      2.30%     0.81%       1.20%
mean (population-weighted)     2.10%      2.45%     3.45%       3.84%
standard deviation             2.08%      2.43%     2.47%       2.26%
coefficient of variation        0.74       1.06      3.05         1.88
no. of countries                 87         87        87           87


Source: Calculated from World Development Indicators CD-ROM, World Bank.
                                                                         Table 2


Table 1: Basic Data on Socialist Countries
                                         (A)          (B)       (C)       (D)         (E)                  (F)          (G)          (H)       (I)
                                                             number of            growth rate           distance                             Eastern
                                        year         year      years   per-capita    since                from                     EBRD     Europe or
                                      became       socialism   under     GDP,      socialism            Brussels     control of    reform    former
Code Country                          socialist   abandoned socialism    1990     abandoned              (miles)     corruption     index     USSR
ALB    Albania                          1944         1990           46             841      0.29%          990         -0.985        2.0       1
ARM    Armenia                          1920         1991           71         1541        -4.70%         2054         -0.803        2.1       1
AZE    Azerbaijan                       1917         1991           74         1107        -10.72%        2138         -0.998        1.7       1
BLR    Belarus                          1917         1991           74         3045        -2.08%         1000         -0.654        1.5       1
BEN    Benin                            1972         1990           18             345      1.72%         3058         -0.781                  0
BIH    Bosnia and Herzegovina           1945         1992           47             ..         ..           814         -0.353                  1
BGR    Bulgaria                         1946         1990           44         1716        -2.15%         1057         -0.557        2.3       1
CHN    China                            1949          n.a.          ..             349        ..          4959         -0.289                  0
COG Congo, Rep. of                      1963         1990           27         1106        -3.06%         3849         -0.596                  0
HRV    Croatia                          1945         1991           46         4575         1.61%          638         -0.464        2.5       1
CUB    Cuba                             1959          n.a.          ..                        ..          4862         0.274                   0
CZE    Czech Republic                   1945         1990           45         5270        -0.31%          448         0.384         3.1       1
EST    Estonia                          1940         1991           51         4487        -0.58%          996         0.593         3.1       1
ETH    Ethiopia                         1974         1991           17             100      2.43%         3485         -0.436                  0
GEO    Georgia                          1921         1991           70             ..      -9.02%         2009         -0.744        1.8       1
HUN    Hungary                          1945         1990           45         4857         0.65%          714         0.614         3.4       1
KAZ    Kazakhstan                       1917         1991           74         2083        -4.46%         3327         -0.869        2.1       1
KGZ    Kyrgyz Republic                  1917         1991           74         1492        -5.82%         3245         -0.763        2.1       1
LVA    Latvia                           1940         1991           51         3703        -4.33%          906         -0.264        2.7       1
LTU    Lithuania                        1940         1991           51         2986        -4.40%          915         0.034         2.7       1
MKD    Macedonia, FYR                   1945         1991           46         1537        -1.23%         1016         -0.517        1.9       1
MDA    Moldova                          1945         1991           46         1769        -10.98%        1140         -0.387        2.1       1
MNG Mongolia                            1924         1990           66             524     -1.53%         4225         -0.145                  0
MOZ    Mozambique                       1975         1989           14             144      3.19%         5561         -0.535                  0
NIC    Nicaragua                        1979         1990           11             460      0.29%         5600         -0.836                  0
POL    Poland                           1945         1990           45         2604         3.40%          727         0.492         3.1       1
ROM Romania                             1945         1996           51         1531        -4.80%         1107         -0.457        2.2       1
RUS    Russian Federation               1917         1991           74         3668        -5.65%         1404         -0.616        1.9       1
SVK    Slovak Republic                  1945         1990           45         4048         0.07%          603         0.030         2.8       1
SVN    Slovenia                         1945         1991           46         9659         2.96%          572         1.023         2.8       1
SOM Somalia                             1969         1991           ..             ..         ..          4121         -1.051                  0
TJK    Tajikistan                       1917         1991           74             ..      -10.93%        3176         -1.316        1.2       1
TKM    Turkmenistan                     1917         1991           74         1970        -7.96%         2750         -1.289        1.2       1
UKR    Ukraine                          1920         1991           71         1979        -9.59%         1141         -0.892        2.0       1
UZB    Uzbekistan                       1917         1991           74             984     -2.92%         3084         -0.963        1.9       1
VNM    Vietnam                          1954          n.a.          ..             206                    5588         -0.332                  0
YEM    Yemen                            1969         1990           21             315     -1.07%         3472         -0.854                  0
YUG    Yugoslavia                       1945          n.a.          ..             ..         ..           859         -0.995                  1
ZWE    Zimbabwe                         1980          n.a.          ..             686        ..          4998         -0.319                  0


Sources: The selection of countries and col. (A) are based on Kornai (1992, Table 1.1). Col. (B) is based on information from
the CIA World Fact Book online. (http://www.cia.gov/cia/publications/factbook/). Col. (D) and (E) come from the World Bank,
World Development Indicators 2001, except for Georgia and Tajikistan for which data come from EBRD, Annual Report 2000.
Growth rate is calculated as [ln(y99) - ln(yinit)]/n, where y99 and yinit are per-capita GDP in
1999 and the initial year of the transition, respectively, and n is the number of years since the transition. Col. (F) is calculated from
latitude and longitude data in the World Bank's Global Development Network database and the CIA World Fact Book online. It is
stated in units of latitude-equivalents (see text). Col. (G) is from Kaufmann, Kraay and Zoido-Lobaton (1999a and 1999b)
(http://www.worldbank.org/wbi/governance/datasets.htm#dataset). Column (H) is calculated from Raiser et al. (2001) (see text).
                                                          Table 3



Economic performance and distance from Europe, robustness tests
                    dependent variable: average annual per-capita GDP growth rate since transition
sample                                All                                        EESU
                       (1)      (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)      (6)        (7)       (8)              (9)

distance (x10-4)            -0.56*    -0.58*    -0.29**     -0.36*    -1.58*    -1.72*    -1.42**   -1.20**
                            (-3.34)   (-4.66)   (-2.32)     (-2.97)   (-4.71)   (-3.59)   (-2.66)   (-2.85)
distance squared            1.06*     0.97*     0.47***     0.58**    3.46*     3.91*     3.16**    2.67**
(x10-8)                     (3.73)    (4.29)    (1.95)      (2.66)    (3.89)    (3.38)    (2.69)    (2.66)

log initial income                    -0.014                                    -0.004
                                      (-1.56)                                   (-0.26)

years socialist (x10-3)                         -1.22*     -1.00**                         -0.49
                                                (-3.88)    (-2.67)                        (-0.47)

sub-Saharan Africa                                           1.93
(x10-2)                                                     (1.07)
EBRD structural reform                                                                               2.05     5.06*
index (1-4 scale) (x10-2)                                                                           (1.40)    (5.55)

n                             32        30        32          32        25        23        25        25       25
R-squared                    0.28      0.30      0.50        0.51      0.57      0.55      0.58      0.60     0.47


Note: Numbers in parentheses are robust t-statistics. Constant tems are not reported.
Levels of statistical significance are denoted by asterisks:
* 99% confidence
** 95% confidence
*** 90% confidence
