                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 “3rd OF THA MONTH”: DO SOCIAL SECURITY RECIPIENTS
                       SMOOTH CONSUMPTION BETWEEN CHECKS?


                                          Melvin Stephens Jr.


                                          Working Paper 9135
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9135


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




This research question was inspired by a song titled “1st of tha Month” by the group Bone Thugs-n-Harmoniy.
The song, which was nominated for a Grammy award in 1996 in the category of Best Rap Performance by
a Duo or Group, details increased consumption during the first of each month due to the arrival of welfare
checks and food stamps. I would like to thank Charlie Brown, Matthew Shapiro, and Nicholas Souleles for
comments on an earlier version of the paper as well as seminar participants at Chicago-GSB and Michigan.
I would also like to thank Wolf Weber at the Bureau of Labor Statistics for his generous help in answering
numerous questions regarding the data. All interpretations and errors remain my own and are not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Melvin Stephens Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
“3rd of tha Month”: Do Social Security Recipients Smooth Consumption
Between Checks?
Melvin Stephens Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 9135
September 2002
JEL No. E21, H55
                                         ABSTRACT


        This paper examines the response of consumption expenditures to the monthly receipt of Social

Security checks. Since the amount and arrival date of these checks are known to the recipients, the basic
Life-Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis (LCPIH) predicts that consumption should not respond to the

receipt of these checks. Using daily diary data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, this paper finds
evidence that both the dollar amount and probability of expenditures increase immediately following the
receipt of this check. Most relevant to testing the LCPIH, categories of instantaneous consumption

expenditure such as food away from home increase on the check arrival date. The response is found
primarily amongst households for whom Social Security is the primary source of income. However, the
magnitude of the estimated responses are relatively small and do not suggest that the utility losses are
large from this non-smoothing behavior.




Melvin Stephens Jr.
H. John Heinz III School of Public Policy and Management
Carnegie Mellon University
4800 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
mstep@cmu.edu
1. Introduction
The Life-Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis (LCPIH) is the main doctrine in the economist's
understanding of how households form their consumption decisions. Following Hall's (1978)
seminal work introducing the use of Euler Equations to test the LCPIH, a large empirical
literature using both macro- and micro-level data has emerged. This research is focused
primarily on testing the implication of the hypothesis that predictable changes in income
should have no e ect on consumption. Nearly two decades of research has not reached a
consensus as to whether the empirical evidence supports or rejects the LCPIH. In fact, in
a recent survey of the literature by Browning and Lusardi (1996), the co-authors cannot
agree with one another as to whether \there is strong evidence against the [LCPIH]" (p.
1835).
   One problem plaguing this literature are concerns about the quality of the data used
to test the hypothesis. Measurement error in consumption increases the standard errors of
the estimates (Shapiro 1984) while measurement error in the income measures used in this
literature attenuates the estimated coeÆcients (Altonji and Siow 1987). Together, these
sources of measurement error greatly reduce the power of the econometric tests. Another
problem is determining exactly what are predictable changes in income. Many studies
have been forced to estimate predictable changes in income by using life-cycle variation in
income sources. To the extent that the econometric predictions are not perfectly correlated
with individual expectations, this approach introduces another form of measurement error
into the analysis.
   These concerns have led recent micro-econometric studies to focus on clearly identi able
changes in income such as pre-announced increases in union wages (Shea 1995), changes
in Social Security taxes (Parker 1999), and income tax refunds (Souleles 1999). All of
these studies nd evidence against the standard LCPIH. Other studies using identi able
changes in income also nd evidence against the LCPIH. Wilcox (1989) nds increases in
aggregate consumption at the time cost-of-living increases in Social Security bene ts are
implemented even though these increases are pre-announced. Shapiro and Slemrod (1995)
examine the expected consumption response to a 1992 change in federal tax withhold-
ing that increased the amount of consumers' paychecks but kept annual after-tax income

                                            1
unchanged by reducing the amount of subsequent tax refunds. Although consumers expe-
rienced no change in total resources but only in the timing of income receipt, a substantial
fraction of households expected to increase their consumption in response to this change.
     Given that these recent ndings using identi able income changes tend to reject the
LCPIH, it is reasonable to ask if these results indicate that the LCPIH fails to capture
the general decision process surrounding the relationship between income receipt and con-
sumption or if the failure is limited to certain forms of income receipt. The studies listed
above have focused on the consumption response to either permanent income growth or
predictable one-time payments. Even when these income changes are clearly identi able,
they may occur infrequently enough that households may have some diÆculty understand-
ing how, when, and even how much their income will be a ected. Infrequent changes in
income that are easily forecast may in fact represent a (partial) surprise to a number of
households.
     Alternatively, no previous study has examined how consumption responds to the re-
ceipt of normal income, i.e. a constant periodic income stream such as a paycheck or a
government transfer check. The arrival date and amount of these income payments are
known to households in advance of their receipt so there is no new information at the time
of check arrival. Furthermore, since many types of normal income checks are only changed
periodically, it is possible to examine the consumption response to the receipt of a constant
normal income check amount rather than to changes in the check amount. Under the basic
LCPIH, the arrival of a normal income check should not change household consumption.
Therefore, the test of the LCPIH proposed in this paper is to examine whether the monthly
pattern of household consumption responds to the arrival of a normal income check.1
     In 1999, the United States Social Security Administration dispersed monthly bene ts to
approximately 45 million recipients that included retired and disabled workers along with
their dependents and survivors (Social Security Administration 2000). Since the inception
of the program, Social Security checks have been delivered on the third of each month. If
 1  Paxson (1993), Browning and Collado (2001), and Hsieh (2001) use predictable seasonal variation in
normal income to test the LCPIH and cannot reject the hypothesis. These studies identify the response
to large but infrequent normal income receipts. The current study examines the response to a frequent,
constant stream of normal income.


                                                  2
the third of the month is a weekend or a holiday, then the check is delivered on the rst day
prior to the third of the month which is neither a weekend day nor a holiday.2 Since the
check delivery dates are known to households, the arrival and amount of the Social Security
check do not present any new information to recipients. Thus, household consumption
should not change simply because the household has recently received their transfer check.
The goal of this paper is to examine the response of consumption expenditures to the
monthly arrival of Social Security checks.3
     In order to examine household responses to the receipt of Social Security checks, this
paper uses the Consumer Expenditure Survey's Diary Survey to estimate changes in house-
hold consumption around the check arrival date. Unlike the quarterly Interview Survey
which has previously been used in this literature (e.g., both Parker and Souleles use the
Interview Survey), the Diary Survey gathers information on daily expenditures in two con-
secutive one-week diaries. Each household in the Diary Survey is randomly assigned a start
date for their two-week survey period. Due to this sampling scheme, some households will
be participating in the survey when they receive their Social Security checks while others
will not. Comparing di erences in expenditure patterns between these groups of house-
holds identi es the impact of the check arrival on consumption since the distribution of
households across these two groups is randomly determined.
     Changes in expenditures per se are not evidence of violating the basic life-cycle/permanent
income model. Periodic payments such as mortgages and utility bills are typically due
once a month and these expenditure dates may coincide with the arrival of Social Security
checks. Therefore, expenditures on items which have a known periodic pattern are not ev-
idence against the LCPIH. In addition, a correlation between check arrival and purchases
 2  E.g., if the third of the month falls on a Saturday, then the check will be delivered the day before since
Fridays are potential check delivery days.
 3  Although the link has not been directly examined, there is evidence from the medical literature which is
suggestive of a causal link between Social Security check arrival and increases in some forms of consumption.
Satel et al. (1997) nd a signi cant increase in the fraction of substance abusers voluntarily leaving
residential treatment following the receipt of retroactive Social Security disability bene ts. Shaner et al.
(1995) nd that among a group of schizophrenic cocaine abusers, cocaine use, psychiatric symptoms, and
hospital admissions peak during the rst week of the month, presumably following the receipt of Social
Security disability bene ts. Phillips, Christenfeld, and Ryan (1999) examine the universe of U.S. death
certi cates from 1973 to 1988. They nd a 1% overall increase in the number of deaths in the rst week of
the month relative to the last week of the previous month. Furthermore, they nd a 6% increase in deaths
attributable to homicide, a 5% increase for suicides, and a 14% increase for substance abuse.


                                                      3
of durable goods are not evidence against the LCPIH. Households may make one trip to
the grocery store each month but smooth their food consumption at home throughout the
month. To avoid these issues, the expenditure categories of interest are those categories
which re ect instantaneous consumption. Therefore, the primary test of the LCPIH are
expenditures on food and alcohol consumed away from home, fresh foods which last less
than a month at home, and instantaneous forms of entertainment and recreation.
   The empirical analysis nds an increase in the amount of and probability of spending
across multiple categories of expenditure in the rst few days following Social Security
check receipt relative to the day before the check arrives. In the instantaneous consump-
tion categories of interest, however, there is only weak evidence of non-smoothing behavior.
When the sample is limited to households for whom Social Security is a signi cant portion
of their income, the spending increase at the beginning of the month is more pronounced
and statistically signi cant across all categories of instantaneous consumption. The mag-
nitude of the resulting spending increases during the week following check receipt ranges
from 7% to 20% above mean expenditures while increases in the probability of making
expenditures range from 3% to 6%. Even larger increases are found for the day of and
the day immediately following the arrival of the monthly Social Security check. Thus, the
results found here provide evidence that the arrival of normal income in uences the timing
of household consumption.

2. The Data
The data for this paper come from the Consumer Expenditure Survey's (CEX) Diary Sur-
vey (United States Department of Labor, various years). The United States Department
of Labor's Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) conducts the CEX in two separate compo-
nents, a quarterly Interview Survey and a two-week Diary Survey. The Interview Survey
is designed to capture more expensive and less frequently purchased items that are easier
to recall at quarterly intervals such as appliances and automobiles. The Diary Survey is
designed to gain an accurate accounting of less expensive and more frequently purchased
items such as food, both at home and away, gasoline, and personal care items. Tables pub-
lished by the BLS integrate both of these surveys at a quarterly level to gain an accurate
picture of expenditure by U.S. households.

                                             4
     The Diary Survey is an on-going study with participating consumer units continually
entering and exiting the survey throughout the calendar year. A consumer unit (CU) is
de ned by the BLS as \consisting of all members of a particular housing unit who are
related by blood, marriage, adoption, or some other legal arrangement. Consumer unit
determination for unrelated persons is based on nancial independence" (United States
Department of Labor, various years).4 Each CU participates in the Diary Survey for two
consecutive one-week periods. According to sta at the BLS, the start date for each CU
is randomly determined with new households entering the survey each day. At the begin-
ning of the two-week collection period, an interviewer collects household characteristics,
instructs the CU how to ll out the diary, and leaves a diary for the rst week. At the end
of the rst week, the interviewer reviews the rst diary, answers any questions that the CU
may have, and leaves a diary for the second week. At the end of the second week, the inter-
viewer returns for the second diary and to collect information on household characteristics
including demographic, employment, and earnings data for the CU members.
     The consumer unit is instructed to record all expenditures for each day including both
food and non-food items, expenditures on rentals such as videos, and catalog purchases.
The CU is told to exclude expenditures made when away from home overnight, business or
farm expenses, and sales tax except for that on food purchased away from home. House-
holds are instructed to include items purchased using charge accounts on the date of the
purchase. The CU is told not to record, however, payments made to billing statements for
charge or credit accounts. Although the BLS began conducting the survey on an on-going
basis in 1980, this study uses the Diary Survey data from 1986-1996. Prior to 1986, de-
tailed information on expenditure items from the Diary Survey which are not used in the
integrated data tables were not included in the public use micro-data les.
     The Diary Survey collects employment and income information for each member of
the consumer unit as well as income information for the entire CU. For each member,
information on wage and salary earnings and transfer income (e.g., Social Security) in the
past twelve months is collected amongst other earnings information. The BLS provides
 4   The terms consumer unit and household are used interchangeably throughout the paper.


                                                  5
summary measures of total wage and salary earnings as well as Social Security earnings
for the consumer unit during the past twelve months.
     For this study, some consumer units are deleted due to missing data. Both diary weeks
for each CU are entered as separate observations in the Diary Survey. If the BLS determines
that a diary week is incomplete or if a CU's diary week entry does not have a start date,
then that diary week observation is deleted. If none of the expenditures in a CU's diary
week has a purchase date, then that diary week is deleted.5 After these deletions, any
CU without two diary-week observations remaining are then deleted. Also deleted from
the sample are the fraction of consumer units (roughly 20%) deemed by the BLS to have
incomplete income data.6 Finally, the analysis is restricted to consumer units in which
either the consumer unit's reference person or their spouse receives Social Security.7 The
resulting sample of Social Security recipients is comprised of 9,942 consumer units which
contribute a total of 123,034 potential expenditure days.

3. Empirical Methodology

The test of the LCPIH in this paper is to examine whether expenditures on a given day
depend upon the number of days since (until) the arrival of the Social Security check.
Since consumer units record diaries for two weeks, each consumer unit can contribute
up to fourteen individual days of data. In order to treat all months symmetrically, the
analysis focuses on the fourteen days prior to check receipt and the fourteen days after
check receipt (including the day of check receipt). Diary days which fall outside of this
 5  According to the BLS sta , if some of the expenditures in a CU's diary week do not have a date
of purchase recorded in the diary, those expenditures with missing dates will not have date of purchase
information in the CEX data and therefore will not be used in the analysis performed here. The remaining
expenditures with date of purchase information for the CU's diary week will be used in the analysis. If
none of the expenditures in a CU's diary week has a date of purchase, then the BLS assigns the rst day
of the diary week as the date of purchase for every expenditure in that diary week. For this paper, all
diary weeks in which every expenditure is on the rst day of the diary week are removed from the analysis.
Leaving these diary weeks in the analysis has no qualitative e ect on the results presented here.
 6 This designation is in general based upon the reporting of values for major sources of income. See
United States Department of Labor (Various Years) for more details.
  7 The reference person is designated as \the rst member mentioned by the respondent when asked to
`Start with the name of the person or one of the persons who owns or rents the home'". (U.S. Department
of Labor, Various Years)


                                                   6
28-day window are deleted from the analysis, resulting in some households contributing
less than fourteen days of data. In addition, diary days that fall within the window around
the check arriving on January 3rd are not used in the analysis. The primary reason is that
during the sample period, all cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs) to Social Security checks
were implemented to the January 3rd check. Although these COLAs were all announced
months in advance, the goal of this paper is to examine how recipients react to known
check amounts. If these COLAs are a surprise to some households, then using the January
3rd observations in the analysis could potentially confuse the monthly response to check
receipt with the \surprise" of a COLA.8 All expenditure and income data are de ated to
December 1995 dollars using the overall CPI-U for the window month in which the daily
observation lies.9
     Identi cation of the impact of check arrival on consumption relies on the sampling
methodology of the CEX Diary Survey. According to the survey codebook (U.S. De-
partment of Labor, various years), the diary data is collected by evenly spacing diaries
throughout the calendar year and each day of the week has the same chance of being the
 rst day of the diary week.10 In addition, the survey starting date for any given consumer
unit is randomly selected. In particular, the consumer unit's starting date is unrelated to
the arrival of their Social Security check. Therefore, the monthly expenditure patterns of
Social Security recipients are identi ed by estimating how expenditures on any given diary
day depend upon where it falls within the 28-day window surrounding the check arrival.
     The summary statistics presented in Table 1 are consistent with the randomization of
diary start days relative to the arrival of the Social Security check. The Table presents
basic descriptive statistics by dividing the sample into four groups according to where the
consumer unit's rst survey day falls within the 28-day window described above.11 The
 8  Using aggregate data, Wilcox (1989) nds evidence of excess sensitivity to the Social Security COLA
adjustments.
 9   E.g., since April 28, 1994 is within the 28-day window surrounding the May 3,1994 check arrival date,
all expenditures on this date will be de ated by the May 1994 CPI-U.
10   The survey oversamples consumer units during the last six weeks of the calendar year.
11   Consumer units whose rst diary day falls outside of the 28-day window are classi ed by their rst

                                                    7
age, gender, and education statistics are reported for the consumer unit's reference person
while the income variables correspond to the entire consumer unit. The composition of
the sample is identical across the groups. Although these comparisons can never rule
out unobservable di erences between the groups, it is highly plausible that any estimated
 uctuations in expenditure over the course of the month are not attributable to di erences
in the composition of Social Security recipients over the month.

Econometric Speci cation

The baseline econometric test for the consumption response to the receipt of normal income
is performed using the following speci cation


                Cit =    i +
                               X4
                                      j W EEKj +
                                                   X7
                                                          k DOWk +
                                                                     X Æ DOS +  ;
                                                                      14
                                                                            l    l     it             (1)
                               j =2                k =2               l=2

where Cit is household i's expenditure on day t,           i   is a household speci c e ect, W EEKj
are dummy variables for each of the four weeks that can be constructed from the 28-day
window around the check arrival date, DOWk are day of the calendar week dummy vari-
ables, DOSl are indicators for which of the fourteen diary days corresponds to the day
in question, and it is a daily household speci c error term. This regression model is es-
timated for multiple expenditure categories. Note that these regressions do not include
controls for any household characteristics. The presence of the household xed e ect,                    i   ,
in (1) precludes the inclusion of these such variables. Previous papers that have examined
changes in consumption expenditures have needed to control for life-cycle changes in con-
sumption at either an annual or quarterly frequency. Since the analysis here only examines
a two-week period per household, the need for using controls for life-cycle changes in con-
sumption is greatly reduced. The combination of the two-week diary period and the xed
e ects speci cation also eliminates the necessity of including dummy variables for calendar
month and year since the parameters will be identi ed from within household variation in
daily expenditures over a two-week interval.
diary day that falls within the window. Such consumer units will be those whose rst diary day is in the
middle of a month and therefore their rst day within the window will be 8 to 14 days before check arrival.
This classi cation scheme explains the high number of consumer units within the 8 to 14 days before check
arrival category relative to the other three groups in Table 1.


                                                    8
   The consumption response to check receipt is revealed by the coeÆcients on the W EEKj
variables de ning the treatment and control groups. In the baseline speci cation, the three
included dummy variables pooling daily expenditures are for 8 to 14 days before check ar-
rival, 0 to 6 days since check arrival, and 7 to 13 days since check arrival. The excluded
week, 1 to 7 days before check arrival, corresponds to the week immediately before the
Social Security check arrives. The coeÆcients on the W EEKj variables therefore measure
daily consumption relative to the week in which Social Security recipients have gone the
longest without receiving their check.
   The other control variables included in (1) are intended to control for predictable
variation in expenditures within the two-week diary period. Since expenditures uctuate
between weekday and weekend days, the day of week variables (DOWk ) will pick up these
 uctuations. The inclusion of these variables is particularly important due to the fact that
when the third of the month falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the check will be delivered
on the preceding Friday. Thus, roughly 3/7ths of the check arrivals will be on a day with
relatively high expenditures. Without the day of week variables, increased consumption
due to the \weekend e ect" will be inappropriately attributed to the check arrival. The
indicators for each of the fourteen days within the two-week survey period (DOSl ) are
included to capture predictable declines in expenditure reporting over the survey period.
An examination of the data indicates that expenditures are higher during the rst diary
week as well as on the rst day of each diary week relative to the remaining days. These
declines are likely attributable to \survey fatigue".
   Unlike the studies in the consumption smoothing literature that rely on quarterly or
annual data, daily expenditures include a number of observations with no expenditures.
This censoring of the dependent variables presents three issues. The rst is that the level
of expenditure is used as the dependent variable rather than the more commonly used log
of expenditure. The second is that the econometric analysis must account for the censoring
of the dependent variable. The presence of the xed e ect in (1) further complicates the
analysis. Maximum likelihood estimation of censored regression models requires a large
number of time periods when xed e ects are present in order to achieve consistency (Heck-
man and MaCurdy 1980) and is very sensitive to the assumption of normally distributed

                                              9
error terms (Arabmazar and Schmidt 1982; Brown and MoÆtt 1983). Honore's (1992)
symmetrically trimmed least squares xed e ect censored regression estimator is used in
the analysis presented here since it achieves consistency as the number of households in-
creases (rather than the number of time periods) and does not impose strong distributional
assumptions, such as normality, on the error term.12
     The third issue is that standard tests of excess sensitivity cannot be performed. These
tests are based upon the Euler Equation formulation under which changes in consumption
should not be correlated with any information known in advance. The censored regression
estimator used here does in fact use di erences in consumption between two time periods
as the dependent variable as would be used in the standard excess sensitivity test (Honore
1992). However, the corner solutions in consumption (i.e., the zero expenditure days)
preclude the use of a standard Euler Equation framework. Nevertheless, a nding of a
relationship between household consumption and the arrival of the Social Security check
is a violation of the basic LCPIH.
     In order to more clearly examine the monthly uctuation in expenditures, the results of
additional speci cations are also reported. The rst modi cation to the baseline model is
to replace the W EEKj variables with variables that correspond to each of the individual
days within the 28-day window. Twenty-seven indicators for how many days since (until)
the Social Security check arrives are included in these regressions with the excluded day
being the day immediately preceding the check arrival. The coeÆcients on the individual
day variables give a more complete picture of the monthly pattern of expenditures than
the baseline regressions. The second modi cation is to change the dependent variable from
the actual expenditure amount to an indicator variable for whether or not the household
makes any expenditures on the day in question. These models are estimated using xed
e ect linear probability regressions. The results of the analysis using this modi cation will
give an indication of how the probability of making any expenditures varies in relation to
the check arrival date.

12 However, the estimator requires the assumption that the error terms are for a household are both
symmetrically distributed and serially independent after controlling for the xed e ect.


                                                10
4. Results

To understand the monthly expenditure patterns across various categories of goods, Figures
1a-1d present the raw expenditure data for all consumer units receiving Social Security.
For each expenditure category, the gures plot the di erence between the average daily
spending for each day within the 28-day window and the overall daily average for the
category. The horizontal axis indicates how many days since the Social Security check was
received with negative numbers indicating days prior to the check arrival date. Figure 1a
indicates that total expenditures increase nearly $50 on the date of check arrival above
the daily total expenditure average of $62. The Figure also indicates an increase in total
expenditures on the two days immediately preceding the check arrival date. These increases
prior to the check arrival date are likely due to periodic payments such as rent and utility
bills that are due on rst of the month.
     Figure 1b presents the monthly pattern for strict non-durable expenditures, a category
that was rst used by Lusardi (1996) in order to limit her analysis to items which likely
would be consumed entirely within a calendar quarter to coincide with her use of the
quarterly CEX Interview Survey. The de nition of strict non-durables in the current paper
is food and alcohol both at home and away from home, tobacco-related items, personal
care items, public transportation, gasoline, and motor oil.13 While many of these items
presumably have a xed cost associated with their purchase (e.g., it may be costly to go
to the grocery store on a daily basis), it is still somewhat surprising that, on average,
households wait until the time their Social Security checks arrive in order to pay this cost.
The Figure also illustrates \weekend e ects" in the data. As previously mentioned, Social
Security checks will come on Fridays approximately 3/7ths of the time which means that 7
and 14 days before as well as 7 days after check arrival will also fall on weekends over 40%
of the time. The spikes in spending on these days shown in the gure is likely accounted
for by increased spending on weekends.
13  Lusardi also included utilities, household operations, and miscellaneous expenditures in her de nition
of strict non-durables. However, these expenditures may have a periodic element to them so they have
been excluded from the analysis here.


                                                   11
     The nal pieces of Figure 1 illustrate the monthly uctuations in food expenditures.
The pattern in Figure 1c for food at home is similar to that found for strict non-durables.14
There is a large increase in food at home expenditures the rst two days following the arrival
of the Social Security check as well as evidence of weekend e ects. Monthly uctuations in
food away from home, one of the main expenditure categories of interest, are presented in
Figure 1d. The monthly pattern in the data is a bit noisier relative to the other expenditure
categories. However, the data show a modest increase in these expenditures during the
days following the arrival of the check as well as some evidence of weekend e ects.
     Figure 2 presents a di erent look at the monthly uctuation in expenditures. Rather
than examining the total amount of expenditures within a category, the Figure shows how
the probability of making any expenditures varies with respect to the arrival of the Social
Security check. The patterns for expenditure probabilities in each of the four categories
are similar to those shown in Figure 1 for the amount of spending. However, there are
some notable exceptions. First, there is no spike present on the two days prior to check
arrival for making any (total) expenditures (Figure 2a) although there is a spike on these
days for the dollar amount of spending on these days (Figure 1a). Second, there exists a
much more pronounced spike for making any food away from home expenditures on the
day of check arrival (Figure 2d) than is present for the dollar amount of food away from
home expenditures (Figure 1d).

The Impact of Check Arrival on Expenditures

Table 2 reports the results of estimating the impact of Social Security check arrival on
household expenditures using Honore's xed e ect censored regression estimator for equa-
tion (1).15 Due to the estimation technique, the marginal e ects for the impact of a change
in the regressors on observed household expenditures need to be derived. Rather than re-
port both the estimated coeÆcients along with the marginal e ects, the table reports the
estimated marginal e ects along with the endpoints of the 95% con dence interval for the
14   All food expenditures also include alcohol.
15  Expanded results which include the results for the day of calendar week and day of diary week indicators
are presented in Appendix Table 1.


                                                    12
marginal e ects.16 As described above, equation (1) divides the 28-day window into four
weekly groups and constrains the impact to be the same for all days within the week.
Since the excluded category is 1 to 7 days before the check arrival date, the regression
coeÆcients for these groups indicates the di erence in expenditures for each week relative
to the week immediately preceding the check arrival.
     The results in Table 2 show evidence of monthly expenditure uctuations linked to the
arrival of the Social Security check. Total expenditures, in column 1, are not signi cantly
higher in the week after check arrival relative to the week before check arrival. However,
as Figure 1a indicates, the spike in total expenditures around the rst of the month is
the reason for the insigni cant result. The large signi cant expenditure declines for the
weeks in the middle of the month re ect the monthly pattern in total expenditures. Daily
strict non-durable expenditures (column 2) increase by $1.40, or 10% of average daily strict
non-durable expenditure shown at the bottom of the column, during the week following
the check arrival. Food for home consumption (column 3) also increases sharply during
the rst week of the month, by roughly 13%. Although expenditures in these latter two
categories are classi ed as non-durable, increases in these expenditures may not directly
correspond to increases in consumption since these items may be stored for later use. Thus,
increases in these categories cannot be taken as evidence of non-smoothing behavior. In
fact, if there are xed costs of shopping (time spent traveling, etc.), then one would expect
lumpy patterns in expenditures on these items for any given household. However, it is
not clear that the lumpiness in these expenditures should be tied to the arrival of Social
Security income.17 One possible explanation is that if grocery stores know that the days
16  The average population marginal e ect corresponding to a regressor xk in a censored regression is
calculated as k  P where k is the population coeÆcient on xk and P is the fraction of non-censored
observations in the population (Greene 1981). An estimator for the marginal e ect is ^k  P^ where ^k is
the estimated regression coeÆcient and P^ is the fraction of non-censored observations in the sample. To
obtain con dence intervals for the estimated marginal e ects, 200 bootstrap replications were performed by
randomly sampling with replacement from households in the sample. The endpoints of the 95% con dence
interval are taken directly from the bootstrapped distributions rather than by using the standard deviations
of these distributions since the bootstrapped distributions may be skewed.
17  Fixed costs of adjustment for durable goods can lead to infrequent expenditures on these items. The
timing of these adjustments depends upon the di erence between the actual ratio of the stock of durables
to wealth and the desired ratio (e.g., Eberly 1994). Thus, increases in expenditures on durables may be
correlated with unexpected increases in income. However, normal income receipt should not be unexpected.


                                                    13
following check receipt are periods of high demand, they may raise their prices in response.
Studies nd, however, that stores reduce prices in periods of peak demand.18
     In terms of testing the LCPIH, it is necessary to nd items of expenditure that also
correspond to increases in consumption. Since expenditures on food away from home do
not exhibit the durability across days that is found in the previous expenditure items,
expenditures on these items represent instantaneous consumption. In addition, expendi-
tures on entertainment items such as fees for participant sports and lessons, admissions to
entertainment activities and sporting events, rentals of videos, and coin-operated games
also represent categories of instantaneous consumption. These entertainment expenditures
are combined with food away from home expenditures to create the expenditure category
\instant consumption 1". Expenditures on fresh foods, which include milk, eggs, and fresh
fruits and vegetables, are expenditures on items that are expected to last less than a month
after purchase and therefore closely resemble instantaneous consumption. Fresh food ex-
penditures are combined with food away from home and entertainment expenditures to
create the \instant consumption 2" expenditure category.
     The results from estimating (1) for these categories of instantaneous consumption are
shown in the nal four columns of Table 2. There is an insigni cant increase in food away
from home expenditures during the rst week after check arrival (column 4). In addition,
the magnitude of this increase relative to average daily spending is 6%. When entertain-
ment expenditures are added to create the instant consumption 1 category (column 5),
the estimated e ect is slightly smaller. On the other hand, expenditures on fresh foods
(column 6) show a signi cant increase during the week after check arrival although the
magnitude of this e ect is only 8%. Finally, the second instant consumption category
(column 7) exhibits an insigni cant increase immediately following check receipt. Overall,
these results provide very weak evidence of systematic non-smoothing of consumption in
relation to the arrival of Social Security bene ts.
18   E.g., see Warner and Barsky (1995) and Chevalier, Kashyap, and Rossi (2000). If consumers know that
grocery stores reduce prices at the beginning of the month due to increased demand from Social Security
and other transfer payment recipients, then increased grocery expenditures at the check arrival date may
in fact be an optimal response on the part of consumers. I would like to thank an anonymous referee for
making this point.


                                                  14
     One possibility is that expenditure patterns may be tied only to the receipt of the
primary source of normal income. Households with many sources of income, either earned
or unearned, outside of Social Security may not time their consumption decisions to the
arrival of their Social Security check. To examine this alternative, the analysis in Table
3 is restricted to households that receive at least 70% (roughly the sample median) of
their income from Social Security.19 The results in this Table indicate that the receipt of
their monthly transfer check plays an larger role in the timing of expenditures for these
households. The increase in spending continues to exist during the week following receipt
of the Social Security check for strict non-durables and food at home expenditures. The
magnitude of these e ects are now more prominent, roughly 17% each.
     Amongst this group of households, the results for the instantaneous consumption cate-
gories show a signi cant increase immediately following the check arrival. Food away from
home expenditures signi cantly increase by 21% the week following the check arrival. In
addition, the expenditures in the rst instant consumption category also exhibit a signif-
icant increase of 20% during the rst week. Fresh foods exhibit a statistically signi cant
increase but only increase by 9%. Overall, instantaneous consumption expenditures (col-
umn 7) signi cantly increase by roughly 16% during the week following the arrival of the
Social Security check.
     While the above results indicate that the timing of consumption expenditures is cor-
related with the arrival of the Social Security check, a more detailed examination of the
monthly uctuations in expenditures can be performed by replacing the W EEKj dummy
variables in (1) with indicators for the actual day within the 28-day window surrounding
the arrival date of the Social Security check. These models are estimated excluding the
day before the arrival of the check so that all inferences are made relative to this day. In
order to more easily examine the results of these regressions, the marginal e ects for the
daily indicator variables are plotted along with their 95% con dence bands.
19   Studies in this literature typically split households between high and low wealth households to test for
the impact of liquidity constraints on the estimated parameters. Unlike the CEX Interview Survey, the
Diary Survey does not collect information on the stock of household wealth and has limited information
concerning the income ows generated from wealth. Since this paper is examining the response to a
constant check amount, however, the role for liquidity constraints is rather limited. The current sample
split is designed to focus the analysis on the consumption response to the primary monthly income source.


                                                     15
     The daily indicator coeÆcients are plotted for all households that receive Social Security
in Figures 3a-3g.20 The plots give a clearer picture of the relationship between the check
arrival date and the monthly pattern of expenditures. For total, strict non-durable, and
food at home expenditures (Figures 3a-3c), the gures show the detailed monthly pattern
of increased expenditures peaking around the arrival of the Social Security check as was
previously shown by pooling the days into four weeks in Table 2. These gures indicate
that the increases in these expenditure categories is primarily due to increases during
the day of check arrival as well as in the days immediately following the check arrival.
With the exception of fresh food expenditures (Figure 3f), the monthly patterns for the
instantaneous expenditure categories do not reveal any strong evidence of increases at the
time surrounding the check arrival date.
     The results of again restricting the analysis to households receiving at least 70% of their
income from Social Security are plotted in Figures 4a-4g. Total expenditures (Figure 4a)
show a clear pattern of an increase surrounding the check arrival relative to the remainder
of the month. However, since total expenditures likely increase due to xed payments at
the beginning of the month, there is no spike in expenditures between the day immediately
preceding the check arrival and the check arrival date. However, such a spike is clearly
visible for both strict non-durable expenditures (Figure 4b) and, to a lesser extent, food
at home (Figure 4c). Expenditures in these categories decline over the remainder of the
 rst week and are relatively at for the rest of the month.
     The instantaneous consumption expenditures also show a clear monthly pattern. Food
away from home expenditures (Figure 4d) increase sharply upon the date of check arrival
and slowly decline over the course of the month. The marginal e ects for the rst two
days following the check arrival are $0.65 and $0.69 which correspond to 33% and 35%
increases in average daily spending. Unlike the pattern found for the rst three expendi-
ture categories, food away from home expenditures peak on the day following the check
arrival and reach their lowest point on the day before the next check arrives. Fresh food
expenditures (Figure 4f) are higher during the rst week of the month than the rest of
20   Relatively wide con dence bands occur on days that correspond to outliers in the data.


                                                   16
the month although the daily indicator variables are not precisely estimated. The results
for the two instant consumption categories (Figures 4e and 4g) appear to be driven by
food away from home expenditures and yield identical interpretations for their monthly
patterns. Thus, instantaneous consumption expenditures are tied to the arrival of Social
Security income checks for households that depend upon Social Security as their primary
source of income.

The Impact of Check Arrival on the Probability of Making Any Expenditures

Another margin on which to evaluate the impact of the Social Security check's arrival on
expenditures is to examine the monthly pattern in the probability of making any expendi-
tures. One advantage of this approach is that, when combined with the above expenditure
amount results, one can assess whether the increases in expenditures found at the beginning
of the month are due to an increase in the likelihood of households making expenditures
immediately following the check arrival or if the households that make expenditures at the
beginning of the month are spending more money.
   Panel A of Table 4 presents the results for all households receiving Social Security. For
total and strict non-durable expenditures, there are signi cant increases in the probability
of making any expenditures during the week following the check arrival. Across the remain-
ing categories, there is only weak evidence that the expenditure probability is increased
when the check arrives. For food away from home and the two instantaneous consumption
categories, there is a signi cant increase in expenditures 8 to 14 days prior to the check
arrival. When examining the analogous results for the dollar amounts of expenditures in
Table 2, there is an insigni cant increase in spending over this time interval. These results,
in conjunction with those shown in Table 2, indicate that the arrival of the Social Security
check has a minimal in uence on the timing of instantaneous consumption for the overall
population of Social Security recipients.
   For households that rely on Social Security as their primary source of income, the
probability of households making expenditures increases in the week following the check
arrival in all expenditure categories except those involving food away from home (Panel
B of Table 4). However, the magnitude of the increases in these probabilities are small

                                             17
across all of these categories. For example, food at home expenditures are 1.4 percentage
points more likely during the week following the check arrival, or roughly 3% of the average
daily probability of making food at home purchases. In contrast, the analogous increase
in terms of dollar amounts found in Table 3 is 17%. Similar di erences between the two
tables are also found for strict non-durables and fresh food expenditures. This di erence
in the relative magnitudes suggests that the increases in the dollar value of expenditures at
the beginning of month primarily are due to increases in the amount spent per household
rather than in the number of households making purchases.
   As with the dollar amount of expenditures, the analysis is repeated by replacing the
week indicators with the twenty-seven daily indicators. The results for all households
receiving Social Security are presented in Figure 5. For all of the expenditure categories
presented in the Figure, there is an increase in the probability of making any expenditures
at the check arrival date. However, signi cant increases on the day of check arrival are
found only for total (Figure 5a), strict non-durable (Figure 5b), and total instantaneous
(Figure 5g) expenditures.
   The results of this analysis for households that depend upon Social Security as their
primary source of income are plotted in Figure 6. Across all of the expenditure categories,
there is a signi cant spike in the probability of making any expenditures on the day of
check receipt relative to the previous day and in some cases the spike persists for two days.
The largest initial spike in relation to the average daily probability of making a purchase
is 13% for food away from home (Figure 6d). The initial spike for food away from home in
dollar terms is 33% (Figure 4d) which further suggests that much of the spending increase
is due to increased dollar amounts rather than an increase in the probability of spending.
   Aside from the initial spike in making any expenditures on the days immediately fol-
lowing check arrival, the probability of making expenditures is relatively constant over the
course of the month. The probability of making any purchases at all (total expenditures in
Figure 6a) declines slowly over the course of the month, especially 4 to 9 days before check
arrival, before increasing two days prior to the check arrival. For strict non-durables and
food away from home, the estimated e ects are almost always non-negative and consistent
with a decline in the probability of expenditure between the rst and last day of the check

                                             18
arrival cycle although these results are statistically insigni cant. Overall, the arrival of
the Social Security check increases the probability of making any expenditures for the rst
day or two and has no e ect on this probability over the remainder of the month.

5. Summary

This paper examines the response of consumption to the monthly arrival of Social Se-
curity checks which are a frequent, constant normal income stream. The basic Life-
Cycle/Permanent Income Hypothesis predicts that consumption should not respond to
the receipt of a Social Security check. Using diary data from the Consumer Expenditure
Survey, this paper nds evidence that both the dollar amount and probability of making
any expenditures increase immediately following the receipt of this check. Most relevant
to testing the LCPIH, categories of instantaneous consumption expenditure such as food
away from home increase on the check arrival date. Examination of daily expenditure
data reveals that the increase is sharpest on the day of check arrival and is concentrated
amongst households for whom Social Security is the primary source of income.
   Although the results found in this paper are inconsistent with the complete smoothing
of consumption between Social Security checks, they are not necessarily evidence of large
utility losses due to these violations of the basic LCPIH. At the individual level, Cochrane
(1989) shows that deviations from the household's optimal consumption plan under the
LCPIH may only have second order e ects in terms of lost utility. In light of these results,
choosing to dine out after receiving one's monthly Social Security check may have small
implications for individual welfare. At the aggregate level, the intra-month shifting of
expenditures likely has smaller e ects on the macroeconomy than, say, the shifting of
expenditures across months due to the timing of income tax refunds.
   The results presented here point towards areas for further research. The ndings sug-
gest that expanding the literature on testing the LCPIH to considering frequently dis-
tributed forms of normal income such as paychecks as well as other government transfer
programs may prove useful in understanding the heterogeneity across households in the
consumption response to normal income receipt. Another avenue for research is to expand
the aforementioned work of Warner and Barsky and Chevalier, Kashyap, and Rossi to

                                            19
explore the degree of monthly price variability. Store-level data on price changes, espe-
cially in areas where large portions of the population are simultaneously receiving transfer
payments, may provide further evidence on the behavior of retailers in periods of peak
demand.




                                            20

                ! "  
   #$" !  % &  '  ()       *
   *+,+*
-."/- ..  '  - $ " *  #0    .       
   . 1 "-  &2&-")     3 455,6*
7- ! - !  . - 8Æ +  19 $  #- :  - $  $
    1 "   . 8 ) & 7-   1$"$  -$  $ $
   %-; ' - <*
7- 8-  8 (- ! *44     1= -  2
   $   !  > '  ( 1 " )       + 6,*
7- 8-  "- ? - 6 :  0> 8$-  - 
   8$- @$ )       3 ,55
! 0 -    A A    '  - 1   *444 %  (B '-$ 
  (- ' -  ' ; ( "C 10 $ @-" $ - () & 7-  
  1$"$  -$ %-; ' - <
!$ -    :     0      # - " - $  !2
   "   & -2  -0 )      + +,+
1. - $ ! 3  "   ! " - B (-. $; > 10 $ -"
   ". '-$  )        + 34+,+6
-   %" :  D   " $ 7   D-- ?   E- 1 2
  "-   . 8 )    * 545,+
: . - 1  $  $ #" $   ? !$ 2' -"  #$" :2
       >  -  10 $ )        6 ,
: $;" "    " 1 8!- 4  ? !$ 8   @ " ?.-
    )       3,3
:-F 7 1 * -""  ?(  ?   E- 1 "  -$  
  !  -   -  8   @=  19 $ )     + 5++,565
:   ! 2 *44 ( ! " -  $  $   #$"  $; C 10 $
   -"   ; ' -"  @) '-$  G0 -  8" 
? - "- 6 ' -"  #$"  !--  #$"   ! " > 102
    $ -"  '  (   )          
    24
'-; -       $  :  ! "   '- $.
   !   $  $- = )      3 5,+
'=  ! -  : + ! "   #$"      )  
           +,*
'   (0 ' &$  ! -     & 8    #$-   
   &". -  (    G     @-  % ;   8 )   
            * +,
      #H $   -$0 ( . '"    $   B
   !" $ % . $ . - " )    6 6,
  - -    5 ( . #$"  !$ G      : 2
   / " $ / - $ !$ G - )        
   * ,+
  - 8  ( 3  ' -"  #$" :       # - 
    )      +,44
  - 8  (     "- 5 ! " -     " 
   #$" > 10 $ -"  !   = % )    
     *3,+
    5 G !-$   ? 2!$ I' -" 2#$" :   )
        6,*44
$  $- " - *444      !""" % 
   (!> $  $- " -
   &$        :  ! "   #$" =
     )      3 3,5
G (   ?.- 7-   ?.-  $  !D&G81 1J'1&(#G1 G2
   K1L (#L GK1L M!"  - N O #!' 0 -  %  (!> G ( 
    ?.- 7-   ?.-  $ M -$ -O  -.- 8#> # -20 -  !2
    -" - '$  $  -$ M -.-O K-  - 
%- - 1/.    . - 7 7- ; 5  "  8   2
   - 8-; > 10 $ -" % ;   : )   
       * +*,5*
%$= (0 %  $  $- 7  N  ! "  1= -   
   ? !$ :   )        * *,+43
                                                       
                                                                                                               
                                                
                                                                                   
                                                                            
                                                                         
                                                                                                 
                                                 !                        !                !           !
 "                                            #                        ##                #           #
                                                 !                       !               !          !
 $% &'( )                                                                                    
                                                 !                       !               !          !
 *''                                                                                         
                                                 !                       !               !          !
 +  , "-.                                                                                        
                                                 !                       !               !          !
 **/ 0123 * -                             (                        (#               (           (
                                                !                        !                !            !
 **/ %% * -                               (                         (#               (           (#
                                                  !                        !                  !            !
 )                                                                                                                         #
                                         
                 
                                
                                                 
                                                    !  !  
                                                                                                    
                                                                                            
     !                               "#         "#           "$#         "%#           "&#         "'#          "(#
 )  %  !                       *$$(     *++$         ++)         ++         ++        ++%'         ++(
     ,                        -*&'.*('/ -*+%0.+%0/ -*+(.+%+/ -*+$.+(/ -*+0.+$/ -*++$.+/ -*+(.+$'/
 +  '                                   %+      +0&        +)         +$       +        +&
     ,                          -*'+.%+$/ -+0.+)/ -+'.$(/ -*+$.+&/ -*+.+%)/ -++%.+(/ -*++).+&)/
 (  $                          *)0      +)        +%         ++'         ++         ++$         ++&
     ,                         -*'0.*%/ -*+(.++/ -*++%.+0+/ -*+$.+$$/ -*+).+$$/ -*++%.++0/ -*+%.+$)/

 1 2 34                      5'             5%++            5('+            5$++            5$$+            5$+      5%'+
 6  7 8!9                   +'0             +&0             +%+             +(             +)             +)        +%(
                                        $.+$%          $.+$%           $.+$%          $.+$%          $.+$%          $.+$%    $.+$%
                                          
                          !"#          
      $%%            &  '                     
        (              &        )*+*,-  .  .     
       *%#. "#.  *#  .    
                            "               
                                  #  $%&  '      !  !  
                                                                                                
                                                                                        
    !                            "#         "#           "$#         "%#          "&#          "'#          "(#
                                            
)  %  !                    *'(         ++        *++)         ++$        *++0         ++%        *++&
    ,                      -*&%).*+/ -*+&0.+&%/ -*+%(.+$&/ -*+'.+)/ -*+$.+/ -*++%.+/ -*+$+.+(/
+  '                          (0       )(      +      +%      +%%      +      +&&
    ,                       -*('.$(/ -(.'$/ -+'0.&/ -++(.0/ -++).0/ -++$.++/ -+0.+/
(  $                       *$(      +%'         +%        +)       +(         ++%        +$+
    ,                     -*&(.*/ -*+$%.(/ -*+$0.+&)/ -++.+)&/ -++.+)+/ -*++%.+$/ -++.+(/
1 2 34                  5%(         5++        5'%+        5++        5+        5+        5$%+
6  7 8!9               +'$         +&         +$'         +         +         +'          +%
                                   &'.'%0        &'.'%0       &'.'%0       &'.'%0        &'.'%0       &'.'%0       &'.'%0
        $
                   !"# 
                   $         
                                               2             %    '                        '           **                 **
                                             %4*'*         ) *1'/   $ -                    5          *             '         *
  *' 6.                                   !              !        !                      !             #!            !          !
       ' .                                                                                            
    4                               !           !  !                   #!        !          !      !
    '                                                                                    #       
    4                               !           !  !                     !        !        !      !
    '                                                                                                    
    4                              #!          #! #!                     !        !          !     #!
 7 ) *18- 9. *                                     #                                                              
                %$     &  '()                                              
       ' .                            :                                                                  
    4                              !           !          !         #!         #!        #!     !
    '                                                                                            
    4                              !           !          !         #!         #!        #!     !
    '                                                                                                  
    4                              !           !          !         !         !        !     !
 7 ) *18- 9. *                                     #                                                             
    /                             &                 
                (              &      
  )*+*,-       0                      1  (   *$2.%2,    
  1  3   "4.4,!       .  .            *%#. "#.  *#  .    
                                         
                                           ! !
                                                      
                                                                                              
                                                                                      
     !                  "#               "#             "$#        "%#           "&#         "'#          "(#
 )  %  !         *$$(           *++$            ++)        ++         ++        ++%'         ++(
     ,           -*&'.*('/     -*+%0.+%0/    -*+(.+%+/ -*+$.+(/ -*+0.+$/ -*++$.+/ -*+(.+$'/
 +  '                           %+         +0&       +)         +$       +        +&
     ,             -*'+.%+$/      -+0.+)/     -+'.$(/ -*+$.+&/ -*+.+%)/ -++%.+(/ -*++).+&)/
 (  $            *)0            +)           +%        ++'         ++         ++$         ++&
     ,            -*'0.*%/     -*+(.++/    -*++%.+0+/ -*+$.+$$/ -*+).+$$/ -*++%.++0/ -*+%.+$)/
                          *)$        +&&         +$$                +$       +         *++           ++)
                           -*'+.$&/ -*++&.'/ -*++.+(%/           -+%.+%0/ -*+.+%/ -*++.++&/   -*+$+.+$)/
 1                         *0+       %(       +(&              +'&      +&'        ++'         +'
                            -*)'.'0/  -+)(.&/   -+$&.+/          -+$$.+&/ -+$.+/ -*++.+%/     -+&.+(/
                         +)       %       %              +%%       +$        +$        +%&
                           -*'.%/  -(.)&/   -+0&.)&/          -+%.+'/ -*++&.+&%/ -++%.++/     -++).+(+/
                            (       &)+       $$%              %     $       +%        (%
                            -*&&.$&$/  -&.'&)/   -)%.$0$/          -&.)+/ -+0%.'&/ -+$.+&$/      -$$.+0/
                       *%$'     $00       0              &%     %+       +&        '&
                          -*'00.*0/ -$$0.%'/    -).((/          -$.)%/ -+%.($/ -+(.+$%/      -'.0(/
                         *+&    *$(&      *$)&              $%           *+&(        +'+
                         -*%($.*(0)/ -*%%.*0(/ -*%$'.*$$'/         -+.((/ -+'0.&&/ -*+'(.*+%(/    -+'.+%/
                                                             
                      $  !"#  
              $%%          
 &   .  .            *%#. "#.  *#  .    
                                    
                                                                                                           
                                                                                                  
     !                   "#            "#            "$#          "%#                   "&#            "'#             "(#
  )  ) *+        ,($$      ,'(       ,%&&       ,-.                ,-&         ,-'&        ,-/(
                          0,%%1,%(-2 0,(.%1,&.-2 0,&&(1,$.2 0,-&/1--2           0,-&/1-2   0,-.-1,-&&2   0,$.1,-'2
 )  ) *+        ,.%      ,.'       ,&&-     ,-&$              ,-&       ,-(%        ,$%
                          0,.1,%.'2 0,/%1,(%2 0,'%&1,%&%2 0,-('1,-$-2         0,-.$1,-(2   0,-.(1,-'$2   0,''1,-%2
  )  ) *+      ,/%/      ,..(       ,&(%     ,-%'              ,-&        ,-.-        ,%-
                          0,$-1,($/2 0,//.1,(/'2 0,'.-1,%/2 0,-('1,--.2         0,-.&1,-2   0,-/$1,-'.2   0,($1,-'2
  )  ) *+        ,''.        ,/-       ,&.'     ,-'%              ,-('       ,-(/        ,'%
                           0,/1'$2 0,--&1,.-2 0,'.1,&$2 0,-/$1,-$(2        0,-.1,-%'2   0,-/-1,-'/2   0,/(1,$'2
3 )  ) *+      ,-$'     ,--/       ,'.-      ,-'                ,-'%        ,-/(        ,(-
                          0,%/-1,(&2 0,$%1,/-'2 0,((%1,&.2 0,1--2          0,/1--2   0,1,-.&2   0,/1,%2
4  )  ) *+    ,/'     ,-&%       ,'&.     ,-//              ,-..       ,-/        ,/-
                          0,(/1,/&$2 0,(1,/&&2 0,('-1,&(-2 0,&1,-($2        0,$%1,-$$2   0,-%1,-.2   0,$.1,$%2

    ) *+              ,((.        ,'(        ,$('      ,-%/      ,-&'      ,-%&      ,-'
                            0,/(1,%'$2   0,('1,&$/2   0,%'1,$-2 0,-(%1,-%2 0,-.$1,-$2 0,-&/1,-$$2 0,$/1,-.-2

  )  ) *+           %         %$         (.          -/           -(          -/         -&
  ) *+               0(1.2     0$1&&.2     0.$1$.2   0,-%1-'/2   0,-.1-&.2     0-%1-%'2     0-1-2
 )  ) *+           &&(         &.         $%        -$(          -$          -$&         -(
  ) *+              0$%1-$2     0%&1''/2     0.1%.2    0--'1-(2   0,--$1-($2     0-.1-&$2     0-$1$2
  )  ) *+         (./        '&/         $'        -/&         -%          -%%         &
  ) *+             0%'1-(2     0&/1.-(2     0'1%.2    0-1--2    0-.12     0-&1-''2     0-(1'2
  )  ) *+           $./          &&$         $$%        -$$         -%%         -$'         -.&
  ) *+            0,(/1-'2     0%$/1''(2     0%.1%%2   0---1-''2    0--1-(/2     0-/1-&$2     0-%%1$2
3 )  ) *+          (/        &(&         $'(          -/           -$          -%$         -.
  ) *+             0$($1.&2     0%%(1--2     0'.1%(2   0,-$$1-.2   0,-$-1-.(2     0-.1-'2     0-%1%%2
4  )  ) *+       -&        ('-         %%-        -'(          -&&          -&$         &
  ) *+             0'./1'-'2     0'%'1..(2     0$%.1&%.2    0-$'1-2   0,--(1/2     0-%-1-'.2     0-%$1.2
5 ) 63            7'             7%--          7('-          7$--          7$$-           7$-           7%'-
8  9 :!4         -'/             -&/           -%-            -(          -.             -.           -%(
                              $1-$%         $1-$%         $1-$%        $1-$%        $1-$%         $1-$%         $1-$%
              Figure 1a - Total Expenditures                              Figure 1b - Strict Non-Durables
                       Mean = $62                                                 Mean = $14.00
$50                                                    $4


$25                                                    $2


 $0                                                    $0


-$25                                                   -$2
        -14        -7                0             7         -14               -7                    0                7
                        Days Since Check Arrival                                         Days Since Check Arrival




                Figure 1c - Food at Home                                 Figure 1d - Food Away from Home
                      Mean = $7.60                                                  Mean = $3.00
$4                                                     $1.00


$2                                                     $0.50


$0                                                     $0.00


-$2                                                    -$0.50
       -14        -7                0              7               -14              -7                   0            7
                        Days Since Check Arrival                                           Days Since Check Arrival



                  Figure 1 - Daily Spending Amount Relative to Average Daily Spending
                               All Consumer Units Receiving Social Security
               Figure 2a - Total Expenditures                           Figure 2b - Strict Non-Durables
                        Mean = 69%                                               Mean = 59%
10%                                                      10%

 5%                                                       5%

 0%                                                       0%

-5%                                                       -5%

-10%                                                     -10%
       -14           -7               0              7           -14          -7                0              7
                          Days Since Check Arrival                                  Days Since Check Arrival




                 Figure 2c - Food at Home                              Figure 2d - Food Away from Home
                       Mean = 40%                                                  Mean = 27%
10%                                                      5.0%

 5%                                                      2.5%

 0%                                                      0.0%

-5%                                                      -2.5%

-10%                                                     -5.0%
       -14           -7               0              7           -14           -7               0              7
                          Days Since Check Arrival                                  Days Since Check Arrival



             Figure 2 - Daily Percentage With Any Spending Relative to Average Percentage
                                 All Consumer Units Receiving Social Security
               Figure 3a - Total Expenditures                             Figure 3b - Strict Non-Durables
                        Mean = $62                                                Mean = $14.00
$200                                                      $5.00

$100                                                      $2.50

   $0                                                     $0.00

-$100                                                     -$2.50

-$200                                                     -$5.00
         -14         -7                0              7            -14           -7               0              7
                           Days Since Check Arrival                                   Days Since Check Arrival



                 Figure 3c - Food at Home                                Figure 3d - Food Away from Home
                       Mean = $7.60                                                 Mean = $3.00
$4.00                                                     $3.00

$2.00                                                     $2.00

$0.00                                                     $1.00

-$2.00                                                    $0.00

-$4.00                                                    -$1.00
         -14          -7                0             7            -14           -7               0              7
                           Days Since Check Arrival                                   Days Since Check Arrival


                 Figure 3 - Estimated Marginal Effects for Daily Expenditure Amounts
                                All Consumer Units Receiving Social Security
               Figure 3e - Instant Consumption 1                          Figure 3f - Fresh Foods
                          Mean = $3.30                                         Mean = $1.30
$3.00                                                      $0.50

$2.00                                                      $0.25

$1.00                                                      $0.00

$0.00                                                      -$0.25

-$1.00                                                     -$0.50
         -14           -7               0              7            -14      -7               0              7
                            Days Since Check Arrival                              Days Since Check Arrival



               Figure 3g - Instant Consumption 2
                          Mean = $4.60
$3.00

$2.00

$1.00

$0.00

-$1.00
         -14           -7               0              7
                            Days Since Check Arrival


               Figure 3 (con't) - Estimated Marginal Effects for Daily Expenditure Amounts
                                  All Consumer Units Receiving Social Security
               Figure 4a - Total Expenditures                             Figure 4b - Strict Non-Durables
                        Mean = $47                                                Mean = $11.00
$200                                                      $5.00

$100                                                      $2.50

   $0                                                     $0.00

-$100                                                     -$2.50

-$200                                                     -$5.00
         -14         -7                0              7            -14           -7               0              7
                           Days Since Check Arrival                                   Days Since Check Arrival



                 Figure 4c - Food at Home                                Figure 4d - Food Away from Home
                       Mean = $6.40                                                 Mean = $2.00
$3.00                                                     $2.00

$1.50
                                                          $1.00
$0.00
                                                          $0.00
-$1.50

-$3.00                                                    -$1.00
         -14          -7                0             7            -14           -7               0              7
                           Days Since Check Arrival                                   Days Since Check Arrival


                 Figure 4 - Estimated Marginal Effects for Daily Expenditure Amounts
                 Consumer Units With At Least 70% of Income from Social Security
               Figure 4e - Instant Consumption 1                          Figure 4f - Fresh Foods
                          Mean = $2.20                                         Mean = $1.20
$2.00                                                      $0.50

                                                           $0.25
$1.00
                                                           $0.00
$0.00
                                                           -$0.25

-$1.00                                                     -$0.50
         -14           -7               0              7            -14      -7               0              7
                            Days Since Check Arrival                              Days Since Check Arrival



               Figure 4g - Instant Consumption 2
                          Mean = $3.40
$2.00


$1.00


$0.00


-$1.00
         -14           -7               0              7
                            Days Since Check Arrival


               Figure 4 (con't) - Estimated Marginal Effects for Daily Expenditure Amounts
                   Consumer Units With At Least 70% of Income from Social Security
             Figure 5a - Total Expenditures                        Figure 5b - Strict Non-Durables
                      Mean = 69%                                            Mean = 59%
8%                                                    8%

4%                                                    4%

0%                                                    0%

-4%                                                   -4%

-8%                                                   -8%
      -14         -7               0              7         -14         -7               0              7
                       Days Since Check Arrival                              Days Since Check Arrival



               Figure 5c - Food at Home                           Figure 5d - Food Away from Home
                     Mean = 40%                                               Mean = 27%
8%                                                    6%

                                                      3%
4%
                                                      0%
0%
                                                      -3%

-4%                                                   -6%
      -14         -7               0              7         -14         -7               0              7
                       Days Since Check Arrival                              Days Since Check Arrival


            Figure 5 - Estimated Impact on the Probability of Making Any Expenditures
                             All Consumer Units Receiving Social Security
             Figure 5e - Instant Consumption 1                     Figure 5f - Fresh Foods
                         Mean = 28%                                     Mean = 28%
6%                                                     8%

3%
                                                       4%
0%
                                                       0%
-3%

-6%                                                    -4%
      -14          -7               0              7         -14     -7               0              7
                        Days Since Check Arrival                          Days Since Check Arrival



             Figure 5g - Instant Consumption 2
                         Mean = 47%
8%

4%

0%

-4%

-8%
      -14          -7               0              7
                        Days Since Check Arrival


            Figure 5 (con't) - Estimated Impact on the Probability of Making Any Expenditures
                                 All Consumer Units Receiving Social Security
             Figure 6a - Total Expenditures                        Figure 6b - Strict Non-Durables
                      Mean = 63%                                            Mean = 52%
8%                                                    8%

4%
                                                      4%
0%
                                                      0%
-4%

-8%                                                   -4%
      -14         -7               0              7         -14         -7               0              7
                       Days Since Check Arrival                              Days Since Check Arrival



               Figure 6c - Food at Home                           Figure 6d - Food Away from Home
                     Mean = 36%                                               Mean = 21%
8%                                                    6%


4%                                                    3%


0%                                                    0%


-4%                                                   -3%
      -14         -7               0              7         -14         -7               0              7
                       Days Since Check Arrival                              Days Since Check Arrival


            Figure 6 - Estimated Impact on the Probability of Making Any Expenditures
                Consumer Units With At Least 70% of Income from Social Security
            Figure 6e - Instant Consumption 1                     Figure 6f - Fresh Foods
                        Mean = 21%                                     Mean = 26%
6%                                                    8%


3%                                                    4%


0%                                                    0%


-3%                                                   -4%
      -14         -7               0              7         -14    -7               0              7
                       Days Since Check Arrival                         Days Since Check Arrival



            Figure 6g - Instant Consumption 2
                        Mean = 41%
8%


4%


0%


-4%
      -14         -7               0              7
                       Days Since Check Arrival


      Figure 6 (con't) - Estimated Impact on the Probability of Making Any Expenditures
              Consumer Units With At Least 70% of Income from Social Security
