                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    THE EFFECT OF CHANGES IN DRUG UTILIZATION ON
                         LABOR SUPPLY AND PER CAPITA OUTPUT


                                           Frank R. Lichtenberg


                                           Working Paper 9139
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9139


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      September 2002




The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Frank R. Lichtenberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Changes in Drug Utilization on Labor Supply and
Per Capita Output
Frank R. Lichtenberg
NBER Working Paper No. 9139
September 2002
JEL No. J2, O3, I1, L65
                                         ABSTRACT

        We hypothesize that pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress increases per capita output via

its effect on labor supply (the employment rate and hours worked per employed person). We examine
the effect of changes in both the average quantity and average vintage (FDA approval year) of drugs
consumed on labor supply, using longitudinal, condition-level data.
        The estimates indicate that conditions for which there were above-average increases in utilization
of prescriptions during 1996-1998 tended to have above-average reductions in the probability of missed
work days. The estimated value to employers of the reduction in missed work days appears to exceed
the employer’s increase in drug cost.
        The estimates are also consistent with the hypothesis that an increase in a condition’s mean drug
vintage reduces the probability that people with that condition will experience activity and work
limitations, and reduces their average number of restricted-activity days. The estimates imply that
activity limitations decline at the rate of about one percent per year of drug vintage, and that the rate of
pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress with respect to activity limitations is about 18% per year.
Estimates of the cost of the increase in drug vintage necessary to achieve reductions in activity limitations
indicate that increases in drug vintage tend to be very “cost-effective.”


                                          Frank R. Lichtenberg
                                          Columbia University
                                          Graduate School of Business
                                          726 Uris Hall
                                          3022 Broadway
                                          New York, NY 10027
                                          and NBER
                                          frank.lichtenberg@columbia.edu
                                          phone: (212) 854 4408
                                          fax: (212) 316 9355
                                                                                                                3


         Per capita output is the most frequently used indicator of economic prosperity.
Per capita output may be viewed as the product of three variables--output per hour
worked, hours worked per employed person, and the employment rate:

(Y / P) = (Y / H) * (H / E) * (E / P)                                                       (1)

where:

         Y = output
         P = population
         H = hours worked
         E = employment

Hence factors that increase any of the three variables on the right- hand-side of eq. (1) will
increase per capita output (Figure 1). 1
         In his seminal 1956 paper, Robert Solow showed that technical progress is
necessary for there to be sustained growth in output per hour worked (Figure 2). In that
paper, Solow assumed that technical progress was exogenous: it descends upon the
economy like “manna from heaven,” automatically and regardless of whatever else is
going on in the economy (Jones (1998, 32-3)). More recent theoretical (“endogenous
growth”) models (Romer (1990)) relaxed this assumption: they have hypothesized that
“technical progress is driven by research and development” ((Jones (1998, 89-90)).
Empirical evidence (e.g. Griliches and Lichtenberg (1984), Lichtenberg and Siegel
(1991)) is consistent with the hypothesis that firms and industries that perform more
R&D exhibit higher productivity growth.
         Solow and other economists have recognized since the late 1950s that there are
two kinds of technical progress: disembodied and embodied. Suppose that agent i in the
economy (e.g. a firm or government agency) engages in research and development. If
technical progress is disembodied, another agent (j) can benefit from agent i’s R&D
whether or not he purchases agent i’s products. But if technical progress is embodied,
agent j benefits from agent i’s R&D only if he purchases agent i’s products. Solow

1
  Although they will increase per capita output, increases in the variables on the right-hand-side of eq. (1)
will not necessarily increase social welfare. If people prefer being out of the labor force to working, an
increase in the employment rate will reduce social welfare. If, on the other hand, people are prevented
from working by illness and disability, then innovations that increase employment by enabling people to
work will be welfare-enhancing. Such innovations are the focus of this paper.
                                                                                                          4


conjectured that most technical progress was embodied. In one paper (Solow (1962, p.
76)), he assumed that “all technological progress needs to be ‘embodied’ in newly
produced capital goods before there can be any effect on output.”
        A number of econometric studies have investigated the hypothesis that capital
equipment employed by U.S. manufacturing firms embodies technological change, i.e.
that “each successive vintage of investment is more productive than the last.” Equipment
is expected to embody significant technical progress due to the relatively high R&D-
intensity of equipment manufacturers. According to the National Science Foundation,
the R&D- intensity of machinery and equipment manufacturing is about 50% higher than
the R&D- intensity of manufacturing in general, and 78% higher than the R&D intensity
of all industries.
        These studies have concluded that technical progress embodied in equipment is a
major source of manufacturing productivity (output per hour) growth. Hulten (1992)
found that as much as 20 percent (and perhaps more) of the BLS total- factor-productivity
change (in manufacturing) can be directly associated with embodiment—the higher
productivity of new capital than old capital. For equipment used in U.S. manufacturing,
best-practice technology may be as much as 23 percent above the average level of
technical efficiency. Bahk and Gort (1993) concluded that “Industrywide learning
appears to be uniquely related to embodied technical change of physical capital. Once
due account is taken of the latter variable, residual industrywide learning [disembodied
technical change] disappears as a significant explanatory variable” (p. 579). And
Sakellaris and Wilson (2000) estimate that “each vintage is about 12 percent more
productive than the previous year’s vintage (in the preferred specification)”, and that
equipment-embodied technical change accounted for about two thirds of U.S.
manufacturing productivity growth between 1972 and 1996.
        In this paper we test the hypothesis that another kind of embodied technical
progress—pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress—has increased per capita output
via its effect on labor supply (the employment rate and hours worked per employed
person; see Figure 3)2,3,4 The pharmaceutical industry is even more R&D-intensive than


2
 Rizzo et al (1996) examined the effect of prescribed medicine use on work-loss disability days of
currently employed workers only; they did not consider the effect on the probability of being employed.
                                                                                                        5


the equipment industry: according to the NSF, the R&D intensity of drugs and medicines
manufacturing is 74% higher than the R&D intensity of machinery and equipment
manufacturing (Figure 4). Therefore, it is quite plausible that there is a high rate of
pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress.
        Data collected in the 1996 National Health Interview Survey indicate that 7% of
people between the ages of 18 and 69 are completely unable to work due to illness and
disability; another 5% are limited in the kind and amount of the work they can do.
Limitations in ability to work place individuals and families at major financial risk:
people who are unable to work are more than three times as likely to live below the
poverty threshold as people who are not limited, controlling for age, education, race, and
sex. As Figure 5 shows, inability to work increases steadily with age: the rate is almost
twice as high among 55-64 year-olds (15.2%) as it is among 45-54 year-olds (7.9%). 5
This decline in ability to work with respect to age might be interpreted as age-related
human capital depreciation. We hypothesize that use of newer drugs increases ability to
work (or reduces the rate of human capital depreciation).
        At first blush, one might think that employers need only be concerned about
work- loss days experienced by currently employed persons. However firms make
significant investments in recruitment and training of employees, and if these employees
become unable to work, firms are unable to realize returns on these investments. Firms
as well as workers incur human capital losses.
        We will examine the effect of changes in drug utilization on labor supply using
longitudinal, condition- level data on many major conditions in two different ways 6 . The
first approach examines the effect of changes in the average quantity of drugs (and other

3
  Increased labor supply is not the only, or even the most important, benefit of new drugs. In previous
papers (Lichtenberg (1996, 2001, 2002)), I have presented evidence that new drugs increase longevity and
reduce expenditures on hospital care and other medical inputs.
4
  Data limitations prevent us from examining the effect of changes in drug utilization on output per hour
worked. Berndt et al (1997) examined this effect in a study of pharmaceutical treatment for depression,
anxiety, migraine, and hypertension among individuals employed by insurance claims processors. They
found that pharmaceutical treatment increased both the number of hours worked and output (number of
claims processed) per hour worked.
5
  Since older employed workers tend to earn more than younger employed workers, the percentage
reduction in income from inability to work is even greater than the percentage reduction in employment.
6
  Case studies of the labor-supply effect of specific drugs or drugs for specific conditions have been
performed. For example, Legg et al (1997) examined the effect of sumatriptan for treatment of migraine
disease on employee productivity. They found that the value of the productivity increase was almost ten
times as great as the incremental cost of the drug.
                                                                                                           6


medical services) consumed for a given condition, using data from the 1996-1998 waves
of the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). The second approach examines the
effect of changes in the average vintage (FDA approval year) of drugs consumed for a
given condition; we hypothesize that drug quality tends to increase with vintage. This
approach is based primarily on data from National Ambulatory Medical Care Surveys
and National Health Interview Surveys during the period 1985-1996. Changes in
quantity are positively correlated across conditions with changes in mean vintage, or
quality: there is a significant positive correlation between the percentage increase
between 1996 and 1998 in the total number of prescriptions for a condition and the
fraction of 1996-1998 prescriptions that were for drugs approved after 1990. 7

    I. Why analysis at the aggregate (condition) level?

        We seek unbiased, efficient estimates of the parameters of the “health production
function”—the effect of drug utilization on labor supply. The ideal way in which to
obtain such estimates would be to randomly assign drugs to individuals, and observe their
outcomes (labor supply), as in a randomized clinical trial (RCT). This is often infeasible,
however. I will consider the problems that may arise in estimating health production
functions in a non-experimental setting, and propose a simple and feasible solution to
these problems.
        I begin by postulating the following simple health production function:
        O =β T+γ P                                                     (2)
where
        O = outcomes (post-treatment health status)
        T = quantity of treatment (medical services consumed)
        P = pre-treatment health status


        For simplicity, we represent treatment intensity by a scalar (T), although in reality
treatment involves a vector of inputs. I postulate that both β and γ are positive: post-



7
 Based on a sample of 74 2-digit ICD9 conditions, the correlation coefficient is 0.262 (p-value= 0.024).
Observations are weighted by the square root of the number of 1996-1998 prescriptions.
                                                                                                            7


treatment health status is positively related to both pre-treatment status and quantity of
treatment.
         My objective is to estimate β, the effect of treatment on outcomes, conditional on
pre-treatment health status. The problem is that P is often unobservable. If T were
uncorrelated with P (which would be the case if treatment were randomly assigned to
individuals, as in an RCT), the simple regression of O on T (i.e., without controlling for
P) would still yield an unbiased estimate of β.
         But this is not usually the case. In general, people with worse initial health (lower
P) choose higher T. For example, older people tend to use more medical services and to
have worse (pre-treatment) health than younger people.
         Suppose that T = π P, and that π < 0. This implies that


         P = π-1 T                                                       (3)


Substituting (3) into (2),


         O = (β + γ π -1 ) T


The treatment coefficient in the simple outcomes regression (i.e. the effect of treatment
on outcomes not conditioning on pre-treatment health) is a function of all three effects.
Since π -1 < 0, this coefficient is smaller than β, the effect of treatment on outcomes,
conditional on pre-treatment health. Indeed, it is quite possible for (β + γ π -1 ) to be
negative even though β is positive: although treatment leads to improved outcomes, given
P, the simple correlation between treatment intensity and outcomes is negative. 8



8
 Omitted-variables bias in production function estimation in other, non-health, areas (e.g., manufacturing)
has long been recognized, although the bias there is often thought to operate in the opposite direction, i.e.
overestimation of the marginal productivity of inputs. Chamberlin (1986) discusses the following classic
example:
production function: Y = α1 N + α2 A
Y = output
N = employment
A = managerial ability
α1 , α2 > 0
                                                                                                                8


         When pre-treatment health status is not observable, estimates of the effect of
treatment intensity on outcomes based on individual data are likely to be severely
negatively biased. However this bias may be greatly reduced and perhaps even
eliminated by aggregation. 9 To see this, consider the following health production
function:


         Oijt = β Tijt + γ Pijt


where the subscripts denote person i in group j in year t. (Groups may be defined by
disease, for example.) Aggregating (i.e., computing averages) across individuals, within
groups and years,


         O.jt = β T.jt + γ P.jt                                           (4)


where O.jt = denotes the mean outcome of people in group j in year t, etc. Suppose that
mean pre-treatment health can be decomposed as follows:


         P.jt = θj’ + δt ’                                                (5)


This allows there to be differences between groups in mean pre-treatment health in a
given year, and for changes over time in the mean pre-treatment health of all groups.
Substituting (5) into (4),


         O.jt = β T.jt + γ θj’ + γ δt ’


             = β T.jt + θj + δt




A is unobservable. In equilibrium, firms with higher A will have more employees, that is, the correlation
between A and N is positive. As a result, the coefficient from the simple regression of Y on N is an
overestimate of α1 .
9
  Although analysis at the individual level is often preferable to analysis of aggregate data, aggregation is
desirable under certain circumstances. See Grunfeld and Griliches (1960).
                                                                                                        9


where θj = γ θj ’ and δ t = γ δt ’. We can obtain consistent estimates of β (the effect of
treatment on outcomes) by estimating a model based on group- level panel data, with
fixed group and year effects. In this context, variation in the relative treatment intensity
of different groups (T. jt ) is primarily due to exogenous medical innovations, rather than
variation in pre-treatment health status.

 II. The effect of changes in the average quantity of drugs

        The 1996-1998 MEPS condition files report condition-specific data for each
medical condition reported by each person in each year. It includes the following
variables:


 MISSWORK ijt = 1 if one or more missed workdays were associated with condition j
              borne by person i in year t
              = 0 otherwise
    RXNUMijt = the number of prescribed medicine events (prescriptions) associated
              with condition j borne by person i in year t
    OBNUMijt = the number of office-based events associated with condition j borne
              by person i in year t
    HSNUMijt = the number of hospital stays associated with condition j borne by
              person i in year t

Aggregation of these data up to the condition- year level enables estimation of the
following model10 :


MISSWORK.jt = β RX log(RXNUM.jt ) + β OB log(OBNUM.jt )

                                            + β HS HSNUM.jt + αj + δt + ε jt             (6)

where

MISSWORK.jt = the fraction of people with condition j in year t who had one or more
            missed workdays associated with the condition
   RXNUM.jt = the average number of prescribed medicines associated with
            condition j in year t
   OBNUM.jt = the average number of office-based events associated with condition j

10
  The hypothesis of diminishing marginal productivity of medical services implies that a logarithmic
specification is appropriate. Since HSNUM.jt is frequently zero, we do not take the logarithm of this
variable.
                                                                                                           10


                  borne by person i in year t
     HSNUM.jt = the average number of hospital stays associated with condition j in
                  year t
Including fixed condition effects (α j’s) and year effects (δ t ’s) controls for the effect of
any determinants of MISSWORK that vary across conditions but not over time and that
vary over time but not across conditions. 11 Estimation of this model will reveal whether
conditions for which there were above-average increases in utilization of medical
services (prescriptions, doctor visits, or hospital stays) tended to have above-average
reductions in the fraction of people who had one or more missed workdays associated
with the condition.
         We restricted the sample to conditions borne by people between the ages of 18
and 65. The micro- level dataset contained 143,536 observations. The aggregated dataset
contained about 280 observations (3 years times 93 2-digit ICD9 conditions/year).
         Sample mean values of the variables are shown in the following table.


                           year      misswork rxnum            obnum       hsnum
                           1996        0.24    0.99             1.39       0.024
                           1997        0.20    1.02             1.61       0.034
                           1998        0.21    1.08             1.72       0.032

With the exception of rxnum, the 1997 figures are much closer to the 1998 figures than
they are to the 1996 figures. This may be related to the fact that 1996 was the first year
of the survey, so that data for this year may be subject to greater measurement or
reporting error than data fo r the subsequent two years. 12
         The probability that a condition was associated with one or more missed
workdays ranged between 20% and 24%. The average number of prescriptions per
condition increased by 9% from 1996 to 1998.
         We estimated eq. (6) in two ways: probit estimation on grouped data, and
weighted least-squares (WLS), weighting by the number of observations in each
condition- year cell. Since the dependent variable of eq. (6) is bounded between zero and

11
   For example, suppose that both the probability of missing work days and the average number of
prescriptions vary across regions, and that certain conditions tend to be more prevalent in certain regions.
As long as the regional distribution of conditions remains stable over the sample period, fixed-effects
estimation controls for the influence of region.
12
   Since eq. (6) includes fixed year effects, changes in survey reporting and administration whose effects
did not vary across conditions will not affect our results.
                                                                                            11


one, probit estimation is theoretically superior. In practice, the two procedures yielded
very similar results.
        Weighted least-squares estimates of the key parameters of eq. (6) are shown in the
following table:


                         Parameter β RX       β OB          β HS
                         estimate    -0.0414 -0.0049        0.0208
                         std. error   0.0155 0.0102         0.0623
                         t-statistic    -2.67   -0.48          0.33
                         p-value      0.0081 0.6323         0.7384

The estimate of β RX is negative and significantly different from zero, while the estimates
of the other two parameters are far from statistically significant. When log(obnum) and
hsnum are dropped from the equation, the estimate (p-value) of β RX is -.0498 (0.0033).
These estimates are consistent with the hypothesis that conditions for which there were
above-average increases in utilization of prescriptions tended to have above-average
reductions in the fraction of people who had one or more missed workdays associated
with the condition.
        An increase in the average number of prescriptions consumed for a condition is
associated with a reduction in the probability of missing work days due to the condition.
Suppose the average number of prescriptions increased by 1 per condition per year. We
wish to compare the resulting increase in drug cost to the value of the estimated reduction
in missed work days. To a first approximation, the increase in drug cost would simply be
the average cost of a prescription, which was $34.76 in 1996.
        We will use the following formula to estimate the value of the reduction in missed
work days from a unit increase in the number of prescriptions per condition per year:

V = (C / H) * (H / D) * E(M | M > 0) * - d prob (M > 0)
                                           d RXNUM

  = (C / H) * (H / D) * E(M | M > 0) * RXNUM * - d prob (M > 0)
                                                 d log(RXNUM)

  = (C / H) * (H / D) * E(M | M > 0) * RXNUM * -β RX                         (7)

where
                                                                                                    12


               C  = employer costs for employee compensation
               H  = hours worked
            C/H   = employer costs for employee compensation per hour worked
               D  = days worked
            H/ D  = hours worked per day
               M  = workdays missed
     E(M | M > 0) = expected number of workdays missed, given that some workdays
                  were missed
     prob (M > 0) = probability that some workdays were missed

The sample mean value of RXNUM is 1.03, and our point estimate of -β RX is .0498.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, in 1996 employer costs for employee
compensation per hour worked by civilian workers (C / H) was $18.68. We assume that
hours worked per day (H / D) is 7. The only remaining quantity we need to estimate in
order to compute V is E(M | M > 0). 13
         To estimate this, we combined person- level information from the 1996 MEPS
Full- Year File with condition- level information from the 1996 MEPS Condition File.
The first file provides information about the person’s total number of missed work days
associated with all medical conditions in 1996. 14 The second file provides information
about the number of medical conditions associated with any missed work days in 1996.
The following table presents info rmation about people classified by the latter
characteristic:


                                                            Mean
                    Number of                               number of
                    conditions                  Mean        missed
                    associated with             number of work days
                    missed work     Number of missed        per
                    days            people      work days condition
                    0                      4120        0.18
                    1                      3225        6.88        6.88
                    2                      1476       11.21        5.61
                    3                       660       15.62        5.21
                    4                       250       22.19        5.55
                    5+                      175       28.36        4.59


13
   Unfortunately the MEPS Condition Files indicate only whether any workdays were missed, not the
number of workdays missed.
14
   This is the sum of missed workdays in rounds 1, 2, and 3 of the survey (ddnowrk1-ddnowrk3).
                                                                                            13


There is a strong positive relationship between the number of conditions associated with
missed work days and the mean number of missed work days. For example, people with
one condition missed 6.70 more work days than people with zero conditions associated
with missed work days. We will assume that E(M | M > 0) is a weighted average of the
figures in the last column (weighted by the number of people), minus 0.18 (the mean
number of missed wo rk days of people with zero missed work-day conditions). Hence
E(M | M > 0) = 6.24 – 0.18 = 6.06. The average number of work-days missed per
condition per year by people who missed any work days from a condition is 6.06.
        Substituting these figures into eq. (7) yields an estimate of the value of the
reduction in missed work days from a unit increase in the number of prescriptions per
condition per year:

V = (C / H) * (H / D) * E(M | M > 0) * RXNUM * -β RX

  = $18.68 *     7     *    6.06       *    1.03    * .0498

  = $40.64.

        A unit increase in the number of prescriptions per condition per year (a .97
increase in log(RXNUM)) would reduce the probability of missing any work days by
5.1%. Since E(M | M > 0) = 6.06, it would reduce the expected number of missed work
days by 0.31 days, or 2.18 hours. In 1996, the value to employers of this reduction in
missed work days would have been $40.64. This exceeds the average cost of a
prescription in 1996 which was $34.76. Moreover, employers did not bear the entire cost
of the prescription. According to the 1997 MEDSTAT Marketscan database, which
represents the inpatient and outpatient healthcare service use of individuals nationwide
who are covered by the benefit plans of large employers, health plans, and government
and public organizations, individuals paid 15 percent of the cost of their drug claims in
the form of copayments. Hence the average cost to the employer of an additional
prescription may have been 85% * $34.76 = $29.66. The estimated value to employers of
the reduction in missed work days appears to exceed the employer’s increase in drug
cost.
                                                                                                        14


III. The effect of changes in the average vintage of drugs


        In section A we will develop an econometric specification for testing the
hypothesis that, ceteris paribus, the ability of a person with given medical conditions to
work is positively related to the vintage(s) of the drug(s) he consumes for those
conditions. 15 In section B, we describe the data used to estimate the model. Empirical
results are presented in section C.

     A. Econometric specification

        Consider the following model:

        Lijt = β Vijt + α j + δt + γ Zijt + ε ijt                                        (8)

where

        Lijt = an indicator of the limitations imposed on person i by condition j in year t
        (80 conditions, t = 1985, 1989, 1990,…, 1996)

        Vijt = an indicator (e.g. the mean) of the vintage of the drugs consumed by person
        i for condition j in year t

        Zijt = other attributes (e.g. age) of person i with condition j in year t

        ε ijt = a disturbance.

This model includes both condition fixed effects (α j) and year fixed effects (δt ).
Condition fixed effects control for the possibility that some conditions are inherently
more limiting than others (independent of drug vintage). Some conditions tend to limit
activities muc h more than others in a given year. For example, only 0.5% of the people
who had chronic sinusitis (the second-most prevalent condition in 1990-1992) were
limited by it in their major or outside activity, whereas 21.2% of the people who had
arthritis (the third- most prevalent condition) were limited by it. Year fixed effects control
for the influence of disembodied technical change and for other factors that change over
time but do not vary across conditions.


15
  We define the vintage of a drug as the year in which the drug’s active ingredient was first approved by
the FDA.
                                                                                           15


        While eq. (8) is a useful starting point, for a number of reasons estimation of this
model is neither feasible (due to missing data) nor necessarily appropriate (due to
possible nonlinearity and interaction effects). We elaborate on these issues below.
Censoring of vintage data. The vintage data are censored from below: for drugs that
have not been approved by the FDA since it was established in 1939, we know only that
they are of pre-1939 vintage. One way of addressing the censoring problem is to replace
V by a dummy variable (D) defined as follows:
        D = 1 if V > V*
          = 0 if V < V*,

where V* is a vintage threshold (V* > 1939). Also define the following:

        VN = E(V | V > V*) = mean vintage of “new drugs”
        VO = E(V | V < V*) = mean vintage of “old drugs”

Due to censoring, only the former is known. But this does not prevent us from testing the
hypothesis that users of new drugs are less limited in activity than the users of old drugs,
or from estimating the increase in drug cost required to achieve a given reduction in
activity limitation.
        Suppose we estimate the simple regression of L on D (for simplicity, here we
ignore non-vintage determinants of L). The slope of this regression is:

        bLD = LN – LO

where

        LN = E(L | V > V*) = mean value of L for “new drug” users
        LO = E(L | V < V*) = mean value of L for “old drug” users

Hence, if the estimate of bLD is negative and significant, we may reject the null
hypothesis that drug vintage has no effect on activity limitations.
        One can also estimate the simple regression of drug price (P) on D. The slope of
this regression is:
        bPD = PN – PO

where

        PN = E(P | V > V*) = mean price of “new drugs”
                                                                                               16


       PO = E(P | V < V*) = mean price of “old drugs”

Hence the ratio of bPD to - bLD is the ratio of the new-vs.-old drug price difference to the
new-vs.-old drug reduction in activity limitations, i.e. the increase in drug cost required to
achieve a given reduction in activity limitation.

         bPD = PN – PO
        -bLD -(LN – LO)

       In eq. (8), the parameter β is the effect of a one-year increase in vintage on L. β is
related to bLD as follows:

       β = ∆L = (LN – LO) = bLD___                                             (9)
          ∆V (VN – VO) (VN – VO)

This implies that, to determine the effect of a one-year increase in vintage on L, one
needs to divide the dummy- variable regression coefficient by an estimate of (VN – VO).
Potential nonlinearity. If the relationship between L and V is linear, as hypothesized in
eq. (8), then the choice of vintage threshold (V*) won’t affect the estimate of β we obtain
from eq. (9), e.g. it won’t matter whether we define new drugs as post-1970 drugs or
post-1980 drugs. However if the relationship is nonlinear—e.g., the reduction in activity
limitations from switching from a 1980 to a 1990 drug is greater than the reduction in
activity limitations from switching from a 1970 to a 1980 drug—then the choice of V*
will affect the estimate of β. This is illustrated by Figure 6. Suppose that the vintage
threshold is increased: V* shifts to the right. This will increase both VN and VO, by
different amounts (in gene ral), and will also affect the slope of the straight line passing
through the points (VO, LO) and (VN, LN). We will therefore estimate the model using
several alternative vintage thresholds (1970, 1980, 1985, and 1990), both to check
robustness and to investigate the possibility of nonlinearity.
Aggregation. We have data on L, V, and Z, for large samples of individuals over a
period of years. However the data on L and V come from different surveys and cover
different individuals: data on condition-specific activity limitations come from the
National Health Interview Survey—a household survey—and data on condition-specific
drug utilization come from the National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey—a provider
                                                                                                        17


(physician) survey. Hence estimation of eq. (8) is not feasible. But by aggregating eq.
(8) across individuals, we obtain an equation that can be estimated 16 :

         L.jt = β V.jt + α j + δt + γ Z.jt + ε.jt                                        (10)

where

         L.jt = is the mean value of Lijt for persons with condition j in year t.

         V.jt = is the mean of the vintage indicator of drugs consumed for condition j in
         year t.

For example, L. jt = is the fraction of people with arthritis in 1996 who are unable to work
because of their arthritis, and V. jt is the mean vintage of drugs prescribed to treat arthritis
in 1996. If the estimate of β from eq. (10) is negative and significant, that indicates that
conditions with greater increases in vintage had greater declines (or smaller increases) in
activity limitations.
Interaction effect. In eq. (10), the response of activity limitations to a change in vintage
(β = ∂L / ∂V) is a constant. But it is reasonable to hypothesize that this response is
proportional to the average number of drugs consumed by people with that condition:

         β = β’ N_Rxj                                                                    (11)

where:

         N_Rxj is the average annual number of prescriptions consumed for condition j by
         people with that condition.

Substituting eq. (11) into eq. (10),

         L.jt = β’ (N_Rxj * V. jt ) + α j + δt + γ Z.jt + ε.jt                           (12)

Due to censoring of vintage data discussed earlier, the best way to measure V given the
available data is as the ratio of the number of new (e.g. post-1980) drugs prescribed for

16
   Estimation based on aggregate data may have advantages over estimation based on individual-level data.
Suppose that the disturbance of eq. (8) is correlated with vintage, due to unobserved heterogeneity: people
with more severe cases of a given condition may tend to take newer (or older) drugs for that condition. In
this case, the estimate of β from eq. (8) will be biased. But as long as the exogenous change in condition
mean unobserved severity is uncorrelated with the change in mean vintage, the estimate of β from eq. (10)
will be unbiased.
                                                                                             18


the condition to the total number of drugs prescribed for the condition. Since N_Rx is the
ratio of the total number of drugs prescribed for the condition to the number of people
with the condition, (N_Rx * V) equals the number of new drugs prescribed for the
condition per person with the condition. For example, if (N_Rx * V) = 1 in 1996, that
means that, on average, people with the condition are taking one new drug for that
condition.
       Now consider the costs and benefits of a unit increase in (N_Rx * V). A possible
estimate of this cost is the average cost of a prescription for a new drug. NAMCS does
not contain any information about drug costs, but according to the 1997 MEPS, the
average cost of a prescription for a post-1980 drug in 1997 was $59.08. If use of the new
drug did not reduce use of old drugs, this would be a reasonable estimate of the cost of a
unit increase in (N_Rx * V). However in reality, use of new drugs is likely to reduce use
of old drugs (Lichtenberg and Philipson (2002)). If there were 1- for-1 substitution of
new for old drugs, the cost of the unit increase in (N_Rx * V) would be the difference
between the price of the new drug and the price of the old drug. The average cost of a
prescription for a pre-1980 drug in 1997 was $26.66, so this price difference is $32.42.
       The benefit, in dollar terms, of a unit increase in (N_Rx * V) is the reduction in
the probability of experiencing the limitation (-β’) times the value of, or willingness to
pay for, freedom from the limitation (WTP). Suppose, for example, that consuming one
new drug (increasing (N_Rx * V) by 1) reduces the probability of being unable to work
by .03 (from 8% to 5%). If the value of being able to work is $35,000—about the
average annual earnings of American workers—then the benefit of reducing this activity
limitation is (-β’) * WTP = .03 * $35,000 = $1050. If the benefit of the increase in drug
vintage exceeds its cost, the increase in vintage raises social welfare.


   B. Data

             1. Limitations of activity, by condition and year

       Numerous health surveys (e.g., the Medical Expenditure Panel Survey) collect
data on respondents’ activity limitations, including limitation in ability to work. But
people with activity limitations often suffer from multiple conditions, and these surveys
                                                                                                           19


do not indicate which conditions are responsible for their activity limitations 17 . The
National Health Interview Survey is the only survey we are aware of that collects
condition-specific activity limitation data.
        The purpose of the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS) is to obtain
information about the amount and distribution of illness, its effects in terms of disability
and chronic impairments, and the kinds of health services people receive.
        Condition—Condition is a general term that includes any specific illness, injury,
or impairment. Condition data are derived from the survey in two ways. First,
respondents are asked to identify any conditions that caused certain types of impact
associated with health, such as a visit to a doctor or a day spent in bed. Second,
respondents are read lists of selected chronic conditions and asked whether they or any
family members have any of these conditions. The latter information is used in making
prevalence estimates. At a later point in the survey, a series of questions is asked about
each of the conditions identified in either of the two ways just described. The information
obtained on each condition helps to clarify the nature of the condition and whether
medical services have been involved in its diagnosis or treatment. It also aids in the
coding of the condition. All conditions except impairments are coded according to the
ninth revision of the International Classification of Diseases (5) with certain
modifications adopted to make the codes more suitable for information derived from a
household survey.
Chronic condition—A condition is considered chronic if the respondent indicates it was
first noticed more than 3 months before the reference date of the interview, or it is a type
of condition that ordinarily has a duration of more than 3 months. Examples of conditions
that are considered chronic regardless of their time of onset are diabetes, heart conditions,
emphysema, and arthritis. 18




17
   1996 MEPS data indicate that among people with at least one medical condition, 79% had 2 or more
conditions, 60% had 3 or more, and 31% had five or more. Moreover 95% of conditions are borne by
people with 2 or more conditions, 60% of conditions are borne by people with 5 or more conditions, and
18% of conditions are borne by people with 10 or more conditions.
18
   The majority of conditions reported in the condition file are chronic conditions. For example, 86% of
conditions reported in 1996 were chronic conditions.
                                                                                            20


    Limitation of activity because of chronic conditions— Persons are classified in terms
of the major activity usually associated with their particular age group. The major
activities for the age groups are:
    1.   Ordinary play for children under 5 years of age
    2.   Attending school for those 5–17 years of age
    3.   Working or keeping house for persons 18–69 years of age
    4.   Capacity for independent living (for example, the ability to bathe, shop, dress, eat,
         and so forth, without needing the help of another person) for those 70 years of age
         and over

People 18–69 years of age who are classified as keeping house are also classified by their
ability to work at a job or business. (In Collins (1997), the major activity of persons 65–
69 years is assumed to be working or keeping house; however, questions were also asked
about the capacity for independent living in this age group, which would permit an
alternative definition of limitation.)
    In regard to these activities, each person is classified into one of four categories:
    1. Unable to perform the major activity
    2. Able to perform the major activity but limited in the kind or amount of this
       activity
    3. Not limited in the major activity but limited in the kind or amount of other
       activities
    4. Not limited in any way

In regard to these four categories, NHIS publications often classify persons only by
whether they are limited (groups 1–3) or not limited (group 4). Persons are not classified
as limited in activity unless one or more chronic conditions are reported as the cause of
the activity limitation. If more than one condition is reported, the respondent is asked to
identify the condition that is the major cause of the limitation.
         Condition Record File—This file contains information for each reported health
condition. NHIS condition records can be used to calculate aggregate estimates and rates
of the incidence of acute conditions, prevalence of selected chronic conditions, disability
days and utilization associated with acute or chronic conditions, and chronic conditions
causing limitation of activity. The Condition file contains the following types of records:
         1. Condition records, either acute or chronic, which are associated
         with disability days, doctor visits and /or hospitalizations in the two weeks
         preceding the interview.
                                                                                                       21


        2. Chronic condition records when the condition is reported to be the main or
        secondary cause of activity limitation or limitation in ability to work.
        3. Chronic condition records reported in response to a checklist of
        conditions for each body system, e.g., digestive. The total sample was divided
        into six sub-samples. Each sub-sample was asked the set of conditions
        corresponding to one of the six chronic disease checklists.

        To calculate limitation of activity due to chronic conditions on a condition basis,
NCHS (1996, p. 51) says that all chronic condition records, not just those reported in
response to a checklist of conditions for each body system, should be used.


             2. Vintage distribution of drugs utilized, by condition and year


        National Ambulatory Medical Care Surveys offer information on patients' visits
to a national sample of office-based physicians. The surveys collect information on all
drugs/medications ordered, administered, or provided during office visits. The data items
include medication code, generic name and code, brand name, entry status, prescription
status, federal controlled substance status, composition status, and related ingredient
codes. Also included are demographic items describing the patient, such as age, sex, race,
and ethnicity. The universe consists of office visits to nonfederally employed physicians
classified by the American Medical Association (AMA) or the American Osteopathic
Association (AOA) as "office-based, patient care" (excluding specialties of
anesthesiology, pathology, and radiology), from 112 Primary Sampling Units (PSUs) in
the United States.
        Each NAMCS office visit record reports the physician’s diagnoses, any drugs
prescribed (including the names of each of the ingredients of combination drugs), and a
sampling weight. Hence one can calculate, for each year in which NAMCS was
conducted, the joint distribution of prescribed medicines, by drug and diagnosis 19 .
        To determine the vintages (FDA approval dates) of drugs reported in NAMCS,
we used two unpublished files obtained from the FDA. The first is a list of all of the 821
new molecular entities (NMEs) approved during the period 1950-1993. The second is a


19
  Up to three diagnoses may be recorded; when multiple diagnoses are recorded, we allocate the drugs
prescribed equally across the diagnoses.
                                                                                                      22


list of all new drug applications (NDAs) approved during the period 1939-1998. (The
first FDA drug approval occurred in 1939.) This list includes both new molecular entities
approved and other NDAs approved (new formulations, new manufacturers, etc.).
Although the two lists are broadly consistent, there are some discrepancies. Figure 7
shows the number of new molecular entities approved per year, as computed from both
lists. 20 We consider the first list to be more reliable for the 1950-1993 period, since the
FDA constructed it for the specific purpose of identifying NMEs approved during the
period. We use the second list only to provide data on NMEs approved during 1939-
1949 and 1994-1998. We matched NAMCS generic drug names to ingredient names
contained in FDA new molecular entity approvals.
        Some drugs existed before the FDA was established in 1939. The vintages of
these drugs are unknown—it is only known that they are of pre-1939 vintage. In 1980—
the first year in which NAMCS collected drug data--about 60% of prescriptions were for
drugs of pre-1939 vintage. By 1998, this fraction had declined to about 40%. 21
        To obtain meaningful indicators of the vintage distribution of drugs by condition
and year, we must address the problem posed by the censoring of this distribution. There
are two ways to do this. One is to impute a (reasonable) vintage value for drugs of
unknown (pre-1939) vintage. This allows estimation of the mean vintage of all
prescriptions, including those of unknown vintage. Figure 8 shows the mean vintage of
prescriptions, by year, when the value 1900 is imputed to drugs with missing vintages.
When this imputation is used, the mean age (= year prescribed – vintage) of drugs is
fairly stable, but declines slightly, from about 55 years during 1980-85 to about 52 years
during 1989-98.
        A second approach is to use indicators such as those shown in Figure 9, i.e. the
fraction of drugs prescribed for condition j in year t of vintage greater than v0 (e.g. v0 =
1970, 1980, and 1990). The fraction of prescriptions that were for drugs approved after


20
   We also merged the two lists, by new drug approval number, and calculated the difference in approval
years recorded in the two lists. The mean and median differences were both approximately zero, and 98%
of the differences were between –2 and +2 years, but there were 5 cases in which the absolute difference
exceeded 10 years.
21
   These figures treat a prescription for a combination drug—a drug with multiple ingredients—as a
prescription for each ingredient. For example, a prescription for a drug containing the two ingredients
benzalkonium chloride and tyloxapol is treated as two prescriptions, one for each ingredient.
                                                                                              23


1970 increased from 7.8% in 1980 to 31.2% in 1990, and to 40.3% in 1998. We will try
both of these approaches.
           Table 1 lists the 50 most frequent generic substances in drug mentions at office
visits in 1994-1996.
           As Figure 10 shows, there is considerable variation across conditions with respect
to the rate of change in the drug vintage distribution. The Figure shows the percent of
1998 prescriptions that were for drugs approved by the FDA after 1980, by condition, for
conditions with more than 20 million prescriptions in 1998. About half of the drugs used
for three major conditions—DISEASES OF OTHER ENDOCRINE GLANDS,
HYPERTENSIVE DISEASE, and NEUROTIC DISORDERS, PERSONALITY
DISORDERS, AND OTHER NONPSYCHOTIC MENTAL DISORDERS—were post-
1980 drugs. In contrast, only one-sixth of the drugs used for three other major
conditions—ACUTE RESPIRATORY INFECTIONS, DISEASES OF THE EAR AND
MASTOID PROCESS, and OTHER DISORDERS OF FEMALE GENITAL TRACT—
were post-1980 drugs. We will rely on this (presumably exogenous) cross-condition
variation in the change in the vintage distribution to identify the effect of vintage on
activity limitations.


               3. Average annual number of prescriptions consume d, by condition


           The average annual number of prescriptions consumed, by condition (N_Rxj in
eq. (12)), can be calculated for two different years during our 1985-1996 sample period
from the medical conditions files of two household surveys: the 1987 National Medical
Expenditure Survey and the 1996 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey. Each of these files
contains about 75,000 condition records. We calculated the mean number of
prescriptions consumed, by (2-digit ICD9) condition, in each year; N_Rxj is the mean of
the 1987 and 1996 condition-j means. 22


               4. Prescription prices and vintages



22
     The average number of prescriptions per condition was 1.22 in 1987 and 1.04 in 1996.
                                                                                                         24



       Estimation of price differences between new and old drugs requires data on the
prices and vintages of a cross-section of prescriptions. We obtained data on prescription
prices from the 1997 MEPS Prescribed Medicines file, which contains price data for
234,473 prescriptions, coded by National Drug Code number. Using Multum’s denorm
table, we determined the names of the active ingredients contained in each of these
prescriptions. To determine vintages of these prescriptions, we matched these ingredient
names to the ingredient names contained in FDA new molecular entity approvals
(described above).

       C. Empirical results

           We estimated eq. (12) for five different measures of the (dependent) activity
limitation variable (L), and using five alternative definitions of the vintage variable (V).
The activity limitation variables are:

           main_act_limit = number of people with condition whose major activity is
           limited, mainly due to this conditio n, as % of total number of people with
           condition

           main_ work_limit = number of people with condition whose ability to work is
           limited, mainly due to this condition, as % of total number of people with
           condition

           any_work_limit = number of people with condition whose ability to work is
           limited, mainly or secondarily due to this condition, as % of total number of
           people with condition

           unable_work = number of people with condition who are unable to work, mainly
           due to this condition, as % of total number of people with condition

           restricted_days = mean number of restricted activity days due to this condition in
           the two weeks preceding the interview

The five alternative definitions of the vintage variable are 23 :

           V_Mean = mean vintage of drugs consumed by people with the condition (setting
           the vintage of drugs of missing vintage to 1900)


23
     Each of these variables is multiplied by mean number of prescriptions consumed for the condition.
                                                                                                        25


        POST70 = number of post-1970 drugs consumed by people with the condition as
        % of total number of drugs consumed by people with the condition

        POST80 = number of post-1980 drugs consumed by people with the condition as
        % of total number of drugs consumed by people with the condition

        POST85 = number of post-1985 drugs consumed by people with the condition as
        % of total number of drugs consumed by people with the condition

        POST90 = number of post-1990 drugs consumed by people with the condition as
        % of total number of drugs consumed by people with the condition

      The sample includes chronic conditions experienced by people between the ages of
18 and 69 in the years 1985 and 1989-1996.24 The micro-level data set contains about
320,000 observations. The data were aggregated by 2-digit ICD9 code and year; the
aggregate data set contains about 630 observations (9 years * about 70 conditions). The
model was estimated using weighted least squares (WLS), with the weight equal to the
number of sample conditions in that condition- year cell. 25 All models include the
following covariates: condition fixed effects, year fixed effects, mean age, mean years of
schooling, percent male, and percent white.
      The estimates are presented in Table 2. Estimates in the first column are based on
the first vintage measure, mean vintage of drugs consumed for the condition. The
coefficients on this measure are negative and highly significant for four of the five
dependent variables (all except unable_work). This is consistent with the hypothesis that
an increase in a condition’s mean drug vintage reduces the probability that people with
that condition will experience activity and work limitations, and reduces their average
number of restricted-activity days.
      Estimates in the second column are based on the “new drug share”, using the lowest
vintage threshold (1970). Not surprisingly (due to potentially erroneous missing- value
imputations in the first measure), this variable is more strongly (inversely) related to all

24
   The NHIS collected consistent data on chronic conditions from 1982 to 1996 (major changes were made
to the survey in 1997), but NAMCS was not conducted in 1982-1984 and in 1986-1988. It has been
conducted annually since 1989.
25
   Since most of the dependent variables are bounded between zero and one, we also computed probit
estimates of some models. The results were very consistent with the WLS estimates: the probit t-statistics
on the vintage coefficient were generally about 20% smaller than the WLS t-statistics, but probit p-values
were also generally < .001. Since WLS coefficients are easier to interpret than probit coefficients, we
report WLS estimates.
                                                                                                       26


of the activity limitation measures than mean vintage is: all of the t-statistics are higher in
column 2 than they are in column 1. All of the dependent variables are negatively and
significantly (at the .02 or lower level) related to POST70. 26
      The remaining three columns are also based on the “new drug share” measure of
vintage, but use increasing vintage thresholds (1980, 1985, and 1990). With only one
exception (the POST90 coefficient in the restricted_days regression), all of the vintage
coefficients are negative and highly statistically significant. Thus, the finding of a
significant negative effect of drug vintage on activity limitations appears to be quite
robust to alternative vintage measures and definitions of activity limitations.
      Now we will test the sensitivity of the estimates (based on the 1980 vintage
threshold) to two other changes in model specification. The drug vintage measures used
in the regressions reported in Table 2 were based on all NAMCS drug mentions. About
10% of NAMCS drug mentions are for nonprescription (over-the-counter (OTC)) drugs;
about one sixth are for combination drugs. The first column of Table 3 shows estimates
of the vintage coefficient when OTC and combination drugs are included; the second
column shows estimates when they are excluded. Excluding OTC and combination drug
mentions has very little effect on the estimated vintage coefficients.
      The third column of Table 3 shows estimates of vintage coefficients when we
include an additional covariate in the model: log(PREVjt ), where PREVjt is the estimated
prevalence of (number of people reporting) condition j in year t. In principle, it is
possible that the introduction of new drugs for a condition could induce people with mild,
previously- unreported cases of the condition, to begin reporting it. As a result, the
average reported severity of the condition (e.g. inability to work) would decline, but this
would be due to an increase in reporting. The data provide no support for this hypothesis,
however: the coefficients on log(PREVjt ) are generally (weakly) positive, indicating that
severity and reported prevalence tend to move in the same direction, not in opposite
directions. Moreover, controlling for reported prevalence has very little effect on the
estimated vintage coefficients. Given this apparent robustness, we base the remainder of
our analysis on the estimates presented in Table 2.


26
  NHIS collects data on subcategories of restricted activity days, i.e. work-loss days and bed-days.
Vintage coefficients were never significant in regressions of these more detailed measures.
                                                                                                        27


      Recall that the vintage coefficients in columns 2 through 5 in Table 2 should be
interpreted as new-drug vs. old-drug differences in mean limitations (LN – LO), and that
to determine the effect of a one-year increase in vintage on L, one needs to divide these
coefficients by an estimate of (VN – VO). Vintages of pre-1939 drugs are unknown, but if
we exclude pre-1939 drugs—and redefine old drugs as drugs for which (1939 < vintage <
V*)—we can calculate (LN – LO)/(VN – VO). 27 To determine the percentage effect on L
of a one-year increase in vintage, we divide this ratio by the mean value of L. Estimated
percentage reductions in activity limitations from a one- year increase in vintage (based
on V* = 1985) are:
               main_act_limit                    1.0%
               main_ work_limit                  1.1%
               any_work_limit                    0.8%
               unable_work                       1.2%
               restricted_days                   1.0%


These estimates imply that activity limitations decline at the rate of about one percent per
year of drug vintage. Previous authors have argued that the annual rate of embodied
technical progress should be measured as the percentage change in output from a one-
year increase in the vintage of an input divided by the input’s share in total cost of
production. 28 CMS data indicate that during the period 1985-1996, the average share of
prescription drug expenditure in national health expenditure was 5.6%. This implies that
the rate of pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress with respect to activity
limitations was about 18% per year. 29
      As discussed above, by combining these estimates with data on the average prices
of new and old drugs, we can estimate the cost of the increase in drug vintage necessary
to achieve reductions in activity limitations. If use of a new drug does not reduce use of


27
   We calculate this by including two vintage variables in the model, e.g. POST39—the numb er of post-
1939 drugs consumed by people with the condition as % of total number of drugs consumed by people with
the condition—and POST85, and dividing the POST85 coefficient by the difference between the mean
vintage of 1939-1985 drugs (=1968) and the mean vintage of post-1985 drugs (=1989). (In these
regressions, the POST39 coefficient is never statistically significant.)
28
   In other words, if an input improves at the rate of 20% per year, and the input accounts for 5% of total
cost of production, than improvement in the input causes output to increase 1% (= 5% * 20%) per year.
29
   As noted above, Sakellaris and Wilson (2000) estimate that “each vintage [of manufacturing equipment]
is about 12 percent more productive than the previous year’s vintage (in the preferred specification).”
                                                                                              28


old drugs, the cost of a unit increase in (N_Rx * V) is PN. If, on the other hand, there is
1-for-1 substitution of new for old drugs, the cost of the unit increase in (N_Rx * V)
would be the difference between the price of the new drug and the price of the old drug
(PN – PO). For convenience, we refer to these as upper- and lower-bound estimates,
respectively, of the cost of a unit increase in (N_Rx * V). To estimate cost per unit
reduction in an activity limitations variable, we divide either PN or (PN – PO) by minus the
vintage coefficient.
       These calculations are shown in Table 4. Because the dependent variable in the
restricted_days regression was the mean number of restricted activity days due to this
condition in just the two weeks preceding the interview, we “annualized” these
coefficients by expressing them as percentages of average 2-week restricted activity days
(i.e., we divided by .838 = mean(restricted_days)), and then multiplied by average annual
restricted activity days per person due to chronic conditions (8.3 days). The annualized
coefficients are about ten times as large in magnitude as the original (2-week)
coefficients.
       The last column of Table 4 shows the average (across the 4 vintage thresholds)
estimate of the vintage cost of reduced activity limitations. The “upper bound” average
estimate of the vintage cost of enabling a person to work (unable_work) is $2570; the
“lower bound” average estimate is just over half as much ($1357). The average annual
earnings of a full- time year-round American worker are currently in the neighborhood of
$35,000. Hence the increase in vintage would be “cost-effective,” even if the earnings of
the person enabled to work were a small fraction (e.g. 10%) of average earnings. Costs
of reducing work limitations and activity limitations in general are about half as great as
the cost of shifting the person from completely unable to work to able to work.
       The upper- and lower-bound estimates of the cost of achieving one less restricted-
activity day are $34 and $18, respectively. Average daily employee compensation is
currently about $140, about four times the upper-bound estimate. Though smaller than
the other ratio of benefit to cost, the vintage- induced reduction in restricted activity days
also appears to be highly “cost-effective.”
       Finally, notice that the vintage cost of reducing activity limitations generally
declines as the vintage threshold (V*) increases. While these differences may not be
                                                                                             29


statistically significant, they suggest that the relationship between vintage and activity
limitations may be nonlinear—e.g., that the reduction in activity limitations from
switching from a 1980 to a 1990 drug was greater than the reduction in activity
limitations from switching from a 1970 to a 1980 drug.


IV. Summary and Conclusions



        Per capita output depends on ability to work and labor supply as well as on output
per hour worked. Previous research indicates that R&D-driven technical progress (often
embodied technical progress) has been the major source of increase in output per hour
worked. Pharmaceuticals are about three times as R&D- intensive as other goods and
services. We hypothesized that pharmaceutical-embodied technical progress increases
per capita output via its effect on labor supply (the employment rate and hours worked
per employed person). If this is the case, the ability of a person with given medical
conditions to work is positively related to the vintage of the drug(s) he consumes for
those conditions, ceteris paribus. Since inability to work increases steadily with age, an
alternative way of stating this hypothesis is that use of newer drugs reduces the rate of
human capital depreciation.
        First we examined the effect of changes during 1996-1998 in the average number
of prescriptions consumed for a condition on the probability of missed work days. The
estimates indicated that conditions for which there were above-average increases in
utilization of prescriptions tended to have above-average reductions in the probability of
missed work days. The estimated value to employers of the reduction in missed work
days appears to exceed the employer’s increase in drug cost.
        We then examined, using different data, the effect of changes during 1985-1996
in the average vintage of prescriptions consumed for a condition on five different,
condition-specific measures of activity limitation, including limits on ability to work.
There was considerable variation across conditions with respect to the rate of change in
the drug vintage distribution; we relied on this to identify the effect of vintage on activity
limitations.
                                                                                             30


       The estimates were consistent with the hypothesis that an increase in a condition’s
mean drug vintage reduces the probability that people with that condition will experience
activity and work limitations, and reduces their average number of restricted-activity
days. The finding of a significant negative effect of drug vintage on activity limitations
appeared to be quite robust to alternative vintage measures and definitions of activity
limitations. The estimates implied that activity limitations decline at the rate of about one
percent per year of drug vintage, and that the rate of pharmaceutical-embodied technical
progress with respect to activity limitations is about 18%.
       By combining these estimates with data on the average prices of new and old
drugs, we estimated the cost of the increase in drug vintage necessary to achieve
reductions in activity limitations. We calculated both “upper-bound” estimates—which
assume that use of a new drug does not reduce use of old drugs—and “lower-bound
estimates”—which assume that there is 1-for-1 substitution of new for old drugs.
       The “upper bound” average estimate of the vintage cost of enabling a person to
work is $2570; the “lower bound” average estimate is just over half as much ($1357).
Since the average annual earnings of a full-time year-round American worker is about
$35,000, the increase in vintage would be “cost-effective,” even if the earnings of the
person enabled to work were a small fraction (e.g. 10%) of average earnings. Costs of
reducing work limitations and activity limitations in general are about half as great as the
cost of shifting the person from completely unable to work to able to work.
       The upper- and lower-bound estimates of the cost of achieving one less restricted-
activity day are $34 and $18, respectively. Average daily emplo yee compensation is
currently about $140, about four times the upper-bound estimate. Though smaller than
the other ratio of benefit to cost, the vintage- induced reduction in restricted activity days
also appears to be highly “cost-effective.”
       The evidence suggests that the relationship between vintage and activity
limitations may be nonlinear—e.g., that the reduction in activity limitations from
switching from a 1980 to a 1990 drug was greater than the reduction in activity
limitations from switching from a 1970 to a 1980 drug.
                                                                                         31


                                       References

Bahk, Byong-Hyong and Michael Gort (1993), “Decomposing Learning by Doing in
New Plants”, Journal of Political Economy, 101, 561-583.

Berndt, Ernst, Stan N. Finkelstein, Paul E. Greenberg, Alison Keith, and Howard Bailit
(1997), “Illness and Productivity: Objective Workplace Evidence,” MIT Sloan School of
Management Program on the Pharmaceutical Industry, Working paper no. 42-97, May.

Chamberlin, Gary (1986), "Panel Data", Chapter 22 of Handbook of Econometrics, vol.
2, ed. by Zvi Griliches and Michael Intriligator (North Holland).

Collins, J. G. (1997), Prevalence of selected chronic conditions: United States, 1990–
1992. National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat 10(194).

Griliches, Zvi, and Frank Lichtenberg (1984), "R&D and Productivity at the Industry
Level: Is There Still a Relationship?," in R&D, Patents, and Productivity, Zvi Griliches,
ed. (Chicago: Univ. of Chicago Press).

Grunfeld, Yehuda and Griliches, Zvi (1960), "Is Aggregation Necessarily Bad?" Review
of Economics and Statistics, February, pp. 1-13.

Hulten, Charles R. (1992), “Growth Accounting When Technical Change is Embodied in
Capital,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 82, No. 4. (Sept.), pp. 964-980.

Jones, Charles I. (1998), Introduction to Economic Growth (New York: Norton).

Legg RF, Sclar DA, Nemec NL, Tarnai J, Mackowiak JI. (1997), “Cost benefit of
sumatriptan to an employer,” J Occup Environ Med 39(7):652-7.

Lichtenberg, Frank (1996), "Do (More and Better) Drugs Keep People Out of
Hospitals?," American Economic Review 86, May, 384-8.

----------------------- (2001), “Are the Benefits of Newer Drugs Worth Their Cost?
Evidence from the 1996 MEPS,” Health Affairs 20(5), September/October 2001, 241-51.

----------------------- (2002), “Pharmaceutical Innovation, Mortality Reduction, and
Economic Growth,” in The Value of Medical Research, ed. by Kevin Murphy and Robert
Topel (University of Chicago Press, forthcoming).

----------------------- (2002), “Pharmaceutical Knowledge-Capital Accumulation and
Longevity,” in Measuring Capital in the New Economy, ed. by Carol Corrado, John
Haltiwanger, and Dan Sichel, (University of Chicago Press, forthcoming).
                                                                                        32


Lichtenberg, Frank, and Tomas Philipson (2001), “The Dual Effects of Intellectual
Property Regulations: Within- and Between-Patent Competition in The US
Pharmaceuticals Industry,” working paper, December.

Lichtenberg, Frank, and Donald Siegel (1991), "The Impact of R&D Investment on
Productivity: New Evidence Using Linked R&D-LRD Data," with Donald Siegel,
Economic Inquiry 29 (April), 203-28.

Nelson C, Woodwell D. (1998), National Ambulatory Medical Care Survey: 1993
Summary. National Center for Health Statistics. Vital Health Stat 13(136).

National Center for Health Statistics (1999), National Health Interview Survey, 1996:
Codebook and Questionnaires, First ICPSR Version, April 1999, Inter- university
Consortium for Political and Social Research, Ann Arbor, Michigan.

Rizzo, J., T. Abbott, and S. Pashko, “Labour Productivity Effects of Prescribed
Medicines for Chronically Ill Workers,” Health Economics, vol. 5: 249-265 (1996).

Sakellaris, Plutarchos and Dan Wilson (2000), “The Production-Side Approach to
Estimating Embodied Technological Change,” mimeo.

Solow, Robert M. (1956), “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 70 (February), 65-94.

-------------------- (1962), “Technical Progress, Capital Formation, and Economic
Growth,” The American Economic Review, Vol. 52, No. 2, Papers and Proceedings of
the Seventy-Fourth Annual Meeting of the American Economic Association. May, pp.
76-86.
                         Figure 1
              Determinants of per capita output



 Output per hour worked
         (Y / H)

  Hours worked per                Output per person (Y / P)
employed person (H / E)

Employment rate (E / P)
                                            Figure 2
   Existing evidence on the contribution of technical progress to growth in per capita output



                                 Output per hour worked
Technical progress
                                         (Y / H)

                                  Hours worked per                  Output per person (Y / P)
                                employed person (H / E)

                                Employment rate (E / P)
                                            Figure 3
    Hypothesized additional contribution of technical progress to growth in per capita output



 Technical progress               Output per hour worked
  (e.g., equipment-                       (Y / H)
     embodied)
                                   Hours worked per                 Output per person (Y / P)
                                 employed person (H / E)
  Technical progress
(e.g., pharmaceutical-
                                 Employment rate (E / P)
       embodied)
                                               Figure 4
          Industrial R&D funds as a percent of net sales in R&D-performing companies, 1997

12.0%


                                                                                          10.5%

10.0%




8.0%



                                                                 6.0%
6.0%



                                               3.9%
4.0%
           3.4%



2.0%




0.0%
        All Industries                   Manufacturing   Machinery and equipment    Drugs and medicines
                                                          (including computers)


        Source: National Science Foundation.
                                                       Figure 5
                                       Percent of people unable to work, by age
25%



                                                                                                               19.9%
20%



                                                                                                 15.2%
15%




10%
                                                                        7.9%


                                           4.6%
5%
               2.9%



0%
          25-34 years                  35-44 years                  45-54 years                55-64 years   65-69 years
      The figures are based on pooled data from 1987-1996 National Health Interview Surveys.
                           Figure 6
     Potential nonlinearity in the relationship between
        drug vintage (V) and activity limitations (L)


 L



LO
                                              slope = (LN - LO)/(VN - VO)
                                                   = bLD/ (VN - VO)




LN




                        VO          V*       VN                V
                                                                                                   Figure 7
                                                                        Alternative estimates of the number of new molecular entities
                                                                                  approved by the FDA, by year, 1939-1998

                                            60
Number of new molecular entities approved




                                            50                       List 1: NMEs approved 1950-1993
                                                                     List 2: NDAs approved 1939-1997


                                            40




                                            30




                                            20




                                            10




                                             0
                                              39

                                              45

                                              47

                                              49

                                              51
                                              53

                                              55

                                              57

                                              59

                                              61
                                              63

                                              65

                                              67

                                              69
                                              71

                                              73

                                              75

                                              77

                                              79
                                              81

                                              83

                                              85

                                              87

                                              89
                                              91

                                              93

                                              95

                                              97
                                            19

                                            19

                                            19

                                            19

                                            19
                                            19

                                            19

                                            19

                                            19

                                            19
                                            19

                                            19

                                            19

                                            19
                                            19

                                            19

                                            19

                                            19

                                            19
                                            19

                                            19

                                            19

                                            19

                                            19
                                            19

                                            19

                                            19

                                            19
                                                                                                         Year
                                                 Source: unpublished FDA data.
                                                                                Figure 8
                                                              Mean vintage of drugs prescribed, 1980-1998

                            1950


                            1945
Mean year of FDA approval




                            1940


                            1935



                            1930


                            1925


                            1920


                            1915


                            1910
                                     1980   1981   1982   1983   1984    1985   1986   1987   1988    1989   1990   1991   1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998

                                                                                              Year prescribed

                                   Note: vintage of (pre-1939) drugs with unknown vintages is assumed to be 1900.
                                               Figure 9
                             Fraction of prescriptions that were for drugs
                            approved after given dates, by year, 1980-1998
70%
                 approved after 1938
                 approved after 1970
60%              approved after 1980
                 approved after 1990

50%


40%


30%


20%


10%


0%
      1980 1981 1982 1983 1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998
                                               Year prescribed
                                      Table 1
 Average annual number of occurrences of the 50 most frequent generic substances in
              drug mentions at office visits: United States, 1994-1996
            Number of
Rank        occurrences       ingredient
        1            34,834   AMOXICILLIN
        2            32,847   ACETAMINOPHEN
        3            15,356   IBUPROFEN
        4            15,148   ALBUTEROL
        5            14,648   ASPIRIN
        6            14,530   HYDROCHLOROTHIAZIDE
        7            12,157   FUROSEMIDE
        8            11,966   GUAIFENESIN
        9            11,737   ESTROGENS
       10            10,745   ERYTHROMYCIN
       11            10,406   PHENYLEPHRINE
       12             9,674   DIGOXIN
       13             9,461   LEVOTHYROXINE
       14             9,159   PREDNISONE
       15             9,112   CODEINE
       16             9,040   TRIAMCINOLONE
       17             8,890   HYDROCODONE
       18             8,733   CEPHALEXIN
       19             8,659   PHENYLPROPANOLAMINE
       20             8,502   PSEUDOEPHEDRINE
       21             8,441   TRIMETHOPRIM
       22             8,009   NAPROXEN
       23             7,890   NIFEDIPINE
       24             7,890   BECLOMETHASONE
       25             7,888   DILTIAZEM
       26             7,736   SULFAMETHOXAZOLE
       27             7,514   RANTIDINE
       28             7,503   POTASSIUM REPLACEMENT SOLUTIONS
       29             7,345   INSULIN
       30             7,076   ENALAPRIL
       31             6,826   INFLUENZA VIRUS VACCINE
       32             6,693   HYDROCORTISONE
       33             6,686   TRIAMTERENE
       34             6,618   ESTRADIOL
       35             6,603   ATENOLOL
       36             6,502   GLYBURIDE
       37             6,496   VERAPAMIL
       38             6,375   LISINOPRIL
       39             6,361   CHLORPHENIRAMINE
       40             6,256   FLUOXETINE HYDROCHLORIDE
       41             6,108   POLYMIXIN B
       42             5,925   ALPRAZOLAM
       43             5,680   DEXAMETHASONE
       44             5,673   PROPOXYPHENE
       45             5,670   MEDROXYPROGESTERONE
       46             5,667   LORATADINE
       47             5,553   PROMETHAZINE
       48             5,475   SERTRALINE
       49             5,393   WARFARIN
       50             5,318   CLARITHROMYCIN
                                                                                                                                                               52.5%
                                                                                                     259)
                                                                                       D  S  (250-
                                                                                GLAN                                                                       48.9%
                                                                      C  RINE                        404)
                                                      R    E N  D O
                                                                                        S E  (401-
                                                  HE                                 A
                                             F OT                              DISE                                                                       48.0%
                                   A S  ES O                    T E  N  SIVE                     NP...
                          DIS  E                        P  E R                          R  N  O
                                                    HY                          OTHE                                                                  44.9%
                                                               E  R  S  , AND                    30-53
                                                                                                        7)
                                                      O   R D                         U  M   ( 5
                                               Y DIS                           ODEN                                                                 42.6%
                                  R  S  O NALIT                 , A   N D DU                     70-27
                                                                                                        9)
                         S , P E                        A  C H                         R  S  ( 2
                   RDER                         STOM                           ORDE                                                              40.5%
         TIC  DISO                  PH  A GUS,                    N  IT  Y DIS                     0-429
                                                                                                          )
   U RO                     ES O                       IM   M U                           E  ( 4 2
 NE                    OF                       AND                                  AS
                 ASES                     DERS                                 DISE                                                             39.7%
            DISE                   S O  R                          H   E ART                     O  NS...
                           C  D   I                       S  O  F                         D IT  I
                         LI                     FORM                                    N
                   TABO                                                          D CO                                                           39.2%
        T H E R ME                      O THER                    N   D   ALLIE                   0-414
                                                                                                          )
      O                                                   S E   A                            ( 4 1
                                                DISE
                                                       A                                SE
                                                                                 ISEA                                                     33.4%
                                           ARY                              RT D                         )
                             P U   L M  O N
                                                           M  IC   H   E A
                                                                                             ( 3 6 0-379
                          E                              E                                A
                     CTIV                        ISCH                             DNEX                                                  32.2%
            O BSTRU                                                    E  A ND A                    -478)
    O N IC                                                  E   E Y                          ( 4 7 0
CHR                                                        H                              T
                                                   OF T                           TRAC
                                        O R DERS                    R   A T ORY                      719)
                                                                                                                                        31.8%
                                  DI S
                                                     R   R  ESP    I
                                                                                       R  S  (710-
                                              UPPE                                 DE
                                                                             ISOR                                                 26.3%
                               S    O  F THE                 L  A T  ED D                      720-7
                                                                                                      24)
                        EA  S E                      D   R E                          I E S  (
                  R DIS                      ES A
                                                   N                           PATH                                           23.2%
            OTHE                         ATHI                          ORSO                           09)
                          R T H R   O P                            D
                                                                                       U  E  ( 700-7
                        A                                                           S
                                                                               S TIS                                       21.2%
                                                                       NEOU                          379)
                                                      U  B C U  T A
                                                                                        X A  (360-
                                              AND
                                                    S                              NE
                                        SKIN                                 D AD                                         20.0%
                                  O  F                          E Y    E AN                     TISS.
                                                                                                       .
                          S E S                        T   HE                          O  U S
                       EA                       S OF                            TANE
                 R DIS                    RDER                          UBCU
                                                                                                                       17.4%
           OTHE                   DISO                      A N  D    S
                                                                                             ( 4 60-46
                                                                                                        6)
                                                     KI N                              N  S
                                               OF S                              CTIO                                  17.3%
                                         IONS                              INFE                         9)
                           C O  N   D IT
                                                         IR A  T  O  R  Y
                                                                                          S  ( 3 80-38
                  ATOR
                        Y
                                              E RE
                                                    SP                           OCES                              14.3%
            LAMM                        ACUT                               ID PR                        9)
    ER IN  F
                                                         D   M  A S   T O
                                                                                          T  ( 6 17-62
OTH                                           EAR
                                                    AN                          L TRA
                                                                                        C
                                    O  F  THE                       G   E NITA                              0% 10%     20%         30%        40%        50%        60%
                        E A SES                     F E M   ALE
                    DIS                           F
                                            RS O
                              D IS  ORDE                                                                                Figure 10
                          R
                    OTHE                                                           Percent of 1998 prescriptions that were for drugs approved by the FDA after 1980,
                                                                           by condition (conditions with more than 20 million prescriptions)
                                   Table 2
                Estimates of vintage coefficients from eq. (6):
         alternative measures of activity limitation and drug vintage

Column:                      1           2         3          4           5
Vintage measure:           V_Mean      post70    post80     post85      post90

Dependent variable: main_act_limit (mean = 0.198)
vintage coefficient     -0.00053 -0.03796 -0.03492 -0.05968 -0.07747
std. err.                0.00018 0.00885 0.00831 0.0136 0.02029
t-stat                    -3.03     -4.29     -4.2   -4.39    -3.82
p-value                  0.0026 <.0001       <.0001 <.0001 0.0001

Dependent variable: main_ work_limit (mean = 0.152)
vintage coefficient     -0.00038 -0.03129 -0.02904 -0.05094 -0.06498
std. err.                0.00016 0.00833 0.00782 0.01279 0.01907
t-stat                    -2.32    -3.76    -3.71    -3.98    -3.41
p-value                  0.0206 0.0002 0.0002       <.0001 0.0007

Dependent variable: any_work_limit (mean = 0.258)
vintage coefficient     -0.00054 -0.03534 -0.0367 -0.0625 -0.05934
std. err.                0.00018 0.00914 0.00855 0.01398 0.021
t-stat                    -3.01    -3.87     -4.29 -4.47    -2.83
p-value                  0.0028 0.0001      <.0001 <.0001 0.0049

Dependent variable: unable_work (mean = 0.095)
vintage coefficient     -0.00016 -0.01647 -0.01546 -0.03401 -0.04806
std. err.                0.00013 0.00665 0.00624 0.01018 0.01513
t-stat                    -1.23    -2.48    -2.48    -3.34    -3.18
p-value                  0.2203 0.0135 0.0135 0.0009 0.0016

Dependent variable: restricted_days (mean = 0.838)
vintage coefficient       -0.00328 -0.17585 -0.13504 -0.25134 -0.17854
std. err.                  0.00136 0.06938 0.06523 0.10674 0.1592
t-stat                      -2.41    -2.53    -2.07    -2.35    -1.12
p-value                    0.0163 0.0115 0.0389 0.0189 0.2626
                          Table 3
  Effects of excluding OTC & combination drugs and
          controlling for changes in prevalence

Column:                     1        2        3
Vintage measure:         post80   post80   post80
OTC & combination drugs included excluded excluded
log(prevalence)         excluded excluded included

Dependent variable: main_act_limit (mean = 0.198)
vintage coefficient     -0.03492 -0.02842 -0.02643
std. err.                0.00831 0.0062 0.00626
t-stat                    -4.20     -4.59    -4.22
p-value                   <.0001 <.0001 <.0001

Dependent variable: main_ work_limit (mean = 0.152)
vintage coefficient     -0.02904 -0.02587 -0.02412
std. err.                0.00782 0.0058 0.00586
t-stat                    -3.71    -4.46    -4.12
p-value                  0.0002    <.0001 <.0001

Dependent variable: any_work_limit (mean = 0.258)
vintage coefficient      -0.0367 -0.03195 -0.0298
std. err.               0.00855 0.00636 0.00643
t-stat                    -4.29    -5.02     -4.64
p-value                   <.0001 <.0001 <.0001

Dependent variable: unable_work (mean = 0.095)
vintage coefficient     -0.01546 -0.01399 -0.01279
std. err.                0.00624 0.00469 0.00475
t-stat                    -2.48    -2.98    -2.69
p-value                  0.0135    0.003   0.0073

Dependent variable: restricted_days (mean = 0.838)
vintage coefficient       -0.13504 -0.08221 -0.08359
std. err.                  0.06523 0.05864 0.05945
t-stat                      -2.07    -1.40    -1.41
p-value                    0.0389 0.1615 0.1602
                                           Table 4
 Estimated costs of increase in vintage necessary to achieve reductions in activity limitations

Column:                  1          2          3         4          5
Vintage threshold:     1970       1980       1985      1990      average

Drug prices
PN                      $52.35    $59.08     $65.54     $65.15
PO                      $26.09    $26.66     $29.61     $32.38
P N - PO                $26.26    $32.42     $35.92     $32.76

vintage coefficients
main_act_limit         -0.038    -0.035     -0.060     -0.077
main_ work_limit       -0.031    -0.029     -0.051     -0.065
any_work_limit         -0.035    -0.037     -0.062     -0.059
unable_work            -0.016    -0.015     -0.034     -0.048
restricted_days
(annualized)           -1.742    -1.337     -2.489     -1.768

"Upper-bound cost estimates": PN / -(vintage coefficient)
main_act_limit      $1,379 $1,692 $1,098              $841         $1,252
main_ work_limit    $1,673 $2,034 $1,287 $1,003                    $1,499
any_work_limit      $1,481 $1,610 $1,049 $1,098                    $1,309
unable_work         $3,178 $3,820 $1,927 $1,356                    $2,570
restricted_days
(annualized)           $30       $44        $26        $37            $34

"Lower-bound cost estimates": (PN - PO) / -(vintage coefficient)
main_act_limit        $692      $928       $602      $423        $661
main_ work_limit      $839 $1,116          $705      $504        $791
any_work_limit        $743      $883       $575      $552        $688
unable_work         $1,594 $2,096 $1,056             $682 $1,357
restricted_days
(annualized)           $15       $24        $14       $19         $18
