                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              CRISES IN THE GLOBAL ECONOMY FROM TULIPS TO TODAY:
                          CONTAGION AND CONSEQUENCES

                                              Larry Neal
                                            Marc Weidenmier

                                          Working Paper 9147
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9147


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




Revised version of paper presented for the NBER Conference "Globalization in Historical Perspective" Santa
Barbara, California, May 3-5, 2001. The authors would like to thank Michael Bordo for comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2002 by Larry Neal and Marc Weidenmier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Crises in The Global Economy from Tulips to Today:
Contagion and Consequences
Larry Neal and Marc Weidenmier
NBER Working Paper No. 9147
September 2002
JEL No. G15, N20

                                              ABSTRACT
        This paper examines the historical record of the financial crises that have often accompanied
surges of globalization in the past. The issue of contagion, the spread of financial turbulence from the
crisis center to its trading partners, is confronted with historical and statistical evidence on the causes and
consequences of well-known crises. In general, contagion seems often confused with prior
interdependence, and crises are less widespread and shorter in duration than anecdotal evidence would
indicate. Special attention is given to the gold standard period of 1880-1913, which we find useful to
divide into the initial period of deflation, 1880-1896, and the following period of mild inflation, 1897-
1913. We find evidence of changes in the pattern of "contagion" from core to periphery countries between
the two periods, but in both periods apparent contagions can more readily be interpreted as responses to
common shocks. Lessons for the present period can only be tentative, but the similarities in learning
experiences are striking.


Larry Neal                                                   Marc Weidenmier
Department of Economics                                      Department of Economics
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign                   Claremont-McKenna College
1407 W. Gregory Drive                                        500 E. Ninth Street
Urbana, IL 61801                                             Claremont, CA 91711-6400
and NBER                                                     and NBER
l-neal@uiuc.edu                                              marc_weidenmier@mckenna.edu
I. Introduction

       As the global financial system has evolved since 1971, financial historians have

become increasingly struck by similarities in the stresses and setbacks that have

occurred in international financial markets with those that plagued earlier attempts at

creating a global financial system. The decade of the 1990s was beset by exchange rate

crises in Asia and meltdowns of emerging markets in the former centrally planned

economies. Likewise, the decade of the 1890s a century earlier saw a series of financial

crises that threatened to become systemic at times. Just as the booming US capital

markets in the late 1990s seemed to help stabilize the international financial system at

the time, so did the flurry of new activity in the London Stock Exchange promote a rise

of international liquidity in the late 1890s. Just as leading commentators on the state of

financial markets at the end of the twentieth century argued that the provision of

liquidity to financial markets by the actions of the US Federal Reserve System only

made the dangers of financial fragility more serious when the markets inevitably

collapsed, so did serious analysts in the 1890s criticize the actions of the Bank of

England, especially R. H. Palgrave.1

       The similarity between the financial pressures and varied responses of

participating countries to the emergence of global capital markets in the 1890s and

1990s has not gone unnoticed by economic historians. Bordo and Eichengreen (1999)

look systematically at the characteristics of crises particularly in the gold standard

period to determine the extent to which inferences may be drawn about the role of

capital mobility, fixed exchange rates, and financial regulation in those earlier crises.

Bordo and Schwartz (1999) have made a useful catalog of crises, distinguishing
between banking crises that interrupt the internal payments system and currency crises

that disrupt the external payments relations. Charles Kindleberger (2000)2 has provided

a checklist of financial crises going back to the tulipmania of 1636 in Holland and up to

the Asian crisis of 1997 and the subsequent Russian and Brazilian crises in 1998.

          The interpretations placed on these historical experiences of international

financial crises by the respective authors reflect, ultimately, their judgments whether

today’s global financial market needs an international lender of last resort

(Kindleberger) or a time-consistent set of monetary rules among the participating

countries (Bordo). If contagion, the spread of a financial crisis from the country of

origin to innocent trading partners or geographical neighbors whose financial

fundamentals are sound, is a frequent consequence of a financial crisis, then surely a

lender of last resort is a good idea. Injection of liquidity at the appropriate time in the

center of the crisis could forestall scrambles for liquidity from trading partners or allies.

If, on the other hand, crises spread mainly because trading partners have either weak

currencies or fragile banking systems, then credible commitments to a sound currency

and conservative banking practices need to be acquired by countries participating in a

global financial system. Lurking behind each viewpoint is a historical judgment call:

either, the consequences of financial crises are so dire they should be averted when at

all possible; or, they provide useful learning experiences that can lead to ever sounder

financial and monetary systems. Relying on a lender of last resort to bail out one’s

unwise or risky loans, by contrast, removes the incentives for developing either sound

financial institutions or monetary arrangements.

1
    Palgrave, p. vii.
       The classic account of financial contagions, Charles Kindleberger’s Manias,

Panics, and Crashes, presents a standard pattern in which speculative fevers are caused

by the appearance of new, unusually profitable, investment opportunities. Often, the

new opportunities accompany movements toward globalization as new markets or

technologies appear that can be exploited by a given country or by an economic sector

in several countries. Prices of the new assets that are created in response to the new

opportunity are driven to unsustainable heights, panic eventually occurs and investors

then scramble to withdraw their funds, not only from the original market but also from

any other market that resembles it. The renewed possibilities of contagion in the global

capital markets of the 21st century have created concerns for national policymakers and

for international organizations charged with maintaining order in the international

market places.3

       Countering these concerns with contagion in financial markets, academic

economists    have   distinguished   between    “contagion”    and   “interdependence.”

Propagation of a financial shock from the “origin” economy to one or more “host”

economies may occur through the channels of short-term credit flows if the economies

are interdependent by virtue of substantial trade with each other and substantial

investments in each other. (Frankel and Rose, 1998). Contagion, however, should not

be restricted to economies that are relatively insular, as even normally interdependent

economies with substantial flows of trade and factor movements with each other, may

be subject to contagion – if propagation of the financial shock is more rapid and

2
  Reflecting the renewed interest in financial crises and contagion, this work came out
in its fourth edition in November 2000.
3
  For example, Tamuir Baig and Ilan Goldfajn, “Financial Market Contagion in the
Asian Crisis,” IMF Staff Papers, vol. 46 (June 1999), pp. 167-195.
widespread than reactions to normal fluctuations in trade and capital movements.

Noting that recent financial crises in the late 1990s created increased turbulence in

related markets, they ask whether the increase in correlation among, say, bond prices or

stock market indices that accompanied the Asian financial crisis starting in July 1997,

was due simply to the statistical effect that an increase in variance of two variables will

raise their measured correlation. If, after adjusting for the effect on correlation of

increased variance, there is no increase in correlation among the financial markets after

a crisis, the case for contagion disappears.4 All that remains, then, is the normal

responses to each other’s difficulties that will arise among interdependent economies.

So also, presumably, the case for a lender of last resort would disappear. The force of

this argument depends whether one thinks that prior interdependence was a good thing,

enlarging the country’s production possibilities, rather than a bad thing, simply setting

it up for a fallout from a crisis in any of its trading partners. If a good thing originally,

then common lessons learned should be beneficial as well and not averted. Another

possibility is that interconnected countries are struck by a system-wide shock that has

similar effects on each country, for example, the oil shocks of the 1970s on the oil

importing countries. Whether a lender of last resort would have coped better with the

OPEC cartel than the learning experience that actually occurred depends on one’s

appraisal of the consequences of the crisis and then of the lessons learned.

       Below, we consider Kindleberger’s historical examples of international crises

and contagion in chronological sequence, asking in each case 1) what is the evidence

for contagion, judged by the standards set by analysts of the crises of the 1990s, and 2)

4
 Kristin Forbes and Roberto Rigobon, “No Contagion, Only Interdependence:
Measuring Stock Market Co-Movements,” NBER Working Paper 7267, July 1999,
what were the consequences of the crisis for the evolution of financial and monetary

systems? The crises considered are the tulip mania of 1637, the Mississippi and South

Sea Bubbles of 1719-20, the Latin American debt crisis of 1825, the international crisis

of 1873, the Baring crisis of 1890, the stock market crises of 1893, the panic of 1907,

the Wall Street crashes of 1929 and 1987, and the Asian crises of 1997. Kindleberger

picks on the crises of 1720, 1873, 1890, and 1929 as cases of international financial

crises whose consequences were especially severe and there was no lender of last

resort. (Kindleberger, 2000, p. 207)5 We deal with other, minor episodes in passing,

but pay special attention to the crises of 1873, 1890, 1893, and 1907 using new, high-

frequency data from a wide range of financial markets in those years of the classic gold

standard. These also happen to be the same international financial crises identified as

yielding analogies to today’s financial crises by Charles Goodhart and P. Delargy

(1998). As we shall see, the evidence for contagion is mixed, as is the evidence for

learning. Historical circumstances count for a great deal, today as in the past, but we

insist that learning has occurred and can continue to occur. Implementation of the

institutional reforms required to avert financial crises in the future, however, depends

upon the political will and sense of common peril among policy makers.

II. The Tulip Mania of 1636-37

       The first financial crisis of note after the European “discoveries” of the trading

and exploitation possibilities in the rest of the world – especially the West Indies, the




NBER: Cambridge, MA.
5
  Kindleberger also points to the domestic crises of 1882 in France and 1921 in Britain
where no lender of last resort acted, but these were limited to the country of origin.
East Indies, and Africa – was the tulip mania in Holland, 1637.6 Despite the attention

paid to this episode by the chroniclers of human folly, Peter Garber’s analysis of this

dramatic episode reduces it to a month’s worth of idle speculation by burgers confined

to bars in the city of Haarlem at the height of the Thirty Years War during an outbreak

of the plague. These individuals, short of capital and long on leisure, knowingly made

unenforceable bargains on common tulips for delivery in six months. In fact, their

bargains were not enforced, save at 3.5 to 10% of the original amount, for those traders

wishing to continue in the tulip business afterwards. Such capital as was bound up in

these futures contracts, however, was seen by the authorities as a diversion from more

useful investments in government bonds to continue financing the Dutch war effort.

The government’s hostility to such private uses of funds during wartime accounts for

the negative press that the tulip mania received at the time, which was has been

continued by generations of historians ever since.

       In Garber’s economic analysis, however, the prices usually quoted as examples

of speculative excess were, indeed, normal for first generation bulbs of unusual beauty

that could be used to reproduce generations of subsequent blooms, which naturally fell

sharply in price as production grew. Later markets for bulbs in normal times, whether

for tulips or hyacinths, show similar high prices for the originals and rapid declines

afterwards. Further, there seems to have been no contagion to other financial centers

from the tulip speculation as such, although the financial demands of the Thirty Years

War upon the commercial cities and towns of the European continent created

disruptions as well.

6
 Peter M. Garber, Famous First Bubbles: The Fundamentals of Early Manias,
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2000.
       While Kindleberger leads off his chapter on “Domestic Contagion” with a

critique of Garber’s analysis,7 the evidence he cites from other secondary works

emphasizes the general prosperity of the Dutch republic after the mania had passed and

prices had collapsed. The inference he draws implicitly is that building canals and

luxury residences were also silly speculations by the Dutch. Most historians, and

contemporaries, however, attribute the prosperity of the Dutch in this “golden age” to

the profits they extracted as an entrepôt for Protestant forces in northern Europe during

the Thirty Years War, 1618-48. Especially beneficial was their monopoly of the Baltic

trade as they circumvented the Spanish blockade to the Mediterranean and even

established trading colonies in the West Indies.8 The closest thing to contagion was

speculation in other commodity derivatives in the summer of 1636 in other Dutch

towns, but these, like the tulip mania in Haarlem, are attributed to the outbreaks of

plague and the quarantines imposed by municipal authorities on traveling merchants.9

       The main outcome of the financial crises attending the Thirty Years’ War,

however, was to promote lasting financial innovations, creating perpetual or life

annuities that could be easily transferred to third parties.     These were issued by

individual cities in northern Europe that were forced to pay “Kontributionen” to

warlords maintaining armies in their vicinity.10 When the armies moved on, leaving the

structures of the town intact if the payment had sufficed, the town’s debts remained but

7
  Charles P. Kindleberger, Manias, Panics, and Crashes, 4th ed., New York: John
Wiley & Sons, 2000, pp. 109-110.
8
  Jonathan Israel, The Dutch Republic:Its Rise, Greatness and Fall, 1477-1806, Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1995.
9
  Jan de Vries and Ad van der Woude, The First Modern Economy: Success, Failure
and Perseverance of the Dutch Economy, 1500-1815, Cambridge: at the University
Press, 1997, pp. 150-151.
were serviced indefinitely from the local tax base. Eventually, these were marketed to

citizens in adjacent towns and cities as well, laying the basis for the “financial

revolution” in public finance of the later 17th century.11 The lessons learned by the

Dutch were evident in their emphasis on promoting overseas trade by maintaining a

joint stock company for the Asian trade (the Dutch East India Company), unifying the

mint standards of the provinces, facilitating merchant payments through a public

exchange bank in Amsterdam, and assigning specific excise taxes for the service of

government debts issued mainly by the individual cities and provinces.12 (Neal, 2000)

The golden age of the Dutch Republic ensued, the “contagion” of the tulip mania safely

contained.

III. The Mississippi and South Bubbles of 1719-20

       Nearly a century after the tulip mania in Holland, the French and British

governments created the Mississippi and South Sea bubbles, stock market schemes

designed to reduce the burden of debt service, given weak governments that lacked the

authority to raise taxes. Both governments sought to swap the bulk of their outstanding

debt for equity in large joint-stock trading companies with monopoly privileges – the

Mississippi Company (Compagnie des Indes) in France and the South Sea Company in

Britain. Both efforts had the full support of the government currently in power, and

both were successful ultimately in reducing the respective debt burdens, at the expense

of debt holders who delayed converting their debt holdings or who failed to sell out

10
   Fritz Redlich, "Contributions in the Thirty Years' War," Economic History Review,
12 (December 1959), 247-54.
11
   James Tracy, A financial revolution in the Habsburg Netherlands, Berkeley and Los
Angeles: University of California Press, 1985.
their equity holdings before the crash. The two schemes were connected through

international capital movements, as investors from both the Netherlands and Britain

were first attracted to John Law’s investment opportunities in France from July to

December 1719, and then to the rising stock markets in London from March to

September 1720. By October 1720, however, both schemes had collapsed, thanks

mainly to the total disruption of the European payments system in the summer of 1720.

This was caused mostly by John Law’s efforts to rescue his system from the dangers of

capital flight (by letting the French currency depreciate rapidly, he hoped to induce

speculative inflows in anticipation of the revaluation that would follow), but

complicated by the last outbreak of the plague on the European continent and the

quarantines imposed by municipal authorities.

       Much has been made of the supposed contagion of irrational speculation that

swept across northern Europe in these two years,13 but recent work by economists has

reduced both to essentially rational, if premature, schemes to relieve pressure on

government finances.14 The lesson of history is not that contagion occurred, but that

the two countries suffered a common shock – the excessive debt created by the

enormous expenses of the War of the Spanish Succession.




12
   Larry Neal, "How It All Began: the monetary and financial architecture of Europe
during the first global markets, 1648-1815," Financial History Review, 7 (2000), pp.
117-140.
13
   Kindleberger, 2000, pp. 77-78; 122-29), Edward Chancellor, Devil Take The
Hindmost: A History of Financial Speculation, New York: Farrar, Straus and Girous,
1999), ch. 3.
14
   Larry Neal, The rise of financial capitalism: international capital markets in the Age
of Reason, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990; Antoin E. Murphy, John
Law: Economic Theorist and Policy-maker, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1997; John
Carswell, The South Sea Bubble, rev. ed., London: Alan Sutton, 1993.
        The aftermath of the bubbles, however, laid the basis for the rise of an

international capital market, increasingly centered in the city of London.       Most

important for the future success of the capital markets in Britain, the huge mass of

illiquid Irredeemable Ninety-nine Year Annuities that had constituted the major part of

British national debt in 1719 had been largely converted by 1723 into liquid, easily

tradable and transparently priced, South Sea annuities. This greatly enlarged mass of

tradable financial assets in the secondary market for securities in London preserved an

active stock market in London, more than offsetting the effects of the Bubble Act of

1720.

        The Bubble Act eliminated dealing in a welter of bubble companies that had

sprung up in the previous speculative boom, but does not seem to have eliminated

continued use of the joint-stock company for financing the continued expansion of

British infrastructure – turnpikes, canals, docks, and waterworks.15 The basic outlines

of the Anglo-American structure of finance were set by 1723 – a complementary set of

private commercial and merchant banks all enjoying continuous access to an active,

liquid secondary market for financial assets, especially government debt. The South

Sea Bubble proved to be the "big bang" for financial capitalism in England. In 1726,

even the Bank of England had to acknowledge the success of the South Sea Company’s

three percent perpetual annuity when it issued its own Three Per Cent Annuity.




15
  Ronald Harris, Industrializing English Law: Entrepreneurship and Business
Organization, 1720-1844, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
        Unfortunately for France, the collapse of the Mississippi Bubble there in 1720

proved to be the end of secondary markets for financial assets in that country.16 In the

inflation that had accompanied Law’s efforts to create a market for the Mississippi

company shares, French debtors had repaid their bonds in depreciated currency,

inflicting large, and long-lasting, losses on French creditors. Only a limited market for

private debt arose after the currency reform of 1726, and that was a primary market

mediated by the public notaries in Paris.17 Amsterdam’s capital market survived the

collapse of the mini-bubbles that had popped up there at the end of 1720, but continued

to be fragmented among the various bonds issued by the Generalitet of the United

Provinces and the individual cities and provinces. Only the shares of the new marine

insurance company created in response to the financial innovations in Paris and London

remained as a new investment opportunity for Dutch savers. For the most part, they

focused first on the increasing issues of national debt created by the British

government,18 and then on bonds issued by various European governments after mid-

century.19 The British French, and Dutch governments learned different lessons from

the first international financial crisis.




16
   Philip T. Hoffman, Gilles Postel-Vinay, and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, Priceless
Markets, The Political Economy of Credit in Paris, 1660-1870, Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, 2000.
17
   Hoffman, Philip and Jean-Laurent Rosenthal, “Redistribution and Long-Term Private
Debt in Paris, 1660-1726,” Journal of Economic History, 55, (June 1995), pp. 256-84.
18
   P. G. M. Dickson, The financial revolution in England, a study in the development of
public credit, 1688-1756, London: Macmillan, 1967.
19
   James C. Riley, International Government Finance and the Amsterdam Capital
Market, Cambridge: at the University Press, 1980.
IV. After the bubbles

         Financial crises in the remainder of the eighteenth century were caused by

shocks from the aftermath of war finance, but usually had quite different effects among

the financial centers of London, Amsterdam, and Paris. During the Seven Years War

(1756-63) that caused bankruptcies among the public notaries in Paris and put an end to

the efforts of the most enterprising to become de facto bankers, the most spectacular

military victories won by the British were in India. The territorial gains there and

rewards by grateful Indian princes yielded the promise of greatly increased profits for

the East India Company. Speculation could be financed in Amsterdam by drawing bills

of exchange on the basis of credits expected from the Bank of England as it remitted

bills payable in Amsterdam to support its mercenary troops on the Continent, as well as

the troops of Frederick the Great. This led to wisselruiterij, a Dutch version of check-

kiting (writing checks on a demand deposit before the check has cleared for the original

deposit), that came to a sudden and widely embarrassing halt in 1763. A chain of

bankruptcies then occurred in Amsterdam and Hamburg, where the British subsidies

had been directed. According to Wilson, however, the crisis was short-lived and

focused on the least reputable bankers. 20 London bankers, who had not been involved

in wisselsruiterij, perhaps due to a lack of opportunity or in sophistication in the use of

the Wisselbank’s facilities, sent large shipments of specie to their most reliable

correspondents.     The London bankers and the Bank of England also suspended

temporarily requests for payment of their bills in Amsterdam.            The connections

between the sources of public credit for the British government and the instruments of



20
     Wilson, pp. 168-69.
private credit for foreign trade between London and Amsterdam were thereby sustained

and even strengthened.

         A similar liquidity crisis, however, occurred again in 1772, also the result of

speculation on East India Company stock. But the only response in the Amsterdam

financial sector this time was to patch together a Loan Bank to serve as a form of

deposit insurance by helping to recapitalize merchant banks that were temporarily

illiquid. Even the connections with the London capital market were weakened as Dutch

rentiers withdrew their holdings of British national debt in favor of seeking placements

in other European government debt.21

         The learning experience of these first stock market bubbles and crashes varied,

then, depending whether we take Britain, France, or the Netherlands as our object of

study.    While Kindleberger asserts that the consequences were prolonged and

destructive to all three economies, economic historians remark that the following

quarter-century was one of remarkable prosperity for all three countries, chiefly due to

the absence of major war until the War of the Austrian Succession.22 The French

financial system was weakened permanently, however, while the British benefited from

the creation of a liquid secondary market for successive issues of its national debt and

the Dutch connection with London benefited both.23 The case for a lender of last resort

is strongest in the French experience, weakest in the British, unless one thinks of the

reorganization of the South Sea Company in 1723 as a delayed action of a reluctant




21
   Riley, (1980).
22
   James Tracy, ed., The Rise of Merchant Empires, 1500-1800, Cambridge: at the
University Press, 1990.
23
   Neal, "How It All Began."
lender of last resort – the Bank of England acting under political duress from the

administration of Robert Walpole.

V. The First Latin American Debt Crisis in 1825

       After the disruptions to financial markets caused by the French Revolution and

the wars that ensued until 1815, the London stock exchange emerged as the dominant

capital market in the world. The first foray of British investors into international

finance, however, ended in disaster with the crash of 1825. The origins of the 1825

crisis began with the withdrawal of foreigners from the British national debt after the

war. Following the final defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo in 1815, capital flowed back

to the European continent from Great Britain.          Foreign holdings of British debt

diminished rapidly, the price of Consols rose as the supply diminished, and prices of

Bank and East India stock rose in tandem. British investors used to safe returns ranging

between 4 and 6 percent for the past 20 years now found their options limited to yields

between 3.5 and 4.5 percent. The opportunities for investment in new issues of French

five percent rentes were more attractive than continuing their holdings in Consols.

Indeed, the rentes maintained a steady return over five percent throughout the crisis

period and offered a stable alternative to the British funds.

       Baring Brothers and Co., by its successful finance of Wellington’s army in

1815, had established itself as the dominant merchant bank in England. By undertaking

the flotation of the first two issues of French rentes sold to pay the reparations and

support Wellington’s occupation forces, Barings became the “Sixth Power” in Europe,

according to the Duc de Richelieu.24 From February to July 1817, Barings disposed of

three loans, the first two at a net price of 53 for 100 million francs each and the third at
65 which raised 115 million francs. Yet, according to the historian of the Baring firm,

no disturbance in the British trade balance or in French reserves seems to have occurred

— the inflow of capital to France from Britain from the issue of rentes seems to have

been offset by indemnity payments and army contracts from France to Britain.25 (What

the historian has missed, of course, is the fall in the exchange rate of the British pound

that occurred at the time; the pound was still floating after the suspension of

convertibility in February 1797.) From this success for British investors in foreign

investment with the French rentes, it has traditionally been argued, came increased

enthusiasm for other forms of investment, first in the bonds issued by the new

government of Spain established in 1820, and then in the bonds issued by the new

states emerging in Latin America.26

       The collapse of Spanish control over its American empire during the

Napoleonic Wars led to a variety of independent states being formed out of the former

colonies by 1820. Battling one another for control over strategic transport routes,

mainly rivers and ports, and over state enterprises, mainly mines, each appealed to

foreign investors as a source of government finance and as a means to substitute foreign

expertise and technology for the vanquished Spanish. Their government bonds and

their mining shares found a ready market in the London Stock Exchange, which had

become the dominant market place for finance capital in the world during the

24
   Jenks, p. 36. See also Ziegler, pp. 100-111.
25
   Jenks, p. 37.
26
   While the focus for foreign loans was mostly on Spain and Spanish America,
literature buffs may be forgiven for thinking instead of Greece, which received a loan
and much-needed publicity for its then premature efforts to break away from Turkish
rule. Over 50 years later, when the Greek government was attempting to assure the
international community it would go on a gold standard, part of its commitment was to
resume payment on these initial bonds!
Napoleonic Wars.     The loan bubble of 1822-25 ensued, eventually giving British

foreign bondholders their first experience with defaults by sovereign states. None of

the new Latin American states emerging from the remains of the Spanish empire

(Brazil remained part of the Portuguese empire) found the means, whether by exports

or taxes, to service the debts they had incurred in London. Meanwhile, they dissipated

rapidly in military conflicts with neighboring states the net proceeds they received after

the bonds were sold at discount and they had paid large commissions up front to the

London investment houses.27

       From 1822, when both Chile and Colombia floated bond issues with London

agents, an increasing number of Latin American governments tried to find the means

for financing their transition to independence from the flush pockets of British

investors.   The bonds they issued, in terms of the amounts actually paid up, as

distinguished from the amounts actually received by the governments, were the largest

single category of new investment in the London capital market in this period.28 It is

true, even so, that the amount was small relative to the remaining sum of the British

government’s funded debt -- £43 million compared to £820 million.29

       Figure 1 compares the prices of several bond issues of the emerging South

American states, as given in James Wetenhall’s semi-weekly Course of the Exchange.

27
   Dawson (1990) provides a readable account of this episode, but Marichal (1989) puts
it into a longer run Latin American perspective. Brazilians point with pride that their
bonds never went into default, which is why their prices remained the highest among
the Latin American bonds in the late 1820s. The Brazilian bonds, in fact, were the only
ones issued by the Rothschilds. None of their government bond issues for Austria,
Belgium, Naples, Prussia, or Russia defaulted in this period. (Doubleday, p. 281).
28
   Gayer, Rostow, Schwartz, vol. I, p. 189.
29
   Gayer, Rostow, and Schwartz, vol. I, p. 408, fn. 8 and Abstract of British Historical
Statistics, p. 402. These are nominal values in each case, but government debt was then
trading at close to par, so its market value was roughly the same.
At the peak of the stock market boom, there was surprising convergence in the prices of

all the Latin American bonds. It was only in the ensuing two years that information on

the fiscal capacity of the individual governments and their respective economic bases

enabled the London market to distinguish among them.          Mexico and the Andean

countries were clearly marked to be disaster cases by the end of 1828, while already

Argentina and Brazil were demonstrating their attractiveness to British investors, an

allure that would increase until the Baring crisis of 1890.

       To see if this early financial crisis is properly another example of contagion, we

have analyzed the cross-correlations of various asset prices in the London Stock

Exchange during the first Latin American debt crisis in the 1820s, which led to the

financial crisis of December 1825. Using the prices of the Three Percent Consol as the

reference security, Table 1 shows that correlations were quite high before the crisis

between the price of Consols, a general index of stock market prices, the price of

French rentes (a seasoned foreign security), and the first Latin American bonds issued

by Colombia and Chile. After the crisis, correlations broke down and, contrary to the

recent stock market crises, the variance of the reference asset in this case actually

declined.    Consequently, adjusting for heteroscedasticity actually increases the

likelihood of finding evidence of contagion, but even so the hypothesis of contagion

from the collapse of Latin American bond prices to the stock market index, or mature

bond markets, is resoundingly rejected.

       The lesson learned by the British government in this case was to make major

changes in the financial structure of Britain, reforming the bankruptcy law, repealing

the Bubble Act of 1720, forcing the Bank of England to open branches in the major
commercial and industrial cities, while maintaining the gold standard, and avoiding

most Latin American involvements for another quarter-century. If the Bank of England

acted as a lender of last resort, it was erratic, belated, and ultimately inadequate.30 In

the view of modern economic historians, however, this set the stage for the true

industrial revolution in the British economy – the beginning of sustained increases in

per capita income, increases sustained to the present day. It may be, then, that other

reforms in the financial architecture of a country can compensate for the absence of an

effective lender of last resort.

VI. The Gold Standard Emerges

         Meanwhile, European countries took note of the superiority of the British public

financial system that Britain had conclusively demonstrated during the Napoleonic

wars from 1803 to 1815. The lesson was clear, but adapting the British system to

Continental conditions was a slow and painful process, marked by numerous setbacks

as European governments clung as long as possible to their traditional fiscal regimes,

monetary standards, and financial institutions.     Over the course of the nineteenth

century, the individual European nation-states gradually moved as best they could

toward an imitation of the obviously successful British system of public finance.

Issuing perpetual annuities backed by the permanent taxing authority of an elected

Parliament was a key element in the British system, but the reigning monarchs of

Europe only reluctantly ceded authority over taxation to their parliaments.

         Constraining the growth of the money supply with a credible rule such as the

gold standard was also important, not least to maintain the market value of the debt

issued by a government. But no country was willing to follow the British example of a

30
     Comments by Michael Bordo, on Neal (1997).
gold standard, set in 1821, until little Portugal adopted gold as its monetary standard in

1854. Then it took the Franco-Prussian War in 1870 to get united Germany to adopt a

gold standard to replace the varieties of silver standards among the various German

states. France, and its major trading partners in Europe, persisted with the bimetallic

standard, maintaining a mint ratio of 15.5:1 of silver to gold until 1871. Then, the flood

of German silver on the market as the German Empire replaced the silver coinage with

either gold or token coins led France and the other members of the Latin Monetary

Union to demonetize silver, effectively adopting the gold standard as well after 1879.31

       With the adoption by 1880 of a nearly universal regime of fixed exchange rates

within Europe, a truly European – and Atlantic – wide financial market arose quickly,

which came to encompass much of Latin America (Argentina and Brazil) and Asia

(India) as well as Australia.32    It served well to finance an impressive surge of

international trade as well as labor and capital movements that remain benchmarks for

today's global market place. The trade, labor, and capital movements of the period

were clearly driven by technological revolutions in steam-driven transport, electrical

communication, and agricultural mechanization.33 All of these epochal changes placed

immense new demands upon the international financial markets as well, which in turn

expanded rapidly their depth and range of services.




31
   Marc Flandreau, "The French crime of 1873: an essay on the emergence of the
international gold standard," Journal of Economic History, 56 (1996), pp. 849-72.
32
   Giulio Gallarotti, The Anatomy of an International Monetary Regime: The Classical
Gold Standard, 1880-1914, New York: Oxford University Press, 1995.
33
   Kevin H. O'Rourke and Jeffrey G. Williamson, Globalization and History: The
Evolution of a Nineteenth Century Atlantic Economy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
1999.
       While previous analysts have focused on either the bond market,34 as an

indicator of long-term capital movements, or on exchange rates as an indicator of

credible commitment to the gold standard,35 we have chosen to focus on the open

market interest rates for three-month accommodation bills, which were reported weekly

in the Economist newspaper. While the discount rates at the public banks of issue on

the European continent remained sticky compared to the Bank of England, the open

market rates were much more responsive to market conditions. Table 2 demonstrates

dramatically how much more volatile were short-term interest rates on three-month

trade bills than the long-term interest rates on the respective government bonds. For the

five countries shown, the standard deviation of the short-term rates we use for our

analysis of the transmission of financial crises were several times greater than the

standard deviation of the long-term rates. In the cases of Britain and Germany, the

difference was nearly ten times. In the statistical analysis below, we concentrate on

correlations of movements in interest rates in this short-term capital market. It was the

short-term capital market that had the greatest volume of trading activity, financing not

only the continually rising volume of domestic and foreign trade arising from the

transportation revolution of the steam age, but also the temporary liquidity needs of

financial intermediaries.   This so-called “money market” was precisely where we

expect pressures from liquidity demands by banks to be expressed, raising discount

rates when demands for cash surged and lowering discount rates when the supply of

case was plentiful. Indeed, even Kindleberger notes that it was the short-term capital

34
  Niall Ferguson, The Cash Nexus, Money and Power in the Modern World, 1700-
2000, New York, Basic Books, 2001, Bordo and Murshid, op. cit.
market that was the usual, and most effective, transmission mechanism for the

examples of contagion he cites, which become exceptionally numerous in this period.36

       The analysis below draws upon the extensive data set we have compiled

specifically for this study. The data set comprises weekly observations on prices of

long-term government bonds and interest rates on three month, prime quality trade bills

determined in national capital markets and the discount rates charged by their public

banks for fourteen countries over the period January 1, 1870 through June 27, 1914.

(see Data Appendix for a full description.) Including over 100,000 observations, this

rich data set, now available to researchers, can be used for detailed analyses of the

transmission process of financial disturbances in the world's first global financial

market. We use it in this study to focus on the issue of whether contagion characterized

the financial crises of the gold standard period. Table 3 show the dates of the crises and

the periods we analyze pre- and post-crisis.

VII. The Crisis of 1873

       We begin with the 1873 crisis, which is considered to have started in Germany

and Austria but amplified by the repercussions in the United States, still in the

greenback period.    Table 4 shows the correlation coefficients between the market

interest rates on call money in New York and, respectively, Paris, Berlin, Amsterdam,

Brussels, Vienna, Petersburg, and three-month bills in London.37 Germany had just


35
   Michael D. Bordo and Ronald MacDonald, “Violations of the `Rules of the Game'
and the Credibility of the Classical Gold Standard, 1880-1914,“ NBER Working Paper
No. W6115, July 1997.
36
   Kindleberger, ch. 8, “International contagion.”
37
   All interest rate data for the period 1873-1914 were de-seasonalized using the
ESMOOTH facility in RATS, which is based on the Holt-Winters Exponential
Smoothing Algorithm.
adopted the gold standard formally, but was still in the process of replacing the silver

coinage. Paris, Amsterdam, Brussels and Vienna were bimetallic but suffering the

aftershock of Germany’s switch from silver to gold and the flood of silver coming into

their mints.

       The last column in Table 4 indicates whether there is evidence of contagion (C)

or not (N) between the London market rate and the market rate of the country in

question.      None of the seven cases show contagion on the Forbes and Rigobon

criterion, after adjusting for heteroscedasticity, although Austria does increase its

correlation considerably while failing the one-sided T-statistic test of +1.65. While we

have taken the US as the source of the crisis, Kindleberger might well argue that

Austria was the source. It certainly was the weakest financial sector, with the Austria-

Hungarian Monarchy struggling with the aftermath of its defeat at the hands of Prussia

in 1866 and the triumph of the German Reich establishing a gold standard in 1871.

Rather than a case of possible contagion, Austria's apparent response to the US crisis

can also be interpreted as a defensive reaction in common with the US to maintain their

gold stocks in response to German pressures.

       These statistical measures of contagion are completely at odds with the standard

story of the 1873 crisis. According to Kindleberger, the crisis was initiated by the

speculative excesses in Germany resulting from the reparations payments extracted

from France after its defeat in 1870; the German mania spilled over into Austria in

1871 and 1872. Both stock market bubbles collapsed in May 1873, with contagion

spreading to Italy, Holland, and Belgium, eventually taking in the US in September
1873.38 If that was a process of contagion, then we should have found the correlation

of Austria and the US falling after the collapse of Jay Cook's firm in September 1873,

not rising as it did. The panic in the US, which we take as the crisis point, was

followed by a worldwide depression in trade and economic activity that lasted until

1879, and which encompassed France and Russia, neither of which shared in the initial

euphoria and so were exempted from the crash.

          The cases of Austria and the United States show that, even in the absence of a

lender of last resort or any close substitute for the actions of such a lender, effective

steps were taken to limit their correlations with the epicenter of the crisis, Germany in

this case. Other unpleasant economic consequences followed from their respective

resolves to hasten deflation and return to a fixed metallic standard (the US in 1879

when the economy picked up again and Austria not until the early 1900s when it was

finally successful in shadowing the gold standard). Financial contagion, however, was

not, on our reading of the statistical evidence in the short-term capital markets of the

time, part of the picture, but the gold standard system was incomplete, still in its

formative years.

VIII. The Crisis of 1890

          The Baring crisis of 1890 forced Portugal and Argentina off the gold standard,

while leaving Britain breathing a collective sigh of relief in the financial sector.

Governor Lidderdale of the Bank of England coordinated a swap of equity for debt

among the major banking houses of London so they could take over much of the Baring

business while forestalling a run on them by their clients. But as he admitted freely, his


38
     Kindleberger, 2000, pp. 131-32.
efforts would likely have failed had it not been for the pledges of support by the

Banque de France and the British government.39 What seems surprising at first glance

is that the gold centers experienced much more volatile market and bank rates through

these three crisis years than did the smaller, more vulnerable trading centers such as

Vienna, Madrid, and Genoa. Figures 2a and 2b highlight the contrast in performance

by the respective money markets of the core and periphery countries in Europe. The

much lower volatility of both the bank and market rates in the periphery countries

compared to the bank and money rates in the core countries persisted right through the

crisis year of 1890, the effects of which are impossible to discern in Figure 2b.

                                –Figures 2a and 2b about here–

       The explanation of lower volatility in the periphery than the core cannot be that

only the credit markets of the large industrial countries were affected by the crisis; trade

intensity among the European continental countries was still rising in the 1880s despite

signs of reversal in the free trade movement that had begun in the 1860s. It seems self-

evident that the less advanced countries were using their public banks to limit access to

trade credit through informal credit rationing. Their implicit capital controls were

clearly effective, as their respective money markets mirrored faithfully both the stable

levels and the low volatility of the very stable bank rates. Arthur Bloomfield (1959, p.

28) identified the variety of informal capital controls that central banks employed when

under duress in the gold standard period, although he hesitated to draw any definite

conclusions about the policy implications of his anecdotal evidence.                Joseph

39
  Kindleberger (2000), pp. 151-2, 184-5, drawing on the authoritative account of Leslie
Pressnell, “Gold Reserves, Banking Reserves and the Baring Crisis of 1890,” in C. R.
Whittlesey and J. S. G. Wilson, eds., Essays in Money and Banking in Honour of R. S.
Sayers, (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1968).
Schumpeter, on the other hand, asserted that every commercial bank was assigned a

ration and “such ration was cyclically varied as well as currently revised.”40 The

question is whether the behavior of the periphery countries changed over time with

experience or with changes in circumstance?

         We have even more data on short-term interest rates with which to examine the

possibility of contagion from the financial crisis of 1890, which may have started with a

banking crisis in the US in October, leading to exacerbation of Baring’s difficulties

with Argentina in November of that year. Table 5 gives the results for twelve trading

partners, most of whom were on the gold standard at this point, the main exception

being Portugal, which left the gold standard in 1890. The only two cases of possible

contagion are Russia and the United States, but again this may be interpreted as a

defensive reaction as in the earlier crisis of 1873. Russia did not formally commit to a

gold standard until the reforms of Sergei Witte in 1896. The correlations of short-term

interest rates in these gold standard markets with the London market were higher,

typically, than in 1873 both before and after the crisis of 1890, reflecting the increase in

short-term capital flows that accompanied the spread of the gold standard.

         Our results can be compared with those reported by Bordo and Murshid (1999),

who analyzed the correlation patterns on government bond prices for eight countries

before and after the first crisis in April 1890 when the Banco de la Nacion stopped

dividend payments, provoking a run on all Argentine banks, and then before and after

the November failure of Baring Brothers. Only in the case of Argentine and British

bonds did they find an increase in correlations and then only after the April crisis within

Argentina, suggesting the unlikely case that contagion spread from Argentina to

40
     (Bloomfield, p. 29, citing Schumpeter, Business Cycles, New York, 1939, p. 651.
Britain, or that Argentine bonds became absorbed by the reorganized and recapitalized

Barings firm. Both their results and ours indicate that the actions of the Governor of

the Bank of England in re-organizing Barings while supporting their depositors limited

the fallout from this crisis to the English banking establishment in the short run. It may

have had more widespread influences, however, in the medium and long-run, due to the

interconnections of the various money markets that had arisen.

IX. The Crisis of 1893

       To see the longer-term effects of the 1890 experience we are fortunate that

another, more serious and more widespread, financial crisis struck in 1893. Figures 3a

and 3b show how the short-term credit markets in Europe responded to this crisis. The

volatility of bank rates among the core gold standard countries was nearly as stable

during this crisis as in the periphery countries, most of whom were merely shadowing

the gold standard at this time. Portugal had abandoned it, Russia and Austria had not

yet adopted it, Italy was about to drop it and Spain never would adopt it formally. The

real contrast in this crisis came in the open market rates, which as in the previous crisis

of 1890 were much more volatile in the core countries than in the periphery. We take

this again as evidence that credit rationing was effectively administered in the periphery

countries, implying de facto capital controls in the periphery, but exposure to external

market pressures in the core.

       Additional evidence in support of our interpretation of the contrasting results for

core and periphery countries in Europe comes from the Australian case in 1893. For

Australian economic development, the crisis of 1893 has been interpreted as a major

turning point. The large number of branch banks that had financed Australia's "long
boom" over the preceding quarter century had to suspend payments for varying periods

during the year 1893 and to consolidate services when they resumed. Despite the

internal turmoil in the domestic payments system that was occurring, the discount rates

in Melbourne, Sydney, and Adelaide remained rock solid throughout the year and the

following years. Indeed, the only sign of trouble that we can pick up in our financial

data from the Economist newspaper is that it stopped reporting the Australian data

altogether in 1894. It was in London’s bill market, where most of the Australian banks

had their headquarters, that the action occurred.

                               –Figures 3a and 3b about here–

       The crisis of 1893, originating in the United States with a banking crisis

combined with a currency crisis created by the Silver Purchase Act of 1893 included

Australia, Italy, and Germany in its extent, according to Bordo and Eichengreen. In the

short-term capital markets, however, it appears to have created contagion in only 3 of

the 12 cases analyzed in Table 6. Only the Netherlands, Belgium, and Switzerland

were affected apparently. All three small countries had essentially no correlation at all

with the very volatile call money rates of the US before the crisis, unlike Italy, France,

and Austria. But after the crisis, their correlation with US call money rates shot up

significantly. The odd thing about this crisis, however, is that the variance of the

central capital market actually fell during the crisis period compared to the precrisis

period – from 0.442 to 0.255. If we were to take the London three month bill rate as

the epicenter of the crisis instead, we would still have the same problem – a decline in

variance so that the adjustment of the correlation coefficient for increased variance

should actually be reversed, reducing the precrisis correlation. The same conclusion,
nevertheless, would emerge – somehow the crisis of 1893 increased the

interdependence of the short-term capital markets in the Atlantic trading world for three

of the smaller, but very open, economies in Europe while decreasing it for the major

economies of France, Italy and Great Britain.

       We believe this may again be a defensive reaction limited to the smaller

countries with smaller gold reserves at their disposal, compared to the major countries.

This may be a further demonstration that the pressures upon the gold standard’s

viability as an international monetary system were becoming extreme by that time as

the American and German economies expanded rapidly and increased their holdings of

monetary gold. While the discovery of new sources of gold in South Africa and Alaska

in the following years eased the pressures overall from 1897 to the outbreak of World

War I, the financial techniques developed by continental bankers in imitation of the

British example were also important. We return to this point in our conclusion after

examining the case, or not, for contagion in the following international financial crises,

starting with the one major international financial crisis during the period of gold

inflation, 1897-1914.

X. The Crisis of 1907

       After 1897, gold inflation relieved the pressures imposed upon monetary

authorities committed either formally or informally to fixed exchange rates under the

gold standard system. Not only did currency crises remain on the sideline, but the

frequency of banking crises diminished as well. The crisis of 1907, however, was very

serious and its effects widespread, extending from the US to Germany and Italy.

Figures 4a and 4b contrast the results for the core and now a much expanded
membership in the periphery. Even with the greater numbers of centers reporting to the

Economist newspaper by this time, however, the same stability of bank rates and

corresponding market rates in the periphery countries remains in sharp contrast to the

volatility of market rates in the core countries.    Moreover, bank rates were more

responsive in the 1907 crisis as more central banks began either to imitate the practices

of the Bank of England, or to take defensive measures in response to the Bank’s

frequent changes of discount rate.

                               –Figures 4a and 4b about here–

       In the midst of the gold inflation period from 1897 to 1914, occurred the most

severe and widespread financial crisis before World War I. No doubt that its origin was

the United States, but the financial interdependence already developed within the gold

standard area meant that its effects were quickly transmitted abroad. While the crisis

that caught everyone’s attention was the banking crisis with the failure of the

Knickerbocker Trust Company of New York in October 1907, the ultimate cause of the

crisis was likely the San Francisco earthquake in April 1906.41 Naturally, the physical

destruction caused by the earthquake put immediate demands upon the financial

resources of first the California, then the US economy. It was not until October 1906,

however, that these pressures were transmitted to London, but then the pressures were

sudden and overwhelming as over £50 million of gold were shipped in that month from

London to the US.      The cause was the reluctant decisions by British insurance

companies to pay out on the claims lodged by their San Francisco insurees. While the

insurance companies had initially claimed that the losses of property in San Francisco
were caused by the earthquake, and not by the fires that followed immediately, so they

were not liable for payments, they realized that US courts would certainly rule against

them. They began payments in October, dealing with six months of accumulated

claims.

          The effect was two-fold: first the Bank of England raised the discount rate

sharply, and second, when it lowered the discount rate in January 1907 it refused to

discount any bills originating from the United States. Ultimately, this cut off New

York trust companies from their usual source of funds for financing liquidity demands

in the fall. The fall of 1907 saw another large outflow of gold from London to the US,

and this time the response was felt throughout the capital market, transmitting quickly

to Germany, France, and Italy.

          Table 7 shows how dramatic this final episode of the gold standard was for the

global financial system of the time. The increase in variance of short-term interest rates

in the London market was the greatest experienced in the entire gold standard period.

The evidence of contagion is nearly universal in Europe – only the Scandinavian gold

bloc remained impervious, along with the US, India, and Spain. Forbes and Rigobon

might classify these results for 1907 as less an example of contagion, however, than of

an aggregate shock affecting all the financial centers of the gold standard. The problem

with that explanation, of course, is the anomalous case of the United States, the very

epicenter of the crisis. But this may be a another case where our statistical test is too

rigorous, as the t-statistic of 1.48 is even closer to the critical value of 1.65 than the

case of Austria in 1873. But if the US financial market was subjected to special

41
  This paragraph draws on Kerry Odell and Marc D. Weidenmier, “Shock and
Aftershock: The 1906 San Francisco Earthquake and the Panic of 1907,” unpublished
discrimination in this crisis, excluded from the London discount market precisely in the

year before the crisis of October 1907, the US anomaly is explained. Effectively, the

UK interest rate against the US bills of exchange was infinity.

       We have, then, a historical example of what can happen when a country is

excluded from an interdependent financial system precisely when its financial needs are

greatest, as is always the case when a major, unexpected, and unpredictable “bolt from

the blue” hits an economy. When interdependence is already high, attempts to shelter

the rest of international system from an idiosyncratic shock in one financial center are

likely to prove fruitless. With the benefit of hindsight, we can see that the European

centers might have been better off if they had come to the aid of San Francisco, or their

own insurance companies, promptly. Of course, if all the governments concerned were

nursing their reserves of gold in case a major war were to break out, their actual

reaction is understandable.

XI. The greatest financial crisis of all: 1929–33

       The issues touched on in our discussion of historical crises are motivated, of

course, by our awareness of the tragic consequences of the Great Depression of 1929-

33, which all analysts agree was initiated by a truly international financial crisis and

most acknowledge that the consequences – economic, political, and social – were long-

lasting and dire. Here is where Kindleberger’s argument for a lender of last resort has

its greatest force. Thanks to cooperation between Montagu Norman, Governor of the

Bank of England, and Benjamin Strong, Governor of the Federal Reserve Bank of New

York, a working version of the pre-World War I gold standard had been built up over



paper, 2001.
the years 1924-28.    While it worked, this “gold exchange standard” provided the

financial basis for an expansion of international trade and rapid economic recovery in

the major industrial economies. But when a liquidity crisis struck, basically because

world agricultural prices fell making it impossible for farmers from the plains of

Nebraska to the pampas of Argentina to the steppes of Hungary to make payments on

the debts they had incurred, there was no lender of last resort around. The Bank of

England was willing, but incapable with its limited resources, to serve in this role. The

Federal Reserve System of the United States was capable, but unwilling to play that

role, given its dysfunctional internal decision-making procedures.42

       Our view of this terminal crisis of the gold standard era is that the entire period

from the outbreak of World War I in late July 1914 until the collapse of the Bretton

Woods system of fixed exchange rates in mid-August 1971 was the antithesis of

globalization. The work of Jeffrey Williamson on convergence of real wages, which

made substantial progress in the gold standard years and came to halt in the 1914-45

period, confirms this view. The study of capital movements and the various measures

of capital market integration by Alan Taylor and Maurice Obstfeld identifies this period

as one of “de-globalization” as well. Only the brief interlude of 1924-28, which W. A.

Lewis called “the five good years” in his history of the interwar period, had any

resemblance to the global economy and its methods of operation that had arisen in the




42
  We hope this capsule summary captures the essence of Charles Kindleberger’s
argument, expressed in his World in Depression, 1919-1939 (Berkeley and Los
Angeles, 1986), as well as in Manias, Panics, and Crashes and many other places.
half-century before World War I. And that was based on a flawed financial structure

that could not have endured.43

          From this perspective, which we share with Kindleberger, the key financial

crisis was not the Wall Street panic in October 1929, but the failure of the Kreditanstalt

Bank in Austria, announced on May 11, 1931. The contagion effects in this crisis were

the worst possible for globalization as they consisted of payment defaults that led to a

widening circle of exchange controls and a downward spiral of international trade. But

in terms of our indicators of contagion, there would be little or no effect, much as we

found for the crisis of 1873, at the beginning of the gold standard era.

          Indeed, Bordo and Murshid find a similar outcome in their analysis of

correlations of bond prices for 21 countries before and after each of three crises they

identify in the 1929-33 period. These are the Wall Street crash in October 1929,

Britain’s departure from the gold standard in September 1931, and the US law passed in

May 1933 that allowed devaluation of the US dollar.             In general, they find little

evidence of contagion, especially after adjusting for the increase in volatility of the

British bond prices after September 1931. The only cases that seem to show contagion

are Greece and Finland after the US devaluation in 1933, but these may reflect more the

importance of US holdings of Greek and Finnish bonds than Kindleberger-style

scramble for liquidity.

XII. Lessons Learned from De-globalization

          Nevertheless, the lessons learned are still being discussed today. The idea that

the periphery countries always suffer relative to the core countries, a hint of which

43
     Eichengreen, Golden Fetters, is the classic analysis of the plight of the gold exchange
comes from the Bordo-Murshid findings, was articulated most effectively by Mihail

Manoilescu, a Romanian economist appalled by the damage suffered by Romania as it

tried to follow French advice by staying on the gold standard as long as possible while

rejecting offers of markets for its oil from Nazi Germany. Manoilescu’s ideas found a

receptive audience in Argentina, where Raul Prebisch, a young economist in the central

bank of Argentina, was similarly appalled at the damage to Argentina’s export

economy caused by following British advice.            Prebisch’s ideas persisted long

afterwards, thanks to his influence in the Economic Commission of Latin America.44

       After the failure of the World Economic Conference in 1933, the world divided

up into mutually exclusive trading blocs – the sterling area with its imperial preference,

the reichsmark bloc based on bilateral exchange agreements, the Japanese led “Asian

co-prosperity sphere”, and the autarkic economies of the Soviet Union and fascist

Spain, Italy, and Portugal. These assorted regional trading blocs and the attempts by

Nazi Germany and Imperial Japan to expand their regions to become entirely self-

sufficient were important elements in the economic background conditions that set the

stage for the tragedies of World War II. Whether all this could have been avoided by a

lender of last resort acting at the critical crisis (Wall Street crash? Kreditanstalt

collapse? Britain leaving gold? US devaluation?) seems doubtful.

       What was needed, in Kindleberger’s view, was an economic and political

hegemon, a role willingly adopted by the United States after World War, as it took the

lead in establishing the Bretton Woods system, based on the institutions of the

International Monetary Fund and the World Bank, with increasing efforts to make the


standard.
44
   Joseph Love, “Manilescu and the development of core-periphery thought,”
patchwork General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade become effective, eventually

turning into the World Trade Organization. The results of the Bretton Woods era,

essentially 1958-71 when it was fully functioning as planned, were remarkably good, as

shown by Bordo.45      In particular, financial crises were limited to the occasional

currency crisis when a country, usually Britain, could no longer sustain its dollar peg,

but these were confined to the country of origin thanks to capital controls so there was

never an issue of contagion. But the monetary basis of the Bretton Woods system, the

dollar exchange standard with the dollar fixed in price relative to gold, was also fatally

flawed, essentially because the costs of maintaining political hegemony for the US

undermined its ability to act as economic hegemon. After its sudden collapse in 1971,

the disintermediation created by the worldwide inflation that followed led to the rise

once again of international capital markets, this time in a world of fiat currencies and

floating exchange rates, leading to a new series of international financial crises that

began to emerge in the late 1980s as capital controls were increasingly lifted.

XIII. The new financial crises: 1987, 1994, 1997

       The Asian crises started in July 1997 with the collapse of the Thai currency, the

baht, as the Bank of Thailand ran out of dollar reserves needed to maintain its peg with

the dollar. They quickly spread to other East Asian countries including Malaysia,

Indonesia, the Philippines and, with a lag, South Korea, making a strong case for

financial contagion in the global capital market. IMF Staff Papers and the World

Economic Outlook have repeatedly referred to the Asian crisis as a prime example of


45
  Michael Bordo, "The Bretton Woods System in Historical Perspective," ch. 1., in
Bordo and Eichengreen, eds., A Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System, Chicago:
Univbersityof Chicago Press, 1992.
“contagion”. IMF loans made to Argentina and Turkey in 2001 were given credit for

preventing contagion spreading from the financial difficulties in those countries.

Further, recovery has been slow, complicated by political difficulties in each country,

although the sharp devaluations of each currency have moderated the fall in GDP.

        The most powerful statistical evidence in support of the contagion hypothesis is

Baig and Goldfajn (1999). They use the criterion that if correlations among countries’

financial markets increase significantly after a crisis, contagion has occurred.

Analyzing the correlations among the five afflicted countries for foreign exchange

rates, equity market indexes, interest rates, and prices of government bonds, both before

and after the crisis, they find strong evidence of contagion in the currency and

government bond markets.       They find mixed evidence of contagion in the equity

markets, until they control for country-specific events and other fundamentals,

whereupon contagion appears to have occurred. Certainly, the financial press drew

similar conclusions and it may be that managers of emerging market mutual funds

decided to cut back their exposures to all Asian markets, anticipating contagion in a

self-fulfilling action.

        Another argument, however, could be that all five countries were victims of a

common shock, namely the sharp rise in the value of the US dollar relative to the

Japanese yen, a rise that began in 1996. All five countries had pegged their currencies

to the dollar and in the early 1990s, when the dollar was falling relative to the yen, all

five had profited by expanding their exports into markets previously dominated by the

Japanese. Several also gained from Japanese investment in their economies as Japanese

firms relocated production facilities into Thailand and Malaysia. These advantages
turned to disadvantages when the dollar began to rise sharply against the yen and the

European currencies.     This would not have caused a crisis by itself – Singapore,

Taiwan, and Hong Kong also had pegged their currencies to the US dollar – but the five

crisis countries also had incredibly weak banking systems caused by financing long-

term property investments with short-term loans denominated in dollars.

       A more substantive objection to the contagion scenario is due to the work of

Forbes and Rigobon (1999). They examine the cases of the US stock market crash in

October 1987, the Mexican peso crisis in 1994, and the East Asian crises in 1997.46

Unlike Baig and Goldfajn, however, Forbes and Rigobon adjust their post-crisis

correlations for the increase in volatility that also occurred and which biases upward

standard measures of correlation.          Making the appropriate adjustment for

heteroscedasticity in their correlation measures, they conclude that for stock market

indexes, at least, interdependence was already high before the crises in question and

remained high afterwards, showing that contagion did not appear to have been a factor

even in these cases. If it had existed, the degree of correlation among the stock markets

would have increased after the crisis, independent of the increase in variance.

Moreover, they find that when correlations among stock market indices are adjusted for

heteroscedasticity in the previous crises of 1987 and 1994, contagion does not appear to

have been a factor then either.

       For example, calculating correlation coefficients between indexes of stock

market values in 27 countries during the East Asian crisis of 1997, they find evidence

of contagion in 15 of the cases. Adjusting for the increase in variance that occurred in
the various markets after July 1997, however, they eliminate the evidence of contagion

in all but one case – Italy. And that case is more likely due to Italy’s reentry into the

European Monetary System in November 1996, reducing exchange risk with the rest of

European stock markets, than any psychological fears overtaking Italian investors.

       Performing the same adjustment on correlation coefficients among stock market

indexes before and after two other major financial crises – the October 1987 collapse of

the New York Stock Exchange and the collapse of the Mexican peso in late 1994 –

Forbes and Rigobon systematically eliminate statistical evidence of contagion. Their

conclusion is that “Contagion is not simply a high cross-market correlation after a

shock. It is a significant increase in this correlation after the shock. The high levels of

co-movement across many stock markets during these three tumultuous periods reflects

a continuation of strong cross-market linkages, and not a significant shift in these

linkages.” [p. 35] As they find high levels of correlation before each crisis as well as

after, they direct our attention to the causes of interdependence across international

equity markets even in periods of relative stability. These cross-market linkages, they

suggest, make today’s financial markets especially vulnerable to shocks. Kindleberger

should approve of this conclusion, although he might shy away from substituting

“interdependence” for “contagion” in future writings.

       Bordo and Murshid also examine the behavior of long-term government bonds

for the Mexican peso crisis in 1994 and the Asian banking/currency crisis of 1997.

Like Forbes and Rigobon, they find little evidence of increased correlation in

government bond markets after each crisis. The only case of increased correlation with

46
 Kristin Forbes and Roberto Rigobon, “No Contagion, Only Interdependence:
Measuring Stock Market Co-Movements, NBER Working Paper 7267, Cambridge,
the Thai government bonds after July 1997 turns out to be Brazilian bonds and US

bonds. (Table 5B) Nevertheless, they do find some evidence that correlations with

emerging market government bonds do increase relative to correlations with developed

country government bonds after both the Mexican and Asian crises. (Tables 6A and

6B)47 As the current debate over the IMF’s role as a potential lender of last resort

continues, we are obviously still extracting lessons from current experiences. What

insight, then, might be taken from our findings from the gold standard period when

changes in contagion occurred as the monetary environment changed from mild

deflation to mild inflation?

XIV. Conclusion: Crisis Connections or Contagions?

       Our formal analysis above of the correlations among the market short-term

interest rates before and after the three major crises of the gold standard period leads us

to doubt that contagion was an important feature then, even under a regime of fixed

exchange rates and open capital markets. Rather, we conclude that different rules of

the game were appropriate for different players.        Countries that had weak specie

reserves and governments prone to budget deficits were well advised not to follow the

example of the Bank of England during crisis episodes. Rather than lend freely at a

penalty rate when the international markets were roiled by a credit crunch somewhere

in the world, they were better off maintaining their previous discount rates so they

could lend judiciously with side conditions to only the most solvent of their customers.

This surely inhibited risk-taking by the local banking establishment, and probably


MA: July 1999.
retarded economic growth, but it did preserve stability in the political sphere while

coping with wrenching structural changes in their economies.         It also meant that

financial crises, rather than increasing correlations among capital markets, actually

tended to decrease them.

       Policy makers acting through the maintenance of discount rates established by

their respective public banks, therefore, had different concerns, which varied from

country to country. Comparing the responses of the several countries that eventually

formed the basis for the first global financial market to the systemic crises that struck

from time to time, contagion appeared less likely (1890) when the short-term capital

markets had been allowed to operate in an interdependent, well-integrated manner

before the crisis. Only when differences in interest rate patterns were attempted by

countries before a crisis by whatever means – different monetary regime, informal

capital controls, support of fiduciary issues – then an especially severe crisis made

common responses more likely to a common shock (1893 and 1907).




47
  Michael D. Bordo and Antu Panini Murshid, “Are Financial Crises Becoming
Increasingly Contagious? What is the Historical Evidence on Contagion?” NBER
Working Paper, 7900, Cambridge, MA, September 2000.
Table 1. Stock Market Crisis of 1825

                Correlation     Coefficients
                Pre-crisis      Post-Crisis
Index                   0.794            0.521
French rentes           0.848           -0.197                  Precrisis        Postcrisis
Colombia 6s             0.881            0.328                  UK var            UK var
Chile 6s                0.910            0.190                  12.740                4.301


                            Adjusted               Contagion       Contagion     Contagion
                Correlation Coefficients         SE/PreCrisis   SE Postcrisis            test
Index                   0.914            0.724         0.166             0.282        -0.423 N
French rentes           0.940           -0.327         0.139             0.386        -2.411 N
Colombia 6s             0.955            0.513         0.122             0.350        -0.936 N
Chile 6s                0.967            0.316         0.105             0.387        -1.323 N
   Table 2. Interest Rate Volatility during the Classical Gold Standard Period,
                                      1880-1914

Country             Standard Deviation          Standard Deviation
                    (Long Term Bonds            (Short Term Market Bills)

Austria                    .375                         .712

France                     .299                         .682

Germany                    .169                         1.11

Netherlands                .317                         .917

United Kingdom             .217                         1.17
Table 3.   "Contagious" Crises during the Classical Gold Standard Period


Panic of 1873

Pre-Crisis: September 21, 1872 - September 13, 1873

Post-Crisis: September 20, 1873 - September 12, 1874


Baring Crisis of 1890

Pre-Crisis: October 5,1889 - September 27, 1890

Post-Crisis: October 4, 1890 - September 26, 1891


US Banking Crisis of 1893

Pre-Crisis: October 8, 1892 - October 7, 1893

Post-Crisis: October 13, 1893 - September 29,1894


Panic of 1907

Pre-Crisis: October 22, 1906 - October 19, 1907

Post Crisis: October 26, 1907 - October 17, 1908
                   Table 4. Crisis of 1873, Short-term capital markets.

                 Correlation     Coefficients
                 Pre-crisis      Post-Crisis
France                  0.665                      0.429
Germany                 0.144                      0.281
Netherlands             -0.099                     0.284
Belgium                 -0.016                     0.476       Precrisis       Postcrisis
Austria                 0.187                      0.680       US var            US var
Russia                  0.259                      -0.235      0.209             0.824
UK                      0.098                      0.163


                 Adjusted                                     Contagion        Contagion Contagion
                 Precrisis       Postcrisis                  SE/PreCrisis     SE Postcrisis   test
France                  0.409                      0.232              0.135         0.143     -0.635 NC
Germany                 0.073                      0.146              0.147         0.146      0.248 NC
Netherlands             -0.050                     0.147              0.147         0.146      0.674 NC
Belgium                 -0.008                     0.263              0.147         0.142      0.935 NC
Austria                 0.095                      0.423              0.147         0.134      1.168 NC
Russia                  0.134                      -0.121             0.146         0.146     -0.870 NC
United Kingdom          0.409                      0.232              0.135         0.143     -0.635 NC
                Table 5. Crisis of 1890, Short-term capital markets.

                       Correlation Coefficients
                       Pre-crisis Post-Crisis
France                0.211           0.546
Germany               0.442           0.698
Netherlands          -0.164           0.280
Belgium               0.646           0.769
Italy                 0.366           0.688
Austria               0.578           0.608
Portugal              0.647           0.462
Russia                0.052           0.711
United States         0.336           0.837
Denmark               0.047           0.275                    Precrisis       Postcrisis
Australia            -0.162          -0.489                    UK var           UK var
India                -0.302           0.095                            0.547        1.513


                  Adjusted                         Contagion        Contagion       Contagion
                  Precrisis         Postcrisis    SE/PreCrisis     SE Postcrisis      test
France                0.129           0.365        0.146               0.137        0.833 NC
Germany               0.284           0.506        0.141               0.127        0.825 NC
Netherlands          -0.099           0.173        0.147               0.145        0.932 NC
Belgium               0.454           0.586        0.131               0.119        0.528 NC
Italy                 0.230           0.495        0.143               0.128        0.976 NC
Austria               0.392           0.418        0.136               0.134        0.098 NC
Portugal              0.454           0.299        0.131               0.141       -0.572 NC
Russia                0.031           0.519        0.147               0.126        1.786 C
United States         0.210           0.677        0.144               0.109        1.849 C
Denmark               0.028           0.169        0.147               0.145        0.482 NC
Australia            -0.098          -0.319        0.147               0.140       -0.772 NC
India                -0.187           0.057        0.145               0.147        0.837 NC
              Table 6. Crisis of 1893, Short-term capital markets.

                 Correlation Coefficients
                 Pre-crisis Post-Crisis
France              0.475    -0.339
Germany             0.234    0.234
Netherlands        -0.144    0.895
Belgium             0.098    0.706
Italy               0.549    -0.656
Austria             0.438    -0.792
Portugal            0.228    0.150
Russia             -0.077    -0.717
Switzerland         0.045    0.573
Australia          -0.084    0.097                       Precrisis    Postcrisis
India              -0.187    -0.715                       US var       US var
UK                 -0.170    -0.523                           0.442        0.255



               Adjusted                Contagion         Contagion Contagion
               Precrisis Postcrisis   SE/Precrisis      SE Postcrisis test
France              0.579    -0.429             0.120         0.133       -3.977 NC
Germany             0.302    0.303              0.141         0.141        0.002 NC
Netherlands        -0.188    0.935              0.145         0.052        5.702 C
Belgium             0.129    0.795              0.146         0.089        2.831 C
Italy               0.654    -0.753             0.112         0.097       -6.747 NC
Austria             0.540    -0.863             0.124         0.075       -7.063 NC
Portugal            0.295    0.196              0.141         0.145       -0.346 NC
Russia             -0.101    -0.804             0.147         0.088       -3.002 NC
Switzerland         0.059    0.677              0.166         0.123        2.138 C
Australia          -0.110    0.127              0.147         0.146        0.811 NC
India              -0.243    -0.803             0.143         0.088       -2.424 NC
UK                 -0.221    -0.628             0.144         0.115       -1.574 NC
   Table 7. Crisis of 1907, Short-term Capital Markets, seasonal adjusted data.

                 Correlation Coefficients
                 Pre-crisis Post-Crisis
France             -0.708    0.915
Germany             0.750    0.956
Netherlands         0.065    0.955
Belgium            -0.229    0.963
Italy               0.511    0.941
Austria            -0.144    0.921
Switzerland         0.615    0.961
United States       0.788    0.952
India               0.393    0.173
Sweden              0.602    0.791                Precrisis     Postcrisis
Denmark             0.746    0.744                UK var         UK var
Spain               0.460    0.595                      0.723         3.158



                Adjusted              Contagion Contagion       Contagion
                Precrisis Postcrisis SE/Precrisis SE Postcrisis   test
France             -0.432    0.735        0.133         0.100         5.014       C
Germany             0.477    0.842        0.130         0.080         1.744       C
Netherlands         0.031    0.839        0.147         0.080         3.547       C
Belgium            -0.112    0.863        0.147         0.074         4.412       C
Italy               0.274    0.799        0.142         0.089         2.282       C
Austria            -0.069    0.749        0.147         0.098         3.345       C
Switzerland         0.350    0.857        0.138         0.076         2.369       C
United States       0.522    0.830        0.126         0.082         1.480       NC
India               0.200    0.084        0.144         0.147         -0.400      NC
Sweden              0.339    0.526        0.139         0.125         0.707       NC
Denmark             0.472    0.470        0.130         0.130         -0.009      NC
Spain               0.241    0.334        0.143         0.139         0.331       NC
References
   Agénov, Pierre-Richard, M. Miller, D. Vines and A. Weber, eds., The Asian
          Financial Crisis, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
   Baig, Taimur and Ilan Goldfajn, “Financial Market Contagion in the Asian Crisis,”
          IMF Staff Papers, vol. 46 (June 1999), pp. 167-195.
   Bayoumi, Tamim, Barry Eichengreen, and Mark P. Taylor, eds., Modern
          Perspectives on the Gold Standard, New York: Cambridge University Press,
          1996.
   Bloomfield, Arthur I., Monetary Policy under the International Gold Standard,
          1880-1914, New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, 1959.
   Bordo, Michael D., “The Bretton Woods International Monetary System: A
          Historical Overview,” in Michael Bordo and Barry Eichengreen, eds., A
          Retrospective on the Bretton Woods System: Lessons for International
          Monetary Reform, Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press,
          1993), 3-98.
   Bordo, Michael D., The Gold Standard & Related Regimes: Collected Essays, New
          York: Cambridge University Press, 1999.
   Bordo, Michael D. and Anna J. Schwartz, "The Operation of the Specie Standard:
          Evidence for Core and Peripheral Countries, 1880-1990," in Michael D.
          Bordo, The Gold Standard & Related Regimes: Collected Essays, New
          York, 1999.
   Bordo, Michael D. and Anna J. Schwartz, eds., A Retrospective on the Classical
          Gold Standard, 1821-1931, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1984.
   Bordo, Michael D. and Antu Panini Murshid, “Are Financial Crises Becoming
          Increasingly More Contagious?” NBER Working Paper No. 7900,
          September, 2000.
   Bordo, Michael D. and Barry Eichengreen, “Is Our Current International Economic
          Environment Unusually Crisis Prone?” unpublished working paper, August
          1999.
   Bordo, Michael D. and Finn Kydland, "The Gold Standard as a Commitment
          Mechanism," in Michael D. Bordo, The Gold Standard & Related Regimes:
          Collected Essays, New York.
   Bordo, Michael D. and Ronald MacDonald, “Violations of the Rules of the Game
          and the Credibility of the Classical Gold Standard, 1880-1914,” NBER
          Working Paper 6115, July 1997.
   Braga de Macedo, Jorge, Barry Eichengreen, and Jaime Reis, eds., Currency
          Convertibility, the Gold Standard and Beyond, London: Routledge, 1996.
   Clare, George, A Money Market Primer, and Key to the Exchanges, London:
          Effingham Wilson, 1891.
   Classens, Stijn and Kristin Forbes, eds., International Financial Contagion, New
          York: Kluwer, 2001.
   Eichengreen, Barry, Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression,
          1919-1939, New York: Oxford, 1992.
   Eichengreen, Barry and Marc Flandreau, The Gold Standard in Theory and History,
          2nd ed., London: Routledge, 1997.
Ferguson, Niall, The House of Rothschild: The World's Banker, 1849-1998, vol. 2,
       London: Penguin Books, 2000.
Flandreau, Marc, "Central bank cooperation in historical perspective: a sceptical
       view," Economic History Review, 50 (November 1997), 735-63.
Flandreau, Marc, L'or du monde: la France et la stabilité du système monétaire
       international, 1848-1914, Paris, 1995.
Flandreau, Marc, "On the inflationary bias of common currencies: The Latin Union
       puzzle," European Economic Review, 13 (1993), 501-506.
Flandreau, Marc, "The French crime of 1873: an essay on the emergence of the
       international gold standard," Journal of Economic History, 56 (1996), pp.
       849-72.
Flandreau, Marc and Mathilde Maurel, "Monetary Union, Trade Integration and
       Economic Fluctuations, 1880-1913: Austria-Hungary in a European
       Mirror," unpublished paper, May 2000.
Flood, Robert P., Andrew K. Rose, and Donald J. Mathiesen, "An empirical
       exploration of exchange-rate target-zones," Carnegie-Rochester Conference
       Series on Public Policy, 35 (1991), 7-66.
Forbes, Kristin and Roberto Rigobon, “No Contagion, only interdependence:
       Measuring Stock Market Co-Movements,” NBER Working Paper 7267,
       July 1999, NBER: Cambridge, MA.
Frankel, Jeffrey and Andrew K. Rose, "The Endogeneity of the Optimum Currency
       Area Criteria," Economic Journal, 108 (July 1998), 1009-25.
Frankel, Jeffrey and Andrew K. Rose, "Is EMU more justifiable ex post than ex
       ante?" European Economic Review, 41 (April 1997), 753-60.
Gallarotti, Giulio M., The Anatomy of an International Monetary Regime, The
       Classical Gold Standard, 1880-1914, New York: Oxford University Press,
       1995.
Glick, Reuven, R. Moreno and Mark Spiegel, eds, Financial Crises in Emerging
       Markets, New York: Cambridge University Press, 2001.
Goodhart, C. A. E. and P. J. R. Delargy, “Financial Crises: Plus ça change, plus
       c’est la même chose,” International Finance, 1, 2 (1998), 261-87.
Homer, Sidney and Richard Sylla, A History of Interest Rates, 3rd edn., New
       Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1991.
Kindleberger, Charles P., International Capital Movements, New York: Cambridge
       University Press, 1987.
Kindleberger, Charles P., Manias, Panics, and Crashes, 4th edn., New York:John
       Wiley and Sons, 2000.
Kindleberger, Charles P., The World in Depression, 1919-1939, rev. ed. (Berkeley
       and Los Angeles, 1986).
Lewis, Karen K., "An empirical exploration of exchange-rate target-zones: a
       comment," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 35
       (1991), 67-78.
Love, Joseph, “Raul Prebisch and the Origins of the Doctrine of Unequal
       Exchange,” in, James L. Dietz and James H. Street, eds., Latin America's
       economic development: Institutionalist and structuralist perspectives,
       (Boulder, CO:, 1987), pp. 78-100.
Martín Aceña, Pablo, and Jaime Reis, eds., Monetary Standards in the Periphery:
       Paper, Silver and Gold, 1854-1933, New York: St. Martin's Press, 2000.
Neal, Larry, “The Financial Crisis of 1825 and the Restructuring of the British
       Financial System,” The Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 80
       (May/June 1998), 53-76.
Neal, Larry, “How it all began: the monetary and financial architecture of Europe
       during the first global capital markets, 1648-1815,” Financial History
       Review 7 (2000), pp. 117-140.
Neal, Larry, The Rise of Financial Capitalism: International Capital Markets in the
       Age of Reason, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1990).
Odell, Kerry and Marc D. Weidenmier, “Shock and Aftershock: The 1906 San
       Francisco Earthquake and the Panic of 1907,” unpublished paper, 2001.
Ogden, Tessa, "An analysis of Bank of England discount and advance behaviour
       1870-1914," in James Foreman-Peck, ed., New perspectives on the late
       Victorian economy, New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Oppers, Stefan Erik, "Was the worldwide shift to gold inevitable? An analysis of
       the end of bimetallism," Journal of Monetary Economics, 37 (1996), 143-
       162.
O’Rourke, Kevin and Jeffrey G. Williamson, Globalization and History: The
       Evolution of a Nineteenth Century Atlantic Economy, Cambridge, MA: MIT
       Press, 2000.
Rajan, Ramkishen, “(Ir) Relevance of Currency Crisis Theory to the Devaluation
       and Collapse of the Thai Baht,” Princeton Essays in International Finance,
       2001.
Söderström, Ulf and Alexis Stenfors, "Explaining Devaluation Expectations in the
       EMS," Finnish Economic Papers, 8:2 (Spring 19950, 63-81.
Svensson, Lars E. O., "Assessing target zone credibility: Mean reversion and
       devaluation expectations in the ERM, 1979-1992," European Economic
       Review, 37 (1993), 763-802.
Svensson, Lars E. O., "The Simplest Test of Target Zone Credibility," IMF Staff
       Papers, 38:3 (September 1991), 655-65.
Tracy, James, ed., The rise of merchant-empires: long-distance trade in the early
       modern world, 1350-1750, Cambridge and New York: Cambridge
       University Press, 1990.
Warren, George F., and Frank A. Pearson, Gold and Prices, New York: John Wiley
       & Sons, 1935.
                                    Data Appendix
Data Type             Country          Description           Data Availability

Bank Discount Rates   Austria                                Jan. 1, 1870 - June 27, 1914

                      Belgium                                Jan. 1, 1870 - June 27, 1914

                      Denmark                                May 10, 1884 - June 27, 1914

                      France                                 Jan. 1, 1870 - June 27, 1914

                      Germany          Berlin bank           Jan. 1, 1870 - June 27, 1914
                                       rate

                      Italy            Genoa bank            Jan. 24, 1885 - June 27, 1914
                                               rate

                      Netherlands                            Jan. 1, 1870 - June 27, 1914

                      Norway                                 Jan. 6, 1894 - June 27, 1914

                      Portugal                               Jan. 24, 1885 - June 27, 1914

                      Russia           St. Petersburg        Jan. 1, 1870 - June 27, 1914

                      Spain                                  Jan. 6, 1885 - June 27, 1914

                      Sweden                                 Dec. 17, 1892 - June 27, 1914

                      Switzerland                            Dec. 17, 1892 - June 27, 1892

                      United Kingdom                         Jan. 1, 1870 - June 27, 1914


Open Market Rates     Austria                                Jan. 1, 1870 - June 27, 1914
(3 month bills)
                      Australia        discount rate for     May 10, 1884 - Dec. 30, 1893
                                       Australian banks
                                       operating in London

                      Belgium                                Jan. 1, 1870 - June 27, 1914

                      Denmark                                May 10, 1884 - June 27, 1914

                      France                                 Jan. 1, 1870 - June 27, 1914

                      Germany          Berlin open           Jan. 1, 1870 - June 27, 1914
                                       market rate

                      India            Bombay bank rate      May 10, 1884 - June 27, 1914

                      Italy            Genoa open            Jan. 24, 1885 - June 27, 1914
                                              market rate

                      Netherlands                            Jan. 1, 1870 - June 27, 1914
                     Norway                                     Jan. 6, 1894 - June 27, 1914

                     Portugal                                   Jan. 24, 1885 - June 27, 1914

                     Russia           St. Petersburg             Feb. 4, 1871 - June 27, 1914
                                                open market rate

                     Spain                                      Jan. 6, 1885 - June 27, 1914

                     Sweden                                     Dec. 17, 1892 - June 27, 1914

                     Switzerland                                Dec. 17, 1892 - June 27, 1892

                     United Kingdom                             Jan. 1, 1870 - June 27, 1914

                     United States    call money rate in        Nov. 27, 1880 - June 27, 1914
                                      New York City


Long-Term Bond Rates Austria          5% Silver Rentes          Jan. 2, 1880 - Dec. 29, 1899

                                      4% Gold Rentes            Jan 2. 1880 - Dec. 1913

                     Belgium          3% Rentes                 Jan. 16, 1885 - Oct. 21, 1898

                     France           3% Rentes                 Jan. 2 1880 - July 31, 1914

                     Germany          Prussian Consols          Dec. 31, 1880 - Dec. 31, 1909
                                      (4% converted to 3.5%
                                      April 22, 1898)

                                      3% Imperial               Aug. 24, 1894 - Dec. 26, 1913

                                      4% Imperial               November 23, 1894 - Dec.
26,1913

                     Italy            4%                        Jan. 2, 1880 - Dec. 26, 1913

                     Netherlands      3%                        Aug. 25, 1882 - Dec. 26, 1913

                     Russia           5%                        Jan. 2. 1880 - July 31, 1914

                     United Kingdom 3%/2.75% Consols            Jan. 2, 1880 - July 31, 1914

                     United States    4%                        Jan. 2, 1880 - Aug. 9, 1907

                                      4% (due 1925)             Jan. 6, 1905 - July 31, 1914
"Contagious" Crises during the Classical Gold Standard Period


Panic of 1873

Pre-Crisis: September 13, 1872 - September 13, 1873                  (n=52)

Post-Crisis: September 20, 1873 - September 20, 1874        (n=52)


Baring Crisis of 1890

Pre-Crisis: September 27,1889 - September 27, 1890          (n=52)

Post-Crisis: October 4, 1890 - October 4, 1891     (n=52)


US Banking Crisis of 1893

Pre-Crisis: September 30, 1892 - September 30, 1893         (n=52)

Post-Crisis: October 7, 1893 - October 7, 1894     (n=52)


Panic of 1907

Pre-Crisis: October 19, 1906 - October 19, 1907             (n=52)

Post Crisis: October 26, 1907 - October 26, 1908   (n=52)
                Figure 1.Yields of Latin Bonds
                              1822 - 1827
 30


 25


 20


 15


 10


  5


   0
 08-Mar-22     02-May-23     25-Jun-24     19-Aug-25     13-Oct-26    07-Dec-27
        04-Oct-22     28-Nov-23     21-Jan-25     17-Mar-26     11-May-27

French        Brazil         Argentine      Columbia       Chile          Peru
                                                                Figure 2a.
                             Coefficients of Variation - Core: London, Paris, Berlin, Amsterdam, Brussels
                                                             Crisis of 1890


0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Bank
0.20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Market

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
                                                                                        Mar-90
                Feb-89




                                                                               Feb-90




                                                                                                                                     Nov-90


                                                                                                                                                       Feb-91
                         Apr-89




                                                                                                 May-90




                                                                                                                                                                Apr-91
       Jan-89




                                  Jun-89


                                                    Sep-89


                                                                      Dec-89




                                                                                                          Jun-90
                                                                                                                   Aug-90




                                                                                                                                              Jan-91




                                                                                                                                                                         Jun-91


                                                                                                                                                                                           Sep-91


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec-91
                                           Jul-89




                                                                                                                                                                                  Jul-91
                                                             Oct-89




                                                                                                                            Oct-90




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct-91
          0.00
                 0.05
                        0.10
                               0.15
                                           0.20
                                                      0.25
                                                             0.30
                                                                    0.35
                                                                           0.40
Jan-89
Feb-89
Apr-89
Jun-89
 Jul-89
Sep-89
Oct-89
Dec-89
Feb-90
Mar-90
May-90
Jun-90
Aug-90
Oct-90
                                                                                               Figure 2b.

                                                                                             Crisis of 1890




Nov-90
Jan-91
Feb-91
                                                                                  Coefficients of Variation - Periphery




Apr-91
Jun-91
 Jul-91
Sep-91
Oct-91
Dec-91
                                               Bank
                                      Market
                                                             Figure 3a.
                          Coefficients of Variation - Core: London, Paris, Berlin, Amsterdam, Brussels
                                                          Crisis of 1893


0.70


0.60


0.50
                                                                                                 Bank
0.40                                                                                             Market


0.30


0.20


0.10


0.00                                                                                                                                 Nov-93
                                                                                        Mar-93
                Feb-92




                                                                                                                                                       Feb-94
                         Apr-92
                                  May-92




                                                                                                 May-93




                                                                                                                                                                Apr-94
       Jan-92




                                           Jul-92
                                                    Sep-92


                                                                      Dec-92
                                                                               Jan-93




                                                                                                          Jun-93
                                                                                                                   Aug-93
                                                                                                                            Sep-93


                                                                                                                                              Jan-94




                                                                                                                                                                         Jun-94
                                                                                                                                                                                  Jul-94
                                                                                                                                                                                           Sep-94


                                                                                                                                                                                                             Dec-94
                                                             Oct-92




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Oct-94
          0.00
                 0.10
                        0.20
                               0.30
                                              0.40
                                                     0.50
                                                            0.60
                                                                   0.70
Jan-92
Feb-92
Apr-92
May-92
 Jul-92
Sep-92
Oct-92
Dec-92
Jan-93
Mar-93
May-93
Jun-93
Aug-93
Sep-93
                                                                                       Figure 3b.

                                                                                     Crisis of 1893




Nov-93
Jan-94
Feb-94
                                                                          Coefficients of Variation - Periphery




Apr-94
Jun-94
 Jul-94
Sep-94
Oct-94
Dec-94
                                           Bank
                                  Market
                                                                             Figure 4a.
                                           Coefficients of Variation - Core: London, Paris, Berlin, Amsterdam, Brussels
                                                                           Crisis of 1907




0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

                                                                                                                                                                           Bank
0.20
                                                                                                                                                                           Market

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00
                                                      Nov-06




                                                                                                            Nov-07




                                                                                                                                                                  Nov-08
                Mar-06




                                                                        Mar-07




                                                                                                                              Mar-08
                                             Sep-06




                                                                                                   Sep-07




                                                                                                                                                         Sep-08
       Jan-06




                                                               Jan-07




                                                                                                                     Jan-08
                         May-06




                                                                                 May-07




                                                                                                                                       May-08
                                  Jul-06




                                                                                          Jul-07




                                                                                                                                                Jul-08
          0.00
                 0.05
                        0.10
                               0.15
                                         0.20
                                                      0.25
                                                             0.30
                                                                    0.35
                                                                           0.40
Jan-06

Mar-06

May-06

 Jul-06

Sep-06

Nov-06

Jan-07

Mar-07

May-07

 Jul-07

Sep-07
                                                                                               Figure 4b.

                                                                                             Crisis of 1907




Nov-07

Jan-08

Mar-08
                                                                                  Coefficients of Variation - Periphery




May-08

 Jul-08

Sep-08

Nov-08
                                               Bank
                                      Market
