                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     THE SOCIAL MULTIPLIER

                                           Edward L. Glaeser
                                           Bruce I. Sacerdote
                                          Jose A. Scheinkman

                                          Working Paper 9153
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9153


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Edward L. Glaeser, Bruce I. Sacerdote, and Jose A. Scheinkman. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Social Multiplier
Edward L. Glaeser, Bruce I. Sacerdote, and Jose A. Scheinkman
NBER Working Paper No. 9153
September 2002

                                            ABSTRACT

    In many cases, aggregate data is used to make inferences about individual level behavior. If
there are social interactions in which one person’s actions influence his neighbor’s incentives or
information, then these inferences are inappropriate. The presence of positive social interactions,
or strategic complementarities, implies the existence of a social multiplier where aggregate
relationships will overstate individual elasticities. We present a brief model and then estimate the
size of the social multiplier in three areas: the impact of education on wages, the impact of
demographics on crime and group membership among Dartmouth roommates. In all three areas
there appears to be a significant social multiplier.


Edward L. Glaeser                                      Bruce I. Sacerdote
Department of Economics                                6106 Rockefeller Hall
315 A Littauer Center                                  Department of Economics
Harvard University                                     Dartmouth College
Cambridge, MA 02138                                    Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER                                               and NBER
eglaeser@harvard.edu                                   bruce.i.sacerdote@dartmouth.edu

Jose A. Scheinkman
Princeton University
    I.       Introduction


Empirical work in the social sciences frequently attempts to infer individual behavior
from statistical work on aggregates. Individual labor supply is inferred from changes in
the tax schedule. Crime deterrence elasticities are inferred from changes in policing or
punishment. Changes in policies are often seen as our best means of inferring underlying
economic behavior because variation in these policies is, in some cases, orthogonal to
individual-specific error terms.


However, using aggregate variation to infer individual-level parameters is problematic
when there are positive (or negative) social interactions. If one person’s proclivity
towards crime influences his neighbor’s criminal behavior, then a change in policing will
have both a direct effect on crime and an indirect effect through social influence. The
presence of positive spillovers or strategic complementarities creates a “social multiplier”
where aggregate coefficients will be greater than individual coefficients (as described by
Becker and Murphy, 2000). A large body of recent work (including Katz, Kling and
Liebman, 2001, and Ludwig, Hirschfeld and Duncan, 2001) seems to confirm the
existence of these spillovers in a number of areas. As such, an estimated aggregate
elasticity incorporates both the true individual level response and effects stemming from
social interactions.1


For many purposes, particularly policy-related ones, researchers actually want the
aggregate coefficient that includes both the individual level response and the social
multiplier. In that case, aggregate empirical work is appropriate. Still, it is crucial that
the empirical work is done at the same level of aggregation as the ultimate policy. For
example, if we want to know the effect of a national change in crime policy, but we work
with city-level data, then we will miss the impact of all cross-city interactions. To
adequately infer state-level effects from city-level coefficients, we need to know both the



1
  There is a long literature that discusses the so-called general equilibrium effects which may be missing
from some econometric estimates. In a sense, positive externalities are just one type of general equilibrium
effect.


                                                     2
power of social interactions and the degree to which those interactions decay across
jurisdictions.


We refer to the estimated ratio of aggregate coefficients to individual coefficients as “the
social multiplier.”2 So, if wages are regressed on years of schooling at the individual and
at the state level, the ratio of these two coefficients is the social multiplier. It is also true
that the same social multiplier can be estimated by regressing aggregate outcomes on
aggregate predicted outcomes, where the predictions are based on individual level
regressions. In this paper, we present a theoretical framework which maps this estimated
social multiplier with underlying social influence variables.


Our theoretical framework tells us that if an individual’s outcome rises “x” percent as his
neighbor’s average outcome, then the social multiplier roughly equals 1/(1-x) for large
enough groups. As such, big social multipliers do not tend to occur unless the value of
“x” is .33 or higher.           If the spillover works through the neighbors’ exogenous
characteristics, not through their outcomes (i.e. your propensity for crime is influenced by
your neighbors’ parents’ characteristics, not by their crime level), then typically the social
multiplier is smaller.


The presence of sorting will also impact the measured social multiplier.             If there is
sorting on observables and positive social interactions, then the individual level
coefficient will overstate the true individual level relationship. The intuition of this claim
is that with sorting, one person’s education will be correlated with his neighbor’s
education and the effect of my education (in an individual-level regression) will overstate
the true impact of education because it includes spillovers. The presence of this bias will
mean that the measured social multiplier will tend to underestimate the true level of
social interactions. On the other hand, correlation between aggregate observables and
aggregate unobservables will cause the measured social multiplier to overstate the true
level of social interactions.




                                               3
We also introduce a model where social influence exponentially decays with social
influence. This introduces a two-parameter model which can capture both the level of
social interactions and the degree to which social interactions become less important with
social distance. The downside of this exponential social influence model is that it is not
good for dealing with very large social groupings, such as counties and states:
exponential decay generally will mean that people do not significantly interact with
people who are outside of their county.


We then apply our framework to three different contexts. First, we follow Sacerdote
(2001) and examine the magnitude of these interactions among Dartmouth college
roommates. The Dartmouth roommates data have the advantage of little unobserved
heterogeneity and randomized social groups.                    In this case, we find weak social
interactions in academic achievement, but strong interactions in social group
membership. We estimate a social multiplier of 1.4 in groups of eight (floors) and 2.2 in
groups of 28 (dorms). These estimates are compatible with a weak degree of social
influence that then decays very slowly.


Second, we follow Levitt (1999) and look at the influence of demographics on the crime
rate. Levitt (1999) argues that the coefficients on age from individual level regressions
are far too small to suggest large swings in crime that are related to aggregate changes in
the demographic structure.          For example, these coefficients tell us that the baby boom
can at best explain one-fifth of the rise in crime between 1960 and 1975. While this
argument is correct, social interactions may help us to understand why demographics
appear to be related to crime in time series regressions. Using crime data we find
significant evidence of a social multiplier of 1.7 at the county level, 2.8 at the state level
and 8.2 at the nation level. These are extremely high estimates and we don’t necessarily
believe in the level of social interactions that they imply. Still, they certainly suggest that
the aggregation level is crucial.

2
 In fact, there is a slight difference between the Becker and Murphy definition of social multiplier and our
own, although our definition represents a monotonic transformation of the social multiplier as they define



                                                     4
Finally, we follow Rauch (1993) and Acemoglu and Angrist (1999) and turn to the issue
of human capital spillovers. In this case, we use individual coefficients to create a
predicted wage for an aggregate (such as a state or Public Use Microsample Area, or
PUMA) and then regress actual wage on predicted wage. Using this approach, we
estimate a social multiplier of 1.67 at the PUMA level and 2.17 at the state level.


We agree with Manski’s (1993) generally pessimistic view of the ability to identify social
interaction parameters, at least in the absence of true randomization. However, our
results suggest that social interactions may be large, and that coefficients at different
levels of aggregation differ significantly, either because of social interactions or because
of non-random sorting across different areas. While we remain cautious in interpreting
our parameter estimates, we do believe that our evidence casts doubt on the use of
aggregate changes to make inferences about individual level parameters.


    II.      A Framework


We follow Glaeser and Scheinkman (2002), and present a simple framework which will
connect coefficients from regressions run at different levels of aggregation with
underlying social interaction parameters. The simplest algebraic representation of the
social multiplier can be shown with a global interaction model, where one person’s action
depends on the average action in a group.


                                                                          γ
One particularly simple model of this type is that Ai = θ i +                     ∑ A j , where Ai is
                                                                         N − 1 j∈G ( i ), j ≠i
the action of person i, G(i) refers to person i’s group which is of size N, γ is the social
interaction parameter and θ i reflects the exogenous forces increases the level of the




it. Goldin and Katz (2002) use the term in a way that could encompass either definition.


                                                    5
action.3       We assume that groups represent a non-overlapping partition of the entire
economy, so that if i ∈ G ( j ) then               j ∈ G (i ) .   In general, we will assume that

θ i = ∑k β k X ki + ε i , where X ki is the value of attribute k for person i and β k is the direct

impact of attribute k and ε i is a person-specific random effect.


                                                                  1                        1 1
This            model           implies          that
                                                                  N
                                                                       ∑A
                                                                      j∈G ( i )
                                                                                  j   =
                                                                                          1− γ N
                                                                                                      ∑θ
                                                                                                     j∈G ( i )
                                                                                                                 j           and

                   γ2               γ                                         γ2
Ai = θ i 1 +
                                 +                  ∑θ j . The term (1 − γ )( N − 1 + γ ) captures
          (1 − γ )( N − 1 + γ )  N − 1 + γ        j∈G ( i ), j ≠ i


the fact that if person A has an intrinsically higher propensity to do an activity this will
both have a direct impact on his activity level, but will also indirectly impact his activity
through its influence on the other individuals in the group. When N is large, this term
will be negligible (as long as γ is bounded away from one). When N=2, this term
              γ
becomes           , which is greater than one whenever γ > .5 .
             1− γ


The simplest case occurs when the values of θ i are independent within a group, and

where the included X ki regressors are independent of the error term. In that case, an

individual-level regression where Ai is regressed on an exogenous variable X ki yields a

                                       γ2           
coefficient estimate of β k 1 +                     . An aggregate regression where group
                              (1 − γ )( N − 1 + γ ) 
level average outcomes are regressed on group level average X ki characteristics yields a

                              βk
coefficient estimate of           .
                             1− γ


We define the social multiplier as the ratio of the group level coefficient to the individual
level coefficient, or the amount that the coefficient rises as we move from individual to


                                                                                          γ                      Ai2
3
    This equation can be justified by assuming that people maximize Ai θ i +
                                                                                                 ∑ j −    A
                                                                                          N − 1 j∈G ( i ), j ≠i  2
                                                                                                                         .
                                                                             

                                                        6
                                                                                    1
group level regressions. In this case, the social multiplier will equal
                                                                                    γ2
                                                                          1− γ +
                                                                                 (N −1 + γ )
          N −1+ γ                                                    1
or                        . As N grows large, this value approaches      . When γ is small,
     (1 − γ )( N − 1) + γ                                           1− γ
this coefficient will be close to one and as γ approaches one, the social multiplier
approaches infinity.


The social multiplier can also be estimated by regressing group level outcomes on the
group level outcome that would be predicted using individual coefficients.               If this
procedure is followed, the coefficient estimated by regressing average community
                                γ2            
outcome on       ∑k k  (1 − γ )( N − 1 + γ )  j∈∑
                   β   1 +                           X kj / N , the outcome predicted by
                                               G (i )
                                                                                    1
coefficients estimated using individual level regressions, again equals
                                                                                      γ2
                                                                          1− γ +
                                                                                   (N −1 + γ )
.


One generalization of our assumption is to assume that there is sorting across groups, at
least on the basis of observables.        To include sorting within the framework, we
X ki = X k + µ ki , where X k represents a group level average and µ ki represents an
individual specific component which is independent across people. We maintain the
assumption that the values of X ki are independent across characteristics (although not

                                                                                    Var ( X k )
across people) and independent of the error term. We use the notation σ =                        ,
                                                                                    Var ( X ki )
where σ represents the share of the variation in observable characteristics which is due
to the group level component.


This new assumption does not change the group level regression coefficient, which
           βk
remains        . However, allowing a group-specific correlation of characteristics does
          1− γ


                                             7
influence the individual level coefficients because now the individual-level coefficient
includes the impact of a correlation between the individual’s X ki value and the X kj

values of his neighbors. If we see a correlation between the school outcomes of children
and the schooling of their parents, this may all occur because parental schooling
influences children’s outcomes directly. Alternatively, it may in part reflect the fact that
well-schooled parents live together and as a result, the children of the more educated
have more successful peers.


The    estimated       coefficient      from an individual             level    regression      now     equals
      γ 2 + σγ (1 − γ )( N − 1) 
β k 1 +                         . The bias due to the cross-person correlation roughly
         (1 − γ )( N − 1 + γ ) 

equals σγ --the product of the degree of sorting and the amount of social influence. If
either sorting or social influence is unimportant, then this term is small and can be
ignored, but we think in many cases, both of these terms will be big.


                                                          N −1+ γ
The social multiplier now equals                                                  , which will approach
                                                (1 − γ )( N − 1)(1 + σγ ) + γ
        1
                  as N gets large. If we know the value of σ , then we can infer the size of
(1 − γ )(1 + σγ )
the social influence parameter γ . This formula implies that for high levels of N, the
presence of sorting on observables will always cause the social multiplier to decline. As
such, the measured social multiplier will tend to understate the true level of social
interactions, primarily because the individual level coefficient is biased upwards.4


We now consider the case where there is sorting across neighborhoods on the basis of
unobservable characteristics. To formalize this, we assume that ε i = ε + ν i , where ε


4
 If the social multiplier is estimated by regressing an aggregate outcome on a predicted aggregate outcome,
where the predicted value is formed using individual level coefficients then the estimated multiplier will
                        N −1+ γ                                                         Var ( X k )
again equal                                 , but in this case it is necessary that σ =              for each of
              (1 − γ )( N − 1)(1 + σγ ) + γ                                             Var ( X ki )
the observable variables.


                                                       8
represents a community specific average level of the unobserved shock. Furthermore, we
assume that ε and the X k in question covary.                    In particular, we assume that
     Cov( X k , ε )
λ=                  . The person-specific shocks are still assumed to be independent of each
      Var ( X k )
other.


In       this    case,       the       person         specific     coefficient        will   equal
      γ 2 + σγ (1 − γ )( N − 1)          N −1
β k 1 +                         + λσγ         .        The bias created by sorting on
         (1 − γ )( N − 1 + γ )          N −1+ γ

observables will approximately equal λσγ as N grows large. The aggregate coefficient

                   1              σN      
now becomes             βk + λ             . The social multiplier, in this case, equals:
                  1− γ         σN + 1 − σ 
                  λ        σN                                λ
     ( N − 1)1 +                                      1+
               β k σN + 1 − σ             , or
                                                              βk
                                                                         as N gets large.
                             λ                                   σγλ
( N − 1)1 − γ + σγ 1 − γ +       + γ      (1 − γ )(1 + σγ ) +
                               β                                     βk
                               k 




The social multiplier will rise with λ if and only if 1 > γ (1 + σγ ) . The reason that the
social multiplier can either rise or fall with this form of sorting is that sorting impacts
both the micro and macro coefficients. If 1 > γ (1 + σγ ) then the macro-coefficient will
increase with sorting more than the micro-coefficient and an increase in sorting causes
the social multiplier to rise. If this condition does not hold, which really only occurs
when the form of social interactions are very intense (and the degree of sorting on
observables is quite high), then increases in sorting mean the micro-coefficient increases
significantly through the sorting related bias and this causes the coefficient to increase.


In general, we will rarely know the value of λ . In some cases, such as the Dartmouth
College Roommates data set described below, we know that roommates are randomly
assigned and in that case λ equal zero. However, in other cases, it might be quite high




                                                  9
and we can only guess about the extent that this influences the measured social
multiplier.


We now turn to three variations on this model.                       First, we consider the case of a
continuous outcome where the externality depends on the innate characteristics of the
individuals and not their actions (or outcomes). This is particularly useful in the case of
human capital spillovers where we think that wages (and productivity) may well be a
function of human capital in the area.                         In this case the model becomes
              γ
Ai = θ i +           ∑θ j . The expected value of the individual level coefficient on X k
             N − 1 j∈G (i ), j ≠i

will equal β k if there is no correlation across people in the value of X k . When there is

correlation, the individual level coefficient equals (1 + σγ ) β k . When there is correlation

both across people in the value of X k and sorting on the basis of unobservables, the

micro-level coefficient equals (1 + σγ ) β k + σγλ .


When there is no sorting on unobservables (i.e. whether there is correlation in
observables or not), the expected value of the group-level coefficient equals (1 + γ ) β k .

Thus, without sorting the social multiplier equals 1 + γ and with sorting the social
                        1+ γ
multiplier equals             . Notice that pure input externalities significantly decrease the
                       1 + σγ
possibility of very large multipliers. This occurs because the feedback effects, which are
the key to large multipliers in output-based externality models, are absent in this case.


When there is sorting on unobservables, the expectation of the aggregate coefficient
                                 N (1 − σ )     
equals       (1 + γ ) β k + λ                   ,   and   thus    the   social   multiplier   equals
                               N (1 − σ ) + σ    

 1+ γ         λ  Nσ                                 1+ γ                λ 
         1 +                    which approaches                 1 +    as N gets large. Just as
1 + σγ     β k Nσ + 1 − σ                          1 + σγ            βk 
before, the measured social multiplier has the potential to look very large if there is
significant sorting on the basis of unobservable characteristics.


                                                         10
In the case of the Dartmouth roommates, the key dependent variables are discrete and this
requires further assumptions. Following Glaeser and Scheinkman (2002) (but not Brock
and Durlauf, 2001), we will assume that observed outcomes are discrete, but that
individual actions are still continuous. As such, each individual still chooses a level of
“A”, but then this “A” is translated into a zero-one outcome. As such, each individual
still chooses a level of “A”, and this continuous “A” is what influences neighbors, but the
observable outcome takes on a value of one, if and only if A>k for some fixed cutoff k.


The correct approach to this problem would be to postulate a normal or logistic
distribution for ε and then to estimate the parameters using maximum likelihood.
However, the purpose of this short paper is to give an easily usable method for
calculating the relative size of social multipliers with simple calculation. As such, we
proceed with the approximation that the probability of taking the action equals
    p + ( A − A) , where A is the nationwide average level of A.                  Essentially, we are
assuming that the distribution of the error term is approximately uniform, with density
one, in the relevant region of estimation.5             In that case, the algebra describing the
estimated coefficients is the same as in the continuous case, and we can use the previous
discussion without alteration.


The Depreciation of Social Influence over Social Distance


This global interactions approach helps to make the point that a macro-coefficient does
not necessarily imply much about a micro-relationship.                   Unfortunately, this simple
approach does not help us to understand the degree to which interactions depreciate over
space. As such, it gives us no guidance about what the impact of a policy evaluated on
city-level data will have on the country as a whole. In order to have a framework which
helps us understand the relationship between effects at different levels of aggregation, we



5
 Assuming uniformity is, of course, a very strong assumption, but assuming that the density equals one
conditional upon normality is innocuous, since A can always be rescaled so that this is true.


                                                   11
will need a model where the level of social influence changes with the degree of social
proximity.


In order to present a simple model which captures the depreciation of social influence, we

assume that Ai = θ i + γ ∑d =1 δ d −1 Adi , where Adi is the action taken by the person who is
                                         ∞



exactly “d” units of social distance from the actor. We will think of people as being
organized on a line, and a group of size N as including N people who are closest to one
another on the line. Individuals could be located on a multidimensional lattice and could
interact with any number of neighbors.6 We consider the simplest case of a line with
unidirectional social influences.7                     In other words, we assume that people are only
influenced by people who are behind them in this line, i.e. person 2 follows person 1 and
person 0, but person 1 only follows person zero.


This one-sided feedback ensures that the individual level regression yields an unbiased
estimate of β k (as long as there is no sorting).                               Aggregating yields the formula:

∑                     ((γ + δ ) A0 − δθ 0 ) 1 − (γ + δ ) N
      N
             Ai                                                1              1 − (γ + δ ) N −i    
                                                                   ∑i=1 1 + γ 1 − γ − δ
                                                                      N
      i =1
                  =                                          +                                      θ i .   We assume
      N                        N             1− γ −δ           N                                    
that          1 > γ + δ .8             The      coefficient        from    an     aggregate         regression     equals

                 1      1 − (γ + δ ) N  
β k 1 + γ           −                 
                                        2 
                                                             and       thus      the       social         multiplier   is
             1 − γ − δ N (1 − γ − δ )  

            1      1 − (γ + δ ) N                                     1− δ
1 + γ           −                             , which converges to                          as N gets large and
        1 − γ − δ N (1 − γ − δ )                                      1− γ −δ
                                   2
                                                
equals 1 + γ / 2 when N equals 2.


       III.           Example # 1: Dartmouth Roommates

6
 We have discussed social structure of this kind in our previous work, e.g. Glaeser and Scheinkman
(2002).
    If the structure is a bi-directional circle, then even determining ∂Ai ∂X
7                                                                                      i
                                                                                       j   is not straightforward—higher
values of any individual “X” variable will have both a direct effect and an indirect effect through the
influence of this X on the peers who then in turn influence the individual in question.
8
  This assumption is necessary to guarantee that actions have finite variance.


                                                              12
In this section, we follow Sacerdote (2001) and look for the presence of social
interactions among Dartmouth College roommates.                      The advantage of Dartmouth
roommates is that they are essentially randomly assigned.9 As such, it provides one
example of a situation where social connection is random and not the result of sorting.
Thus, the social multiplier methodology seems most likely to be cleanly applicable in this
case.


There are three natural units of aggregation within Dartmouth College: the room, the
floor and the dormitory. The average room contains 2.3 students. The average floor
contains eight students and the average dormitory contains twenty-seven students. Our
“exogenous” variables are gender, verbal Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) score, math
SAT score, high school grade point average (GPA), family income and a dummy variable
that takes on a value of one if the individual drank beer in high school. The data on GPA,
SAT scores and family income comes from the Dartmouth admissions department. The
data on beer consumption comes from the Survey of Incoming Freshmen (sponsored by
UCLA) which is filled out by thousands of entering college students.


We first examined the determinants of college GPA. We found no evidence of a social
multiplier in this case (results not shown).                The coefficients on individual level
regressions were the same as the coefficients on aggregate regressions. For example, a
100 point increase in math SAT score raised freshman year GPA by .13 points in an
individual level regression, .12 points in a room level regression and .10 points in a floor
level regression. These results are not a surprise—Sacerdote (2001) also found that no
influence of roommate background characteristics on freshman year grades.10 In this
case, there is little evidence for social interactions or a social multiplier.



9
  In fact, the assignment is only conditional within blocking group, where blocking groups are defined by
answers to a pre-college survey. Sacerdote (2001) controls for this non-random element of assignment, but
finds no effect of this control. For simplicity, therefore, we will ignore this minor element of selection.
10
   Sacerdote (2001) does, however, find a correlation between the grade of two roommates which is some
evidence for spillovers. As such, the actual magnitude of intra-room spillovers remains something of a
puzzle.


                                                    13
We then turn to the area of fraternity or sorority membership. Fifty-one percent of
Dartmouth undergraduates join a fraternity or sorority. Table 1 shows the results from
estimating linear probability models in the case of fraternity membership.                          At the
individual level, individuals who drank beer in high school are 10.4 percent more likely
to join a fraternity or sorority.            There are also more surprising individual level
coefficients. Higher math scores increase fraternity membership—a 100 point increase in
math SAT score leads to a 5 percent greater likelihood of joining a fraternity. Higher
high school GPAs also increases the likelihood of joining a fraternity. People from richer
families are also more likely to join a fraternity.11 Men are more likely to join fraternities
than women are to join sororities.


When we aggregate to the room level, the impact of drinking beer, gender and family
income both increase slightly. The impact of GPA and math SAT score decline. None of
these changes are statistically significant. Aggregating to the floor and then dormitory
level causes beer drinking to become even more important (to a statistically and
economically significant degree), but the other variables become insignificant. These
regressions illustrate both the potential and the problems with social multiplier analysis.
The coefficient on beer rises with the level of aggregation, just as the model predicts. The
other coefficients just bounce around. As such, we will focus our analysis on the changes
in the coefficient on past beer drinking.


If we use the global interaction model, we estimate different values of γ for each of the
different levels of aggregation.                  The formula for the social multiplier is
     N −1+ γ
                     . At the room level, the estimated social multiplier is less than one
(1 − γ )( N − 1) + γ
(although we can’t reject small positive multipliers).                At the floor level, the social
multiplier 1.4 and the group size is eight. Together these imply that γ equals .38, which
strikes us as a reasonable number. At the dormitory level, the estimated social multiplier
is 2.23 and the group size is 57. These imply that the social multiplier equals .56. In fact,

11
 The magnitude of these effects are almost the same if we use a probit rather than a linear probability
model.


                                                    14
our estimates are sufficiently imprecise that we cannot reject the null hypothesis that
these two values are the same. Still, we find the general pattern of coefficients increasing
with the level of aggregation.


Of course, logically, we expect the social multiplier to increase with the size of the group.
Presumably, the bigger the group, the greater the share of social influences being
included. Still, the global interactions model gives us little ability to actually interpret the
extent to which the social multiplier changes with the level of aggregation. The local
interactions model is meant to remedy this lack.


Using the local interactions formula for the social multiplier, and given an average floor
                                         1      1 − (γ + δ ) 8     
size of eight, this implies that γ           −                     = .44 and the dormitory level
                                     1 − γ − δ 8(1 − γ − δ )
                                                               2
                                                                     

                                 1      1 − (γ + δ ) 28     
regressions tell us that γ           −                      = 1.27 .   Together these equations
                             1 − γ − δ 28(1 − γ − δ )
                                                         2
                                                              
              20 / 28 − (δ + γ ) 8 + (8 / 28)(δ + γ ) 28
imply that:                                              = 1.88 , which implies that δ + γ = .95 ,
                     7 − 8(δ + γ ) + (δ + γ ) 8
and using and hence γ = .14 and δ = .81 .


These numbers imply that each individual has only a small influence on his neighbor, but
this influence depreciates quite slowly over time. The overall social multiplier is quite
high, and as N gets large, it approaches 2.8. While the standard error bands surrounding
our estimates are sufficiently large to make us quite cautious about accepting these
numbers, they still suggest that the methodology does provide estimates that are at least
plausible.


    IV.      Example # 2: Crime


In our previous work (Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman, 1996), we have focused on
social interactions in criminal behavior. There is a large amount of anecdotal behavior
supporting the existence of these interactions, and it seems reasonable to expect to find a


                                                 15
social multiplier in the level of crime. As we have no data set featuring randomized
interactions in this context, we will have to use existing data on the level of crime to
produce preliminary estimates of the social multiplier in criminal behavior.


Individual level crime rates do not exactly exist. There are data on people who are
arrested and people who go to prison. And there is self-reported data on criminal
behavior. Self-reported data is problematic for two reasons. First, people do not always
report their illegal activities honestly. Second, standard self-reported information on
criminal behavioral (e.g. the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth) does not contain
crime data that is closely comparable to information about crime rates.


Because of these problems, we used nationwide arrest rates by age to form our basic
individual level estimates. These data correspond to arrests, not crimes. In order to make
these two sets of numbers comparable, we multiply the age-specific arrest rate by the
national ratio of reported crimes to arrests. In other words, we ensure that at the national
level, our predicted crime measure is the same as the actual crime level. Nonetheless, our
use of arrest rates will be problematic if the ratio of crimes to arrests differs across age
categories. Still, because this work is meant to be exploratory, we will go ahead with this
information. A further issue is that since our only independent variable is age, we may
miss many possible sources of strategic complementarities in the level of crime.


These individual crime rates provide us with a predicted level of crime in each
neighborhood. As described above, we use the individual level coefficients to predict an
aggregate crime measure, i.e.   ∑ π (a) p(a) , where
                                   a
                                                        π (a) represents the arrest rate in

each age category “a” and p(a) represents the share of the population in that age category.
We ignore any issues that might come from aggregating a discrete variable.


In Table II regression (1), we report the results from regressing actual crime rates on
predicted crime rates at the county level. The coefficient is 1.72. In regression (2), we
show that the state level social multiplier is 2.8. In principle, both of these numbers
might be biased because of sorting on observables or unobservables. In fact, the sorting


                                            16
by age across counties and states is quite low. Sorting on unobservables (or observable
variables that are not included in the regression) is likely to be higher, and as a result it
makes sense to take these results warily, as they may well overstate the true social
multiplier.


Finally, in regressions (3) and (4), we look at the social multiplier that is estimated using
time series data at the nation level. In these regressions, we follow Levitt (1999) closely
and in a sense merely duplicate his evidence showing that, if micro-level coefficients are
used, then aggregate changes in demographics can explain little of the changes in
aggregate crime. In our framework, this observation shows itself in an estimated social
multiplier of 8.16 for crime as a whole and 4.47 for homicides. These high social
mulipliers tell us that crime rates are moving around very quickly, given the fairly modest
changes in aggregate demographic compositions.                We have our doubts about the
interpretation of these estimates. It is at least as likely that these high estimates are due to
a correlation between demographics and unobservable elements. Still, their high values
continue to provide some evidence that social interactions are important in the level of
crime and more generally that social multipliers are worth worrying about.


We have estimated three different social multipliers at different levels of aggregation.
The estimated social multiplier rises substantially with the level of aggregation, so one
might think that the exponential model could be useful in interpreting this data.
However, the exponential model is actually pretty hard to use when addressing such large
aggregations.    To make the point, the difference between state and county level
                            .9834 − (δ + γ ) 86,700 + .0166(δ + γ ) 5, 207,000
coefficients implies that                                                      = .622 , which implies
                                 86,699(1 − δ − γ ) + (δ + γ ) 86,700
that δ + γ > .999 . However, if δ + γ > .999 , then the estimated social multiplier at the
county level requires that γ < .001 . The basic problem is that with an exponential model,
there should be little social interactions beyond close neighbors and as such, differences
between county, state and nation-wide social multipliers are difficult to work with.
Future work will hopefully come up with a better model for addressing the depreciation
of social influence in large groups.


                                                17
   V.      Example # 3: Schooling and Earnings


In the case of schooling and earnings, we turn to the variant of the model where
spillovers occur across θ s (i.e. inputs) not As (i.e. outputs). This framework corresponds
more closely to the idea that individual earnings are a function both of their own
schooling and of the schooling of their neighbors. In this case, the social multiplier

                 1+ γ         λ 
should equal             1 +    .   We will use the approach of regressing aggregate
                1 + σγ     βk 
outcomes on predicted aggregate outcomes. We will use the Individual Public Use
Micro-Sample from 1990, and include all adults between 18 and 60 years of age.


Our individual coefficients are found by regressing individual wages (in levels) on gender
and race dummies, marital status, a third order polynomial in education, and a fourth
order polynomial in age. All of our coefficients in this first stage regression looked quite
standard and we don’t report them to save space.


In Table III, we report our results from aggregating wages and predicted wages up to the
Public Use Microsample Area (PUMA) and State level. These are the two levels of
geography that are available in the 1990 census.            PUMAs on average have 82,800
members. The average state has 2.8 million members.


In regression (1), we find a PUMA level social multiplier of 1.675. In regression (2), we
find a State level social multiplier of 2.172. As we would expect, the social multiplier
rises with the level of aggregation. However, just as in the case of crime, the exponential
model is hard to use with aggregations of this size. These social multipliers may be
biased upwards because of sorting on unobservables; however, sorting on observables at
least is stronger at the PUMA than at the state level.       Still, these different coefficients
should stand as a warning against using coefficients from one level of aggregation to
inform us of effects at a different level of aggregation.




                                               18
Furthermore, these results continue to suggest that there are human capital spillovers, as
suggested by a wide body of other research (e.g. Rauch, 1993, Lucas, 1988, Acemoglu
and Angrist, 1999). However, the results from these regressions imply a much larger
human capital spillover than the previous research. To us, this discrepancy serves to
emphasize the fact that unobserved heterogeneity may be driving our results.


   VI.     Conclusion


Often empirical work treats the level of aggregation as irrelevant. Routinely, state or
national policy interventions are used to infer underlying individual-level parameters in
contexts as diverse as labor supply or the returns to schooling. If positive spillovers or
strategic complementarities exist, then these forms of inference are improper. State-level
regressions yield appropriate answers to questions about state-level policies, but not
necessarily anything else. The existence of a social multiplier means that in many
contexts, aggregate level coefficients will tend to radically overstate the true individual
level response.


This paper has presented a brief analysis of the social multiplier. We presented a series
of simple models, all of which tell us how to infer social interactions variables from the
level of the estimated social multiplier. In principle, these models can be computed
efficiently by using maximum likelihood, but in many contexts, an unbiased measure of
the social multiplier can be estimated by comparing ordinary least squares coefficients
found at different levels of aggregation.


In the empirical sections of the paper, we found evidence for a social multiplier at three
different levels of aggregation. Using Dartmouth roommates data, where roommates are
randomized, we found that the impact of at least one predetermined variable had a bigger
impact on joining a fraternity or sorority at higher levels of aggregation. In this case, our
results were compatible with our model of exponentially declining social influence.
Using crime data, we found evidence for a very large social multiplier in the level of
crime. We do not necessarily take the estimates as being precise, but they are large



                                             19
enough to support the idea that a social multiplier exists. Finally, using data on wages
and human capital variables, we found further evidence for large social multipliers in the
case of wages and human capital. The pattern supports the idea that researchers need to
be careful about how social interactions can potentially make inference very difficult,
especially when state level variation is used as the source of identification.




                                             20
References

Acemoglu, D. and J. Angrist (1999) “How Large are the Social Returns to Education?
   Evidence from Compulsory Schooling Laws,” NBER Working Paper # 7444.
Becker, G. and K. Murphy (2000) Social Economics. Cambridge: Harvard University
   Press.
Brock, W. and S. Durlauf (2001) “Discrete Choice with Social Interactions,” Review of
   Economic Studies 68(2): 235-260.
Glaeser, E. and J. Scheinkman (2001) “Non-Market Interactions,” Advances in Economic
   Theory, forthcoming.
Glaeser, E., Sacerdote, B. and J. Scheinkman (1996) “Crime and Social Interactions,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics CXI (2): 507-548.
Goldin, C. and L. Katz (2002) “The Power of the Pill: Oral Contraceptives and Women’s
   Career and Marriage Decisions,” Journal of Political Economy, forthcoming.
Katz, L., Kling, J. and J. Leibman (2001) “Moving to Opportunity in Boston: Early
   Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
   CXVI (2): 607-654.
Levitt, S. (1999) “The Limited Role of Changing Age Structure in Explaining Aggregate
   Crime Rates,” Criminology 37(3): 581-597.
Lucas, R. (1988) “On the Mechanics of Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary
   Economics 22(1): 3-42.
Ludwig, J., Hirschfeld, P. and G. Duncan (2001) “Urban Poverty and Juvenile Crime:
   Evidence from a Randomized Housing-Mobility Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, CXVI (2): 665-679.
Manski, C. (1993) “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection
   Problem,” Review of Economic Studies 60(3): 531-542.
Rauch, J. (1993) “Productivity Gains from Geographic Concentration of Human Capital:
   Evidence from the Cities,” Journal of Urban Economics 34(3): 380-400.
Sacerdote, B. (2001) "Peer Effects With Random Assignment: Results for Dartmouth
   Roommates" Quarterly Journal of Economics CXVI (2): 681-704.




                                         21
                                                        Table I
                                    Social Multipliers in Fraternity Participation

            Dartmouth Roommate Data: Effect of Background Characteristics on Participation
                 in Fraternities at the Individual Level and Three Levels of Aggregation

            Column (1) shows the OLS regression of individual fraternity participation on own use of beer in high
            school, own SAT scores, own high school GPA and own family income (self reported). Column (2)
            regresses the average participation at the dorm room level on dorm room averages of high school beer use,
            SAT scores, HS GPAs, and family income. Columns (3) and (4) increase the level of aggregation to the
            dorm floor and dorm building respectively.
                                                     (1)                 (2)                        (3)                    (4)
                                            Member of          Room average              Floor average           Dorm average
                                           fraternity or    level membership              membership              membership
                                                sorority
 Drank beer in high school                       0.1040                  0.0984                  0.1454                   0.2320
                                               (0.0258)                (0.0399)                (0.0812)                 (0.1930)

 Male                                            0.0510                  0.0701                  0.0253                  -0.2066
                                               (0.0256)                (0.0286)                (0.0540)                 (0.2038)

 SAT verbal score                               -0.0001                 -0.0000                 -0.0000                  -0.0002
                                               (0.0002)                (0.0003)                (0.0006)                 (0.0011)

 SAT math score                                  0.0005                  0.0002                 -0.0006                  -0.0022
                                               (0.0002)                (0.0003)                (0.0006)                 (0.0014)

 High school GPA                                 0.0004                  0.0003                  0.0003                   0.0004
                                               (0.0001)                (0.0002)                (0.0003)                 (0.0005)

 Family Income '000                              0.0006                  0.0008                  0.0000                  -0.0004
                                               (0.0002)                (0.0003)                (0.0006)                 (0.0013)

 Constant                                        0.0482                  0.1980                  0.7993                   2.2277
                                               (0.1455)                (0.2266)                (0.4594)                 (1.1421)

 R-squared                                          0.04                    0.05                    0.03                   0.08
 Observations                                      1579                      700                     197                     57
 Average group size                                    1                      2.3                     8.0                    28

Notes: Data are for Dartmouth Freshmen. Roommates and dormmates are randomly assigned as described in Sacerdote [2001].
SAT scores are from Dartmouth Admissions data. Family income, use of beer, and high school GPA are self reported on the UCLA
Higher Education Research Institute's Survey of Incoming Freshmen. Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                               22
                                                Table II

                   Regression of Crimes Rates on Predicted Crime Rates

Predicted crime rates for counties (or states or US) are formed by multiplying percentage of persons in each
of eight age categories by the crime rate for persons in that age category. Data are from Census Bureau and
Uniform Crime Reports. Expected crime rate conditional on age is based on age distribution of arrestees
for the U.S.

Columns (1)-(4) are cross sectional and srime data are for 1994 and demographic (age) data are for 1990.
Columns (5) and (6) are the time series data for the US as a whole.

                                               (1)                (2)             (3)                (4)
                                           County               State       US Crime                US
                                            Crime              Crime            Rate          Homicide
                                             Rate               Rate       1960-1999               Rate
                                                                                             1960-1999
 Predicted crime rate                        1.732             2.811             8.163            4.467
 (or homicides)                            (0.088)           (1.070)           (0.998)          (0.637)

 Constant                                   -0.039            -0.078            -0.304            -0.000
                                           (0.004)           (0.045)           (0.043)           (0.000)

 R-squared                                      .12              .13            0.64              0.56
 Observations                                 2756                50              40                40
 Average Group Size                         86,700        5,207,000      226,275,000       226,275,000




                                                    23
                                              Table III

                          Regression of Wages on Predicted Wages

Predicted wages are formed by regressing individual level wages on gender, race dummies, marital status,
education, education squared and education cubed, age, age squared, age cubed and age to the fourth
power. We then aggregate to the PUMA (state) level and regress mean wages on the mean of predicted
wages.

                                                           (1)                      (2)
                                                        PUMA                      State
                                                    Mean Wages              Mean Wages

            Predicted wages                                  1.675                  2.172
                                                           (.0270)                  (.246)

            Constant                                    -2227.140               -8250.57
                                                         (301.170)            (2675.232)

            R-squared                                           .69                    .61
            Observations                                      1726                      51
            Average group size                              82,800              2,802,000




                                                  24
