                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE WELFARE IMPLICATIONS OF INCREASING DISABILITY
                        INSURANCE BENEFIT GENEROSITY

                                              John Bound
                                           Julie Berry Cullen
                                             Austin Nichols
                                             Lucie Schmidt

                                          Working Paper 9155
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9155


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




The authors would like to thank Charlie Brown, Richard Burkhauser, Michael Chernew, Joel Slemrod, and
participants in the University of Michigan Public Finance and RWJF Health Policy seminar series and the
NBER Summer Institute for helpful comments and suggestions. This research was supported by a grant from
the U.S. Social Security Administration to the Michigan Retirement Research Center. In addition, Bound and
Cullen would like to thank MECA for financial support, and Cullen gratefully acknowledges support through
the RWJF Scholars Program. The opinions and conclusions are solely those of the authors and should not
be construed as representing the opinions or policy of any agency.

© 2002 by John Bound, Julie Berry Cullen, Austin Nichols, and Lucie Schmidt. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Welfare Implications of Increasing Disability Insurance Benefit Generosity
John Bound, Julie Berry Cullen, Austin Nichols, and Lucie Schmidt
NBER Working Paper No. 9155
September 2002
JEL No. H21, H22, H31
                                             ABSTRACT

       The focus on efficiency costs in the empirical literature on Disability Insurance (DI)
provides a misleading view of the adequacy of payment levels. In order to evaluate whether
workers are over- or under-insured through the social insurance program, we develop a
framework that allows us to simulate the benefits as well as the costs associated with marginal
changes in payment generosity from a representative cross-sectional sample of the population.
Under the assumption that individuals are reasonably risk averse, our simulations suggest the
typical worker would value increased benefits somewhat above the average costs of providing
them. However, we find that benefit increases tend to lower average utility when we average
across all individuals in our sample, particularly at high levels of risk aversion.            This
counterintuitive finding arises because some lower income DI-insured workers face replacement
rates that are near or above one. For such individuals, a benefit increase would represent transfers
from an even lower income state of the world in which they are not on DI to one in which they
are, a transfer that would not be beneficial even if there were no behavioral distortions associated
with the provision of DI benefits.


John Bound                                                             Julie Berry Cullen
Department of Economics                                                Department of Economics
University of Michigan                                                 University of Michigan
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                                               Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220
and NBER                                                               and NBER
johnb@umich.edu                                                        jbcullen@umich.edu


Austin Nichols                                                         Lucie Schmidt
Department of Economics                                                Department of Economics
University of Michigan                                                 Williams College
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                                               Williamstown, MA 01267
nicholsa@umich.edu
1. Introduction

    Disability status is increasingly used as a means for targeting resources in the United States.

In 1999, 5.6 million disabled individuals and 1.6 million spouses and dependent children

received a total of $4.2 billion in Disability Insurance (DI) benefits, representing over one-eighth

of the Social Security budget for benefit payments. Given its importance and continuing growth,

an evaluation of whether the DI program provides adequate insurance against the income losses

associated with the onset of severe limitations is overdue.

    The empirical literature on DI has primarily focused on the impact of program parameters on

the costs of the program, either in terms of caseload growth or reduced labor force attachment.

This focus on the efficiency costs of DI provides a misleading view of the social desirability of

the program itself and of the adequacy of payment levels. The effectiveness of the program

depends on how the costs relate to the social gains from redistributing toward individuals and

states of the world with higher marginal utilities of income.1 What is striking is that there has

not been any explicit valuation of the benefits associated with providing DI.2 In order to provide

a more comprehensive view, our analysis accounts for both the benefits and costs associated with

a marginal change in benefit generosity. While taking this marginal approach allows us to hold

all else equal and greatly facilitates the analysis, it precludes us from global considerations such

as optimal program design. Our goal instead is to determine whether, given the degree of moral

hazard under the existing DI system, the level of generosity is above or below the optimal level

and which factors are important to drawing a conclusion.

    How an individual worker fares under this marginal reform depends on the expected change


1
  See Diamond and Sheshinski (1995) for an example of a theoretical framework designed to balance redistribution
goals and labor supply disincentives in determining the optimal level of disability payments.
2
  There is a literature documenting the economic disadvantage of the disabled, but this literature has not posed the
question in terms of insurance adequacy (e.g., Haveman and Wolfe 1990; Burkhauser, Haveman, and Wolfe 1993).


                                                         1
in lifetime utility. This expectation in turn depends on the impact on the path of family income

and work effort both in the case where the worker becomes disabled and applies for DI and in the

case where the worker never applies, and on the likelihood of each of these outcomes. Our

approach is based on the intuition that if the population is in steady state, a representative cross-

sectional sample of the population can be thought of as capturing the distribution of potential

life-cycle paths for a representative individual or cohort. We can therefore use observed

earnings patterns to simulate the impact of increasing DI benefits on family income for current

recipients, potential new applicants, and workers in the sample. Combining data from the 1991

March Current Population Survey (CPS) with plausible assumptions about behavioral responses,

we calculate the expected financial benefits accruing to and financial costs borne by each

individual in the sample as a result of a one percent increase in DI payments.

    We then conduct the welfare analysis in two stages. In the first stage, we compare the total

costs associated with the reform to the increase in transfers to current recipients. This ratio

yields an estimate of the average implicit price of providing an additional dollar of income to

current beneficiaries in the presence of moral hazard. This price exceeds one only to the extent

that there are behavioral responses to the increase that generate additional tax and transfer costs,

including changes in work effort and program participation among current beneficiary and

potential applicant families. Using this price, we explore whether representative workers should

find purchasing additional insurance through reduced take-home pay financially attractive.3 This

reveals whether different types of workers are under- or over-insured against career-ending

disabilities, given the existing level of generosity and degree of moral hazard in the system. By

holding the price constant across worker types, we are able to isolate the insurance value of DI.


3
  Bird (1996) carries out an analogous analysis for the EITC program, finding that the benefits from reducing
income risk compare favorably to the tax costs for many middle income individuals.


                                                         2
    In our second approach, we recognize that like other social insurance programs, the value of

DI derives from its dual role as a program that both redistributes resources across individuals and

insures individuals against adverse events. Thus, for example, for individuals at all levels of

education, DI acts as privately provided insurance against the reduction in earnings capacity

associated with the onset of disability. At the same time, DI redistributes from those with higher

to those with lower levels of education both because replacement rates are higher for lower

earners and because the less well educated are substantially more likely to become DI

beneficiaries.4 In order to determine the lifetime incidence accounting for the underlying

distribution of costs and benefits across individuals, we value the change in income for each

member of our sample.5 The sum of individual valuations describes whether or not individuals

gain on average from the payment increase, where this average puts more weight on the low end

of the income distribution. The sign of the sum also answers whether a self-interested

representative individual would favor a payment increase without knowing her own probability

of disability and pattern of life-cycle earnings, but knowing only the social distribution.6

    To summarize the findings of our baseline model, we estimate the total cost of providing an

additional $1 of income to current DI recipients to be $1.50. While the load factor due to moral

hazard is fairly high, we demonstrate that it is moderate enough that representative workers

should be willing to "buy" additional insurance at this price. However, the average implicit price

of an additional dollar of insurance is actually much higher than $1.50 for more highly educated


4
  Much of the theoretical work in this area relies on static one-period models, with variation across individuals in the
degree to which they suffer a disability (modeled as the disutility of work). Productivity differences across
individuals are assumed away. In this context, the equity/insurance distinction disappears since everyone is
identical.
5
  The fact that we are considering a marginal change in program generosity allows us to ignore changes in utility for
individuals who are induced to apply to the program (which would involve valuing changes in leisure) since these
individuals are assumed to be indifferent between applying and not applying.
6
  From this perspective of the “veil of ignorance,” redistribution and insurance are not separate concepts (Varian
1980).


                                                           3
workers due to the redistributive nature of the program. We predict that the reform leads to a net

welfare loss for these groups regardless of the level of risk aversion, considering only the role of

own income security. More surprisingly, despite an average implicit price of less than $1, the

expected utility gain also turns negative for high school dropouts under high levels of risk

aversion. This counterintuitive finding arises since the utility calculation weights low income

states and individuals more heavily as risk aversion increases, and worker-years with current

income below the floor provided to DI recipients help to finance the benefit increase.7

    These combined analyses suggest that DI payments are higher than optimal. Given the focus

on moral hazard costs in the empirical literature, we may have expected that workers would be

over-insured under the current system. However, what is surprising is that it is not the degree of

moral hazard that leads to this conclusion. Rather, what seems to drive this result is that it only

insures against one kind of income risk. Benefit increases are to some extent paid for by able-

bodied workers with low incomes and high replacement rates and by disabled workers who do

not qualify for DI. This redistribution across various low income states of the world represents a

hidden cost of any across the board benefit increase and is relevant to other categorical transfer

programs.

    It is worth highlighting that the conclusion that workers may be over-insured through DI is

derived in the context of a program that currently has relatively high replacement rates. Thus,

the results do not at all imply that the optimal level of DI benefits would be low, merely that they

would be lower. A modification to our baseline model that incorporates health insurance

through its impact on program costs and on utility makes this point even more clear. New public

health insurance costs increase the implicit price of additional insurance to $1.66, which does not

7
  This result parallels a theoretical result in Diamond and Sheshinski (1995). The optimal level of disability benefits
is decreasing in the fraction of non-working individuals who are not on DI, since in their model these individuals



                                                          4
affect our conclusions about willingness to pay for typical workers. However, treating high out-

of-pocket health care expenditures as one of the costs associated with disability exaggerates the

drop in income at the onset of disability and reduces the effective replacement rate (by

approximately 8 percent). This adjustment leads to average utility gains from the marginal

increase in benefit generosity that increase with the level of risk aversion. We take this

sensitivity to small permutations to imply that the generosity of the current program is not too far

from what would be optimal holding the other program parameters constant.

   The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section provides background on the

DI program. Section 3 develops the conceptual framework we use to evaluate the welfare impact

of increasing DI benefit generosity. Section 4 presents and discusses the results, and Section 5

concludes.



2. Background

   DI is currently the most important disability program in terms of its scope and the magnitude

of expenditures involved. The program provides benefits to disabled workers (and their spouses

and children) in amounts related to the disabled worker's former earnings in covered

employment. DI benefit payments are calculated in essentially the same way as are retirement

benefits. Monthly benefits rise as a function of past earnings, but less than proportionately.

Funding is provided through a Social Security payroll tax, a portion of which is allocated to a

separate DI trust fund.

   To be eligible for DI benefits, a worker must have worked a sufficient number of quarters in

Social Security covered employment.8 In addition, he or she must not be gainfully employed and


have higher marginal utilities of income and are taxed along with workers to finance the benefit increase.
8
  Roughly speaking, an individual has to have worked in covered employment for 5 of the 10 years prior to the point


                                                        5
must pass a medical screening. The determination of whether an applicant meets the medical

requirements for disability involves a sequential process, under which about half of all applicants

are turned down. Generally, the worker must be found incapable of gainful employment, taking

into account age, education and work experience. The person must be disabled for a five-month

waiting period before he or she can receive benefits. Given continuing restrictions on work, the

vast majority of recipients refrain from working at all. After two years on the program,

beneficiaries become eligible for Medicare. Successful applicants can expect to continue to

receive cash and health benefits for the remainder of their lives. At the age of 65, beneficiaries

are officially transferred from the disability to the retirement program, but their retirement

benefits are equivalent to the benefits they received under the disability program.

   The fact that DI is targeted to eligible workers distinguishes DI from the second most

prominent disability program—Supplemental Security Income (SSI). While DI is essentially an

early retirement program, SSI is a means-tested program providing benefits to needy disabled

and blind as well as needy aged individuals, regardless of work history. The two programs serve

somewhat different populations. The typical DI beneficiary tends to be older and is less likely to

be female, a high school graduate, or white than is a typical member of the working aged

population. The SSI population is somewhat younger and more female than the DI population

and is even less well educated. We focus our attention on the DI program because it functions

more directly as an insurance program.

   The case for mandatory public insurance for career-ending disabilities is relatively strong.

First, given that these types of disabilities represent very low probability events, it is inefficient

for individuals to self-insure through own savings. Second, in the absence of government

intervention, adverse selection would likely prohibit a market for comprehensive long-term


in time the worker becomes disabled.

                                                   6
disability insurance from forming. Firms offering private disability insurance would attract those

individuals with the highest risk of becoming disabled. At any given price, this form of

consumer self-selection may prevent insurance companies from breaking even. The government

can overcome problems of adverse selection by requiring participation, so that low-risk

individuals are forced to pool with high-risk individuals. While supplementary private insurance

packages are currently available to some classes of workers, 9 this market presumably owes its

existence partly to the primary insurance offered by DI. In fact, the early private insurance

market established before the public system was introduced collapsed during the Great

Depression and was eventually resurrected with more limited coverage (U.S. Senate 1955).

    Though public insurance can solve adverse selection problems, DI is not necessarily any more

immune to moral hazard than private programs. The striking historical correlation between

trends in DI participation and reduced labor supply among elderly males has led to a large

literature measuring the disincentive effects of DI. Though the empirical evidence suggests that

the typical DI beneficiary would be out of the labor force regardless, the same is not true of

individuals on the margin who are induced to apply by increases in the availability and

generosity of benefits (Bound and Waidmann 1992, 2002; Autor and Duggan, forthcoming).

Though DI is associated with large behavioral distortions, there is little in the literature that

would permit one to say whether these sizeable effects outweigh or are outweighed by the

benefits of the program.10




9
  Levy (2002) finds that 43% of workers have long-term disability insurance through their employers. However,
coverage rates are much higher among those in the top quintile of hourly wages (72%) than for those in the bottom
quintile (13%) who are at the greatest risk of becoming permanently disabled.
10
   A notable exception is Gruber’s (1996) analysis of a discrete change in benefit generosity in Canada that
concludes with a back-of-the-envelope calculation of the net utility benefits to current beneficiaries, marginal
applicants, and workers.


                                                        7
3. Conceptual Framework

3.1 Determining whether typical workers gain

     The goal of the first phase of our analysis is to establish whether representative workers

should be willing to trade reduced take-home pay for increased DI benefits, given the degree of

actuarial unfairness associated with the program. The program is actuarially unfair on average

because of moral hazard. That is, since higher benefits lead to behavioral responses that increase

the cost beyond the amount that is actually transferred to current recipients, it will cost more than

$1 to increase the income of the disabled by $1. However, workers may still want to purchase

additional insurance at this price if the marginal utility of income is high enough in the disabled

states of the world. The value of additional insurance to workers depends on how important own

earnings are to family income and the rate at which DI replaces lost earnings, as well as the level

of risk aversion.

     The experiment that we consider is a one percent increase in DI payments. This experiment is

clearly artificial since we leave retirement benefits unchanged despite how closely the two

programs are linked.11 It is not meant to capture a realistic policy but provides a concrete way

for us to evaluate how individuals value DI at the margin. Given the marginal policy change, we

first calculate the static costs due to the increase in transfers to DI beneficiaries holding behavior

constant. Then, we add the dynamic tax and transfer costs associated with the behavioral

responses of current beneficiaries as well as other individuals to the payment increase. From this

point forward, we refer to the static costs as "direct" costs and the dynamic costs as "indirect

costs." The average implicit price of providing an additional dollar to current DI recipients is

simply the ratio of total to direct costs.


11
  Note that we do account for increases in payments to elderly that were DI recipients prior to aging into the
retirement program.


                                                          8
     While calculating these costs may seem straightforward, consider the difficulties that arise

when determining even the direct increase in DI payments to current beneficiaries. Individuals

who enter the program when they are 35 continue to receive benefits from then on. We would,

therefore, need to project benefits forward to determine the full cost.12 We greatly simplify our

task by making the following steady state assumption. As long as the overall population and the

fraction receiving DI are not growing, the age distributions of both the overall population and of

DI recipients are not changing, and there is no productivity growth, we can measure the costs

from a random sample of the population. Each individual in the cross-section can be

conceptualized as depicting the circumstances at one age within a possible life cycle path for an

individual. Then, payments to 45-year olds on the program today can be thought of as picking

up the payments to 35-year olds ten years hence. While this steady state assumption may not be

particularly realistic in the context of the current age structure in the United States, as we discuss

later, sensitivity tests suggest that maintaining this assumption does not substantially affect our

results.

     To measure the direct costs, we identify current recipients in our sample and increase family

benefits by one percent. Note that beneficiaries are found among the elderly as well as the

working-aged population since our framework views an elderly person as the aged version of a

working aged individual. In order to identify the full impact of the reform, we need to identify

which elderly individuals would have been DI beneficiaries in their working years. Appendix A

describes how we identify beneficiaries and how we determine the baseline level of family DI

payments.

     The resulting change in public transfers to these families is moderated by mechanical

12
  Longitudinal Social Security records that track individual earnings and benefits over time might appear to solve
the informational problem. However, these records do not provide information on family income amounts and



                                                         9
interactions with other programs. We use payment algorithms to reduce cash SSI and in-kind

Food Stamp amounts received.13 Finally, the resulting net increase in income will lead to higher

income taxes paid by current beneficiaries. We use TAXSIM to estimate the change in federal

and state income taxes paid.14 The total direct costs of the reform are, therefore, the increase in

DI benefits paid less any reduction in other transfers and any increases in taxes paid, summed

across families. This sum represents the net additional public outlay to families with current

beneficiaries, as well as the net increase in income for these families.

   We use this same steady state framework to calculate two sets of indirect costs. First, we

allow current beneficiaries and their families to respond to the lump sum increase in income.

Own labor supply has little room to respond given the restriction on gainful work imposed by DI,

although family labor supply responses could potentially be sizeable (Cullen and Gruber 2000).

Any reduction in labor supply represents a program cost since it will result in reduced income

and payroll taxes paid by the family. Relying on the broad thrust of the literature on the long run

income elasticity of labor supply (see Killingsworth 1983), we assume that husbands of current

beneficiaries continue to earn the same as before, but apply an income elasticity of negative one

to wives of current beneficiaries. After calculating the reduction in spousal earnings, we

estimate the associated tax cost.

   The second set of indirect costs that we consider has been emphasized in the prior literature

on DI—those associated with new applications. The magnitude of these costs will depend on the

number of new DI applicants, as well as how many of these new applicants pass the medical



sources over time that is integral to our calculations.
13
   For those low-income recipients who are currently receiving SSI benefits, the net change in transfers will actually
be zero since SSI benefits are reduced one-for-one with DI benefits.
14
   TAXSIM is the National Bureau of Economic Research’s FORTRAN program for calculating liabilities under the
U.S. federal and state income tax laws from individual data. We use version 4.0 available at URL
(http://www.nber.org/taxsim/). For more information about TAXSIM, see Feenberg and Coutts (1993).


                                                         10
screening. Successful new applicants will receive DI payments.15 Further, changes in the

income and labor supply of successful and unsuccessful applicants and their families may lead to

increased participation in other transfer programs as well as lower tax payments. The costs of

the policy change include not only the DI benefit payments to new successful applicants, but also

increased public transfers and reduced tax revenue associated with successful and unsuccessful

applications.

     We rely on evidence from prior literature to predict how many new applicants and

beneficiaries will result from the policy reform. Although estimates of the elasticity of

applications with respect to benefit generosity vary considerably (Bound and Burkhauser 1999),

plausible bounds exist. The estimates we find the most credible are based on time series

evidence from the 1960s and 1970s, a period of time when replacement ratios rose appreciably

(Halpern 1979; Lando, Coate and Kraus 1979). These estimates suggest elasticities in the

neighborhood of 0.5.16

     We need to link the application elasticity to the size of the current pool of recipients.

Historically, roughly half of those who apply for DI are awarded benefits (Bound and

Burkhauser 1999), which would imply a ratio of ever-applicants to beneficiaries of two. The

ratio will be greater than this estimate to the extent that mortality is higher among successful than

unsuccessful applicants, and will be smaller to the extent that many individuals apply several

times. Using the matched SIPP-SSA data described in Appendix B, we are able to estimate the

ratio directly for individuals included in the SIPP panels whose applications were acted upon



15
   Since we are analyzing a marginal change and these individuals are assumed to be just indifferent between
applying or not, we can ignore the value of these payments and account for them solely on the cost side. That is,
they affect only the numerator and not the denominator of the implicit price.
16
   Cross-sectional estimates vary considerably, from a low of 0.2 to a high of 1.3. Kreider (1999), with the most
credible econometric model, estimates an elasticity of 0.8. See Bound and Burkauser (1999) for a review of this
literature.


                                                         11
between 1977 and 1997 and find that the two effects largely cancel. Therefore, we assume that

the steady state number of applicants is approximately twice as large as the recipiency base.

This implies that the elasticity of beneficiaries with respect to benefits is the same as the

application elasticity.17

     Thus, our baseline assumption is that a 1% increase in benefits leads to a 0.5% increase in

applications, and the same percentage increase in beneficiaries. Marginal applicants are assumed

to be observably similar to current DI beneficiaries. We describe in Appendix A how we

identify new unsuccessful and successful applicants in our sample and assign DI family

payments to them.

     We conduct detailed analyses with matched SIPP and SSA data to guide the assumptions that

we make about the behavioral responses of marginal applicants and their families. Our

methodology allows us to trace out the impact of both successful and unsuccessful applications.

The most important behavioral responses are changes in own labor supply, which then lead to

additional costs associated with increases in transfer payments and decreases in tax payments.

Details on how we determine which behavioral responses are relevant and estimate the

associated costs are provided in Appendix B.

     Though we account for the most obvious behavioral responses, we ignore several classes—

some of which we expect to have a negligible impact on our calculation and others that are

potentially important but about which we can do little. We ignore the deadweight burden

associated with raising taxes to pay for the increased DI payments. Empirical evidence (Gruber

1994; Anderson and Meyer 1995) suggests that payroll taxes that support programs that are


17
  It seems likely that those induced to apply by an increase in benefits would tend to be less severely impaired than
the typical applicant. In this case, they would be less likely to pass the screening. Since unsuccessful applicants
cost less in terms of taxes and transfers than do successful applicants, our assumption should lead to an overestimate
of the costs of a payment increase.


                                                         12
restricted to workers are essentially benefit taxes, so that the deadweight burden of the tax

increase will be negligible. However, as we demonstrate, DI is far from a pure benefit tax since

it involves substantial redistribution across worker types. Easy solutions to account for

deadweight loss, such as scaling the tax costs upward using factors estimated in the literature,

will not work in this case, since some individuals receive subsidies and others are taxed.

Ignoring this cost is equivalent to assuming the net burden is zero.

     We also ignore a variety of other responses to changes in DI benefit generosity, such as

changes in savings, marriage rates, or participation in private disability insurance programs. We

suspect that none of these effects is likely to be large. The occurrence of a long-term disability

during a person's working years is a relatively rare event, but is likely to represent a reasonably

permanent state. Though both savings and marriage significantly mitigate the costs of becoming

disabled, neither form of self-insurance against this eventuality is very effective. For this reason,

neither is likely to be heavily used or to respond to changes in benefit levels.18 Though

apparently a more viable alternative, applicants for DI are not typically covered by any type of

private disability program, leaving little room for crowd-out along this margin.19

     Using our estimates of the costs that we are able to measure, we then calculate the ratio of

total to direct costs. In order to determine whether a representative individual would be willing

to purchase additional insurance at the implied price, we need to determine the relative value of

income to an individual across able-bodied and disabled states of the world. We assume a utility

function that exhibits constant relative risk aversion, and is separable in consumption and leisure:

                                        C1−θ
         U (C , H ) = v(C ) − f ( H ) =      − f (H ) ,                                             (1)
                                        1−θ

18
   Moreover, median savings among those who apply for DI benefits in the matched SIPP-SSA sample are only
$600.
19
   Only 8.5% of DI recipients in the March 1991 CPS report receiving private disability insurance. Those who


                                                       13
where C is consumption, H represents hours worked, and θ is the coefficient of relative risk

aversion.20 Given this utility function, the marginal utility of income is C −θ . The relative value

                                                                                −θ
                                                             C 
of $1 across the two states of the world can be expressed as  d  , where Cd represents
                                                              Cnd 

consumption when disabled and Cnd represents consumption when able-bodied. We rely on

matched SIPP and earnings records (SER) data to estimate the relative consumption levels for

DI-insured individuals. Then, we compare willingness to pay calculated at varying levels of risk

aversion to the average implicit price.

3.2 Determining whether workers benefit on average

   Given our estimates of the direct and indirect costs, the distribution of these costs across

workers determines how the average worker fares. While DI transfers resources from younger to

older individuals and from able-bodied to disabled individuals in the cross-section, from our

steady-state perspective DI transfers resources from earlier to later years and across different

states of the world. If the cross-sectional distribution captures the full distribution of potential

life-cycle paths, then the net benefits to the random sample measure the average life-cycle

incidence.

   Our approach is to first simulate the change in utility following the reform for each individual

in our sample, and then to aggregate across all individuals. To clarify our approach, it is helpful

to decompose the sum of utilities in the following way:




receive private benefits tend to have more years of education than those who do not (12.5 vs. 10.3).
20
   What is important is not the specific functional form, but the implication that individuals value $1 more when they
are poorer than when they are richer, and that these relative values do not vary with hours of work. We use this as a
heuristic for determining the marginal value of income across states.


                                                         14
         W = ∑ ijt v(Cijt ) − f ( H ijt ) =∑ i ∑ jt v(Cijt ) − f ( H ijt )
                             dv            df                                ,                           (2)
         dW = ∑ i ∑ jt            dCijt −        dH ijt
                            dCijt         dH ijt

where i indicates individual, j indicates possible realizations (e.g. disabled or not), and t indicates

the time period or age. Each member of our sample can be conceptualized as representing a

point in time on one possible life path for an individual. Imagine all of the observations

representing a given individual's possibilities, and imagine that individual at some base period

early in her life. Also, focus on the financial component of utility. As we justify more fully

below, this is reasonable for our analysis since we do not have to explicitly value changes in

leisure for the marginal applicants who are assumed to neither gain nor lose from the reform and

since the changes in work effort for families of beneficiaries operate through income effects.21

                         dv
Our calculation of            dCijt for these observations can be thought of as that person's report of
                        dCijt

how she values the change in consumption in time period t and state j caused by the reform. The

sign of the sum across j and t describes whether she directly benefits from the reform or not.22

Subsequently aggregating across different persons weights their net valuations by the relative

marginal values of income at the base period.

     While conceptually we can separate individuals and life paths, it is impossible to do so in our

cross-section. The role of the risk aversion parameter is complicated in this setting. From the

perspective of a given individual, the utility gain from reducing the potential income loss from

the onset of disability depends on the level of risk aversion in the traditional manner. A higher


21
   Note that we ignore any deadweight burden associated with changes in tax payments required to finance the
reform that would involve changes in work effort for worker families.
22
   While this approach implicitly discounts by mortality, it assumes individuals do not otherwise discount the future.
We make this assumption based on survey evidence (Barsky et al. 1997) that suggests time discounting is negligible.
We did, however, check the robustness of our results. In qualitative terms, our results hold for any reasonable
discount values.


                                                             15
level of risk aversion increases the weight on low income periods, making insurance more

desirable. But, in the welfare calculation, a higher level of risk aversion also increases the

weight that low income individuals receive. The social net benefit of the reform will vary with

the coefficient of relative risk aversion through both of these channels, so that inequality-

aversion and risk-aversion effects are entangled.

     We derive the individual-, realization-, and period-specific components of equation (2) by

simulating the point in time change in utility for each person in our CPS sample. We begin by

distributing the costs of the increase in DI benefit generosity according to 1990 funding patterns.

That is, increases in DI benefit payments and decreases in payroll taxes paid are shared across

workers in proportion to earnings below the Social Security maximum. Net tax costs due to lost

income tax revenue and increases in other transfers are distributed according to workers' shares

of federal and state income taxes paid.23 We can then simulate the impact of the reform on

family income for current beneficiaries, potential new applicants, and workers. In this case, how

workers are affected by increasing DI generosity depends on both the progressivity of DI

replacement rates and of the tax code.24 The degree to which the increased insurance is

actuarially unfair is folded into the analysis since the predicted shifts in family income absorb the

tax increases due to direct and indirect financial costs.

     The next step is to translate the changes in income and leisure into changes in utility.

Assuming that utility takes the form described above, we are able to focus exclusively on the


23
   AFDC costs are divided between the state and federal tax bases according to the 1990 AFDC cost sharing
formulas.
24
   While the above method of distributing costs is the most immediately policy-relevant approach, a second method
would instead distribute the net costs across workers in proportion to expected net benefits. Expected net benefits
would be based on a worker's age-adjusted position in the earnings distribution and would require information on
the pre-application position of DI applicants. This would have the advantage of more effectively isolating the
insurance value of increased benefit generosity because the degree to which the policy change is actuarially unfair
(e.g. expected financial payments exceed expected benefit receipts) reflects only the relative magnitude of the costs
arising from moral hazard.


                                                         16
financial component. The only changes in leisure considered in our analysis are among families

of current beneficiaries and marginal applicants. For the families of current beneficiaries, the

increase in transfers (net their share of costs) is valued ignoring any changes in spousal earnings

and leisure. Though these families choose to "spend" some of the increase in income on

increased leisure, the marginal utility gain can be captured through the income effect. While the

direct benefits accrue to those already on DI through the increase in income, indirect benefits

accrue to the individuals induced to apply for DI benefits. However, since these individuals are

at the margin, revealed preference suggests that they will gain relatively little from the increase.

Thus, we assume that the change in utility for marginal applicants is zero.25 Other families

experience only a change in income proportional to their share of costs.

     Finally, we need to specify how changes in family income are converted to changes in

individual consumption. One alternative is to simply proxy for consumption using per capita

family income. However, there is evidence that families are capable of buffering themselves

against short-term fluctuations in income. Therefore, we also use an alternative proxy to account

explicitly for divergence between income and consumption due to saving. We use data from the

Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) to calculate the relationship between concurrent family

income and consumption, and then smooth family income accordingly.26 In addition, for both

smoothed and unsmoothed family income, we calculate both a strict per capita measure and a per

capita equivalency. In the equivalency measure, family income is divided by a factor that

accounts for both differences in consumption between children and adults and economies of


25
   Note that marginal applicants’ indifference is from the point of the health shock onward (as in Diamond and
Mirrlees 1978). To the extent that the aggregate demand curve for DI benefits is not smooth and continuous in the
level of generosity, then we ignore a non-zero gain to this group and thus underestimate the benefits associated with
increasing DI payment generosity.
26
   The methodology is described in detail in Appendix C. Note that our approach does not allow for perfect
smoothing of consumption across high and low income periods, so that the marginal utility of income is falling with
income for individuals.


                                                         17
scale.27

      The estimated changes in consumption are then fed through the utility function to calculate

dU ijt for each CPS sample member. The sum of the net gains in utility determines the social

value of increasing DI payments. The same calculation for workers with given characteristics

determines the value of the policy change to subsets of individuals. We present results at both

low and high levels of risk aversion in order to test the sensitivity of our findings.

3.3 The Role of Health Insurance

      Up until this point we have ignored the role that medical insurance plays in both welfare

analyses. For the first analysis, if potential applicants become newly eligible for public health

insurance programs, the total costs of the reform may increase. Though determining this net

fiscal externality is very difficult, we choose an approach that provides a clear upper bound on

the new public health insurance costs associated with marginal applicants. We assume that all

individuals that were not receiving public insurance prior to applying but then shift to public

insurance generate net new health care costs. Details are provided in Appendix B. The new

Medicare costs are distributed across families according to their share of earnings subject to the

Medicare tax. The new Medicaid costs are divided between federal and state tax bases according

to the cost-sharing formulas, and are then distributed across the population according to shares of

federal and state income taxes paid.

      The role that health insurance plays in the second welfare analysis is much more complicated.

Valuing medical insurance for marginal applicants, albeit implicitly since we continue to assume

they are just indifferent between applying and not applying, requires valuing medical insurance

for the working population as well in order to determine baseline utility. The relevant value is

27
     We use the adjustment factor suggested by Citro and Michael (1995): (Na + .8*Nc) 0.7, where Na is the number of



                                                           18
not the dollar value of benefits but the insurance value. Imagine that insurance status has little

effect on what kind of medical procedures one has, but affects only the out-of-pocket costs.

Then, the cost of being uninsured is the possibility of having to pay large medical bills and can

be modeled as a loss of income. We estimate heterogeneity in the exposure to distributions of

out-of-pocket expenditures for families by age of the head and type of insurance coverage using

empirical distributions in the CEX (see Appendix D). We then randomly reduce after-tax

income by a draw from the appropriate distribution before proceeding.



4. Results and Discussion

   The random sample of the population that serves as the basis for our analysis comes from the

March 1991 Current Population Survey (with income data for calendar year 1990). Our sample

consists of 158,318 individuals residing in 73,638 tax-filing units.28 We take both the size of the

disability population and the implementation of the program (e.g. screening stringency) as given

when evaluating the desirability of increasing benefit generosity. Since 1990 predates the recent

surge in program growth,29 we tested to ensure that the results are robust to inflating the DI

population to current levels.30 Another issue immediately arises with our assumption that the

population is in steady state. The hump-shaped age distribution we observe in the CPS is not

consistent with a feasible steady state. That is, the fraction of the population that falls within

each age category has to be monotonically declining, or at least non-increasing. The results are

robust to re-weighting the sample assuming constant fertility and mortality weights to



adults and Nc is the number of children.
28
   Our definition of tax-filing units essentially matches the CPS definitions of subfamilies, except that adult
unmarried children residing with their parents are considered to be their own tax-filing units.
29
   See Stapleton et al (1998) for a discussion of the various factors behind this recent growth.
30
   As expected, inflating the size of the DI population to current levels increases the implicit price of insurance, but
only from $1.50 to $1.51. It has no qualitative impact on the welfare implications of the policy reform.


                                                           19
approximate a feasible steady state distribution.31

4.1 Direct and Indirect Costs of the Reform

     We have divided the costs associated with the increase in DI payment generosity into two

main categories. Direct (static) costs result from the transfer of additional income to current

beneficiaries, and involve no behavioral response. Indirect (dynamic) tax and transfer costs are

generated by the behavioral responses of individuals to the regime change. Our estimates of the

costs by category are shown in Table 1.

     The first components of direct costs are calculated by scaling family payments for current

working aged and elderly DI beneficiaries to reflect the 1% increase in generosity. For worker

beneficiaries, this generates direct costs of $191.1 million. For elderly beneficiaries, we have

taken into account both the probability the individual was a DI worker beneficiary and whether

the individual generates benefits based on own work history.32 The expected direct cost of

increased payments to elderly beneficiaries is $129.6 million. These increases in DI payments

are mechanically offset by the interaction of the DI program with other transfer programs,

leading to costs savings of $29.8 million. Finally, these families owe additional federal and state

taxes, leading to savings of $4.6 million in federal and state income taxes. The sum of these

components is the net new transfer to current DI recipients assuming no behavioral response, and

totals $286.3 million.

     We account for two main types of indirect costs generated by the behavioral responses to the

regime change. First, we account for spousal labor supply responses to the increase in transfers

to current beneficiaries. These responses reduce the amount of taxes owed by families of


31
   The implicit price of an additional dollar of insurance falls slightly, from $1.50 to $1.42, and there is no
qualitative effect on the welfare implications.
32
   If the individual currently receives a Social Security benefit amount determined by a retired or deceased spouse's
benefit eligibility, the reform will have no impact on SSDI payments or on family income.


                                                          20
beneficiaries, leading to a loss of $2.2 million in federal, state, and payroll tax collections.

     The second set of indirect costs is generated by the response of those individuals induced to

apply by the policy change. The most important of these are due to the new DI payments to

successful applicants. The total simulated cost of these new DI payments is $89.7 million, which

is about one-fourth as large as the direct cost of increased payments to existing beneficiaries.33

     The remaining indirect costs associated with marginal applications are due to reductions in

own labor supply and resulting changes in public transfers and taxes. To calculate these, we take

into account the likelihood of successful and unsuccessful applications, and the likelihood that

rejected applicants return to work. The resulting income and payroll tax costs total $50.9

million. We predict savings of $0.5 million on AFDC payments, since few marginal applicants

receive AFDC in the base case, few become eligible as unsuccessful applicants, and most

successful applicants become ineligible. Costs associated with the Food Stamp Program are $0.4

million, driven partially by less restrictive income limits for disabled individuals. Finally, SSI

benefits to new successful applicants add $0.3 million to the costs of the policy change. The

costs generated by behavioral responses to the regime change total $143.0 million.

     The relative magnitudes of the various costs provide some insights into which of the

maintained assumptions are likely to qualitatively affect our results. Altering our assumptions

about the spousal labor supply response for current beneficiaries would clearly have very little

effect. While we are fairly confident that we have accurately captured the impact of application

to DI on behavior, we are less certain about how accurately we have captured the number of new

applications that would result from a marginal increase in generosity. A larger or smaller receipt


33
  As a plausibility test, we compare the indirect DI payment cost for working aged individuals to an alternative
crude calculation. Indirect payments should be approximately equal to total payments to current working aged
beneficiaries multiplied by 0.005 (the 1% benefit increase times the application elasticity). The ratio between the
amount resulting from our more involved calculation and this amount is 0.94.


                                                         21
elasticity would scale the indirect costs approximately proportionately, which highlights the key

role that this form of moral hazard plays in determining whether payments are currently too high

or too low.34

4.2 Representative Workers' Willingness-to-Pay

     Our calculations of total direct and indirect costs yield an estimate of the average degree of

actuarial unfairness associated with the "purchase" of an additional dollar of DI benefits through

reduced income for non-recipients. The ratio of total costs to the direct costs, which capture the

net transfer to current DI recipients, is equal to 1.50. For every $1 of income transferred to

current recipients, an additional 50 cents are incurred in indirect costs.

     We use our estimate of the average implicit price to calculate whether representative

individuals should be willing to pay for increased benefits. These calculations are presented in

Table 2. The medians shown are calculated from the subset of the 1990-93 SIPP sample that is

aged 45-61 and is eligible for DI. Assume that when a person becomes disabled, own earnings

are lost and they are replaced to some extent by DI benefits. Then, the value of additional

insurance will be greater the more important own earnings are to family income and the lower is

the share of earnings replaced by DI. The first two columns in Table 2 present the share of own

earnings in household income and the ratio of projected family DI payments to own earnings by

gender and educational attainment. While there are no clear patterns in own earnings share by

education, the progressivity of the payment schedule generates a sharp decline with education in

the share of own earnings replaced. It is not surprising, then, that the pre- and post-tax

replacement rates for family income shown in the next two columns also decline sharply with

education.


34
  For example, with an application elasticity of 0.8 (Kreider 1999), the indirect and total costs would be roughly
60% and 20% higher, respectively, than those we estimate.


                                                         22
   As discussed in the prior section, given a separable constant relative risk aversion utility

function, the relative value of a dollar in the two states can be expressed by the ratio of income in

the two states raised to the power of the negative relative risk aversion parameter. This measure

of willingness to pay, based on after-tax family income replacement rates, is reported in columns

5-7 for levels of risk aversion equal to one, two, and four respectively. Because of the higher

drop in family income between able-bodied and disabled states, willingness to pay is higher for

more highly educated groups. Similarly, willingness to pay is higher for men than women, since

the share of women's earnings in family income is lower. While DI-eligible men of all education

levels would find purchasing additional insurance at a price of $1.50 attractive at levels of risk

aversion at or above two, the same holds for all eligible females only at levels above two.

Though based on a somewhat older population, recent survey evidence finds mean levels of risk

aversion slightly above four (Barsky et al. 1997). At this level, all of our representative

individuals would be willing to purchase an additional $1 of insurance at a price of $1.50. This

implies that if the reform could be financed so that individuals were to absorb the costs in

proportion to their share of expected payments, an increase in DI benefits would move the level

closer to the optimal level. Given replacement rates of between 0.7 and 0.8 for the typical

worker, this result emphasizes the substantial value individuals put on the insurance DI provides.

   Now, we consider the fact that different individuals must pay different prices for increased

insurance given the redistribution within the program. Rather than relating overall direct costs to

total costs, we consider how these costs are distributed across individuals with higher and lower

levels of education. Table 3 shows the average share of costs borne by families according to

years of education of the family head. The majority of costs are distributed in proportion to

earnings under the payroll tax cap. The least-educated families pay $1.52 in total costs




                                                 23
(annually) and the most educated pay $5.88 on average through reduced take-home pay. The

resulting distribution of costs is mildly progressive, as shown in the fourth column in Table 3.

   Comparing these average costs to the expected benefits by level of education provides a crude

sense of variation in actuarial unfairness. The expected increase in DI benefit receipts is much

higher for less educated families due to a likelihood of receipt that is nearly eight times as great

as for the most educated families. The benefit increase provides an additional dollar to these

families at a price of only 32 cents. All other families pay more than one dollar, with the

college-educated paying over seven dollars. Clearly, DI is not a particularly "good deal" for the

typical individual with more than a high school education.

4.3 Life-Cycle Incidence for Average Workers

   In this section, we convert the changes in family income to changes in individual utility to

evaluate the net welfare impact of the increase in DI benefits. Before converting the dollar

values to utils, we first summarize the changes in family income in Table 4. The first three

columns of Table 4 present average pre-reform income for individuals classified by three point-

in-time family types: families with no DI beneficiary, families with a working aged DI

beneficiary, and families with an elderly DI beneficiary. The six rows are based on three

concepts of income: family income, per capita income, and per capita income adjusted for

economies of scale and for the number of adults and children in the family. Each of these three

measures is presented unsmoothed and smoothed to account for the relationship between

concurrent family income and consumption.

   Baseline unadjusted family after-tax income is larger for individuals in families with no DI

beneficiary ($28,455) than for those in families with either a worker beneficiary ($22,302) or an

elderly beneficiary ($21,655). However, the gap narrows when family income is smoothed. The




                                                 24
difference between families with and without beneficiaries becomes even smaller when income

is expressed in per capita terms. In fact, the average income for individuals in families with an

elderly DI beneficiary is larger than that for families with no limited individuals for three of the

four per capita measures.

   The next three columns of Table 4 show the post-reform change in the various measures of

income. As expected, individuals in families with no beneficiary face income losses while

individuals in families with either a working aged or elderly beneficiary experience increases in

income. The initial level of income and the change in income determine the measured impact on

the financial component of utility for each individual.

   Table 5 shows changes in social welfare for different levels of risk aversion and different

measures of individual income. The first column indicates the value of the coefficient of relative

risk aversion (θ). The next four columns show the average change in utility for individuals in the

three different types of families and in all families. For ease of interpretation, the changes in

utility are expressed in monetary terms. Specifically, the values shown are the average change in

utility divided by the average pre-reform marginal value of $1 for individuals within each

sample.

   Recall that social welfare is calculated using a utility function that exhibits constant relative

risk aversion of the form shown in equation (1). If individuals are risk neutral (θ equal to zero),

utility is simply measured by individual income. Since our reform throws away 50 cents for

every dollar transferred to beneficiaries, there must be a net loss in welfare under risk neutrality.

What becomes clear from the results presented in Table 5 is that the policy reform leads to a net

welfare loss for larger values of θ as well.

   The pattern of net welfare impacts (as normalized by the relevant average pre-reform utility)



                                                  25
across levels of risk aversion in Table 5 is surprising. The net welfare loss at first shrinks and

then becomes larger as the level of risk aversion increases. It appears that a representative

individual from behind the "veil of ignorance" would be less willing to pay for higher disability

benefits when very risk averse. This is counterintuitive, since at higher levels of risk aversion

the insurance motive should become more important and we would expect the policy reform to

become more attractive.

     For the welfare of a given individual to fall as the level of benefits rises, the individual must

not want to transfer resources from able-bodied to disabled (and on DI) states of the world. This

will be true so long as replacement rates are sufficiently high for the individual to be unwilling to

pay for the increase. Since DI payments are a function of average earnings, they will tend to be

high (and may even be above 1) during periods when earnings are low – either early in a

person’s working life or during prolonged negative earnings shocks that are not associated with

disability. Given the progressivity of the benefit formula, replacement rates will also be high for

low income workers. What happens in our calculations as the level of risk aversion is raised is

that the marginal value of a dollar in low income states rises. Within individuals, more weight is

put on low income periods of time. Across individuals, more weight is put on the low income

households with generous replacement rates. Together these two factors lead to the pattern of

results we see.

     Table 6 shows how the net welfare impact varies for more and less well-educated individuals

at different levels of risk aversion. 35 The entries are comparable to the numbers in the final

panel and last column of Table 5. They represent the average change in utility, normalized by

average baseline utility, associated with the reform. These results again stress the redistributive


35
  Tables 6, 7, and 8 present results for per capita family income adjusted for economies of scale and the number of
adults and children as described above. Results for pure per capita income do not differ qualitatively.


                                                         26
component of the DI program. For all individuals with a high school education or greater, at all

levels of risk aversion, the policy change causes a loss in net welfare. For individuals with less

than a high school diploma, there is a net welfare gain—for all but the highest level of risk

aversion. Again, while the price is favorable on average for individuals with low education due

to moderate moral hazard costs and redistribution from the more highly educated, the gain turns

negative at high levels of risk aversion due to redistribution from low to modest income states of

the world for a sufficient number of individuals within the low education sample.

   The results shown in Table 7 isolate the role of the redistribution built into the financing of

the DI program. We set the indirect costs to zero, so that the only costs associated with the

reform are the direct costs. This implies no behavioral responses to the policy change, and

therefore an average implicit price of additional insurance of one. Under risk neutrality, those

with a high school degree or less have expected increases in income while those with some

college or more have expected decreases. The average net benefit is negative at all levels of risk

aversion for the more highly educated and, as above, turns negative at higher levels of risk

aversion for the less educated groups. The general similarity of the results between Tables 6 and

7 highlights the fact that the reason we are finding payment increases do not increase welfare has

more to do with the fact that in a sufficient number of cases such increases involve transfers from

lower income states of the world rather than any moral hazard considerations.

4.4 Incorporating Health Insurance

   We first incorporate health insurance on the cost side. Marginal applicants that shift to public

health insurance coverage post-application are estimated to generate additional indirect costs of

$45.3 million. This raises the average implicit price of an additional dollar of insurance by

10.7%, from $1.50 to $1.66. This increase is not great enough to affect many of our conclusions




                                                 27
based on representative agents.

   Despite the moderate change in total costs that must be distributed, incorporating health

insurance could have a potentially important effect on the average welfare analysis. Recall that

we incorporate the value of medical insurance by modifying after-tax income by a draw from

distributions of out-of-pocket medical costs specific to insurance status. As the figures in

Appendix D show, health insurance status in the cross-section is largely a proxy for

heterogeneity in health. Out-of-pocket expenditures are consistently highest for the group

covered by Medicare, which for younger households consists of disabled individuals.

Expenditures are actually lowest for the uninsured. Therefore, our adjustment will tend to make

DI families appear relatively worse off in the baseline and would be expected to make the reform

more attractive.

   Table 8 shows the average welfare impact by education status when the additional health

insurance costs are distributed across the population and baseline utility is adjusted to account for

insurance. For all but the highest education group, the average change in utility due to the policy

reform steadily rises with the level of risk aversion. Once it is recognized that disabled

individuals have lower disposable income than non-disabled individuals with the same level of

family income due to their higher medical expenses, the consumption floor provided by DI is

low enough that the perverse effect from taxing low-income disadvantaged workers to finance

the transfers no longer shows up. Though those with a high school degree or more continue to

be made worse off on average by an increase in payment generosity, the net impact for all

individuals combined is positive at moderate levels of risk aversion.

   Under this modification to our approach, the basic conclusion for whether the program is too

generous or not is reversed. We can use a back-of-the-envelope calculation to determine by how




                                                 28
much incorporating medical insurance has changed the effective replacement rate for after-tax

family income. According to our CEX estimates, average out-of-pocket medical expenses are

14.2% of income for families with DI beneficiaries, compared to 6.2% for other families. If the

8 percentage point difference were simply attributable to the onset of disability (likely an upper

bound), this would imply that after-tax replacement rates fall by nearly 8%. The fact that these

relatively small changes in program generosity and positioning within the income distribution

alter our conclusions suggests that the level may not be too far from what would be optimal

holding all other program parameters constant.



5. Conclusion

   We develop three basic insights into the desirability of increasing DI benefits from our

baseline analysis. First, while the indirect costs of benefit increases appear substantial, the value

attached to such increases for the typical worker is also substantial. Given our estimated average

implicit price of $1.50, representative workers of all education levels should be willing to

purchase an additional $1 of disability insurance under moderate levels of risk aversion. Second,

while the moral hazard costs appear to be relatively low, the implicit price of additional

insurance can be quite large for some subgroups of the population due to redistribution. The

implicit price of an additional dollar varies from less than $1 for individuals with less than a high

school degree to more than $7 for individuals with a college degree. While the importance of

redistribution across broad education categories has not been previously quantified, this pattern

in implicit prices is not surprising given differences in the incidence of disability.

   Our final conclusion is the least acknowledged and perhaps most surprising. We find that an

increase in benefits leads to transfers from lower income individuals and states of the world to




                                                  29
individuals and states with more moderate income, such that these transfers lead to net welfare

losses at high levels of risk aversion. From an individual insurance perspective, a marginal

increase in DI benefits is less attractive because of this potential redistribution to bad states from

worse states. From a social perspective, inequality aversion also plays a role. This highlights

that DI treats disability as a more "deserving" cause of low income than other negative shocks

that affect able-bodied individuals, and that the disabled are treated as more deserving than the

non-disabled poor. The incompleteness of the safety net could to lead to similar counterintuitive

findings for analyses of the adequacy of other categorical social insurance programs as well.

   Though our initial finding is that individuals are, if anything, over-insured against the subset

of career-ending disabilities covered by DI, it is important to remember that we are evaluating a

marginal change in benefit generosity. These results are derived in the context of a program that

provides generous benefits to low income workers who qualify. Our estimates of willingness to

pay make it clear that individuals would/should place a high value on the existence of the

program. Thus, an analysis that began from a base of less generous replacement rates would be

expected to reach different conclusions. The fact that we do indeed reach the opposite

conclusion about the adequacy of the income security provided by DI under the alternative

model that incorporates health insurance, which alters effective replacement rates, highlights this

point. Though our tools do not allow us to say much about the optimal level of DI benefits, this

sensitivity of our results may imply that the current level is in the neighborhood of what would

be conditionally optimal.




                                                  30
Appendix A: Implementation in the CPS

A.1 Identifying current beneficiaries

     Since the CPS does not explicitly identify which individuals are DI recipients, we need to

impute DI beneficiary status. This is fairly straightforward for the working aged population. We

assume that individuals aged 21 to 61 who report having a work limitation and who receive

Social Security benefits are receiving those benefits on the basis of their disability. This

imputation appears to be fairly accurate, capturing over 96% of the number of recipients reported

in the Social Security Bulletin administrative data for 1990.36 Table A1 summarizes the

characteristics of DI beneficiaries relative to working aged individuals. For both men and

women, DI beneficiaries are over 50% more likely to be Black than other working aged

individuals, and tend to be older and have lower levels of education. These types of

demographic differences are important factors in the redistribution that exists within the DI

program.

     The process of identifying current beneficiaries is more difficult for individuals over the age

of 61. We would like to identify those who were receiving DI benefits during their working

years, before the disability and retirement programs merge. However, for those over 61, it is

impossible to distinguish Social Security Disability Income from Social Security retirement

income. In addition, since self-reported disability rates increase with age, they cannot be used

effectively to determine which individuals were DI beneficiaries during their working years.

Rather than identify a subset of elderly individuals as DI beneficiaries with certainty, we impute

the probability that each elderly individual would have been a DI beneficiary by assuming that

elderly DI beneficiaries are similar to the younger working aged beneficiaries already identified.


36
  The Bulletin documents 2,479,270 worker beneficiaries aged 21-61 in 1990. Weighting the count of imputed
beneficiaries by the CPS person weight yields an estimate of 2,387,258.
     In order to calculate this probability, we relate whether individuals aged 51-61 are worker

beneficiaries to their individual characteristics, using a logit specification run separately by

gender. Results from these regressions can be found in the first two columns in Table A2. We

then use the coefficients from these regressions to predict the probability that individuals aged 62

and over are DI recipients, calculated by setting their age to 61. Any individual who does not

report Social Security income is assumed to have a zero probability of DI receipt.37 Assuming

similar mortality rates across disabled and non-disabled individuals, the probabilities are rescaled

proportionately so that the fraction of the population imputed to be DI recipients at any age over

61 is the same as the fraction at age 61 (7.6% for males and 6.5% for females).38 Of the 22,966

individuals in our sample over the age of 61, 14,842 are assigned a non-zero probability of being

a DI beneficiary. Summary statistics for the elderly population as a whole and for imputed

beneficiaries are found in Table A3.

     Since family DI payment amounts are poorly reported in the CPS, we estimate these amounts

for both types of current beneficiaries. All working aged beneficiaries in our sample receive DI

benefits on their own account (that is, due to their own disability and work history), so we

impute family benefits for them based on the reported level of worker benefits and the rules

followed by the Social Security system. Our methodology yields an estimated total of $13.8

billion in DI benefits, as compared with the value of $17.3 billion determined from the

administrative data reported by the Social Security Bulletin. To account for the apparent




37
   If a family has more than one elderly individual, we assume that only the individual with the highest predicted
probability has a non-zero probability of being a DI recipient. We assign the probability that either is a DI recipient
to this individual.
38
   In fact, mortality rates among DI beneficiaries tend to be higher than mortality rates among the newly retired.
Thus, our assumption is likely to exaggerate the fraction of the elderly who would have been DI recipients.
Calculations using existing estimates of the mortality rate among DI beneficiaries suggest the magnitude of this
effect is small.
underreporting in the CPS, we scale reported benefits by a factor of 1.25.39

     All elderly individuals assigned a positive probability of being a DI beneficiary report

receiving Social Security income. However, only some fraction is receiving benefits due to own

work history. We use data on marital history, relative earnings, and gender to determine which

individuals are likely to fall into this category. For these individuals, we impute family DI

benefits based on reported Social Security benefits.40

A.2 Identifying Marginal Applicants

     We rely on strong assumptions to identify those who would be induced to apply under the

new regime. Among working aged individuals, we assume that the pool of potential applicants

consists of all persons who self-report having disability-related work limitations but who are not

identified as current DI beneficiaries.41 The last column for men and women in Table A1

presents summary statistics for these individuals. Among elderly individuals, we assume that the

pool of potential applicants is the same as the pool of individuals imputed to have a non-zero

probability of having been DI beneficiaries.

     Following the regime change, each potential applicant may follow one of three paths. They

may choose not to apply for DI, they may apply and be accepted to the program, or they may

39
   The undercount of Social Security benefits in the CPS appears to affect all age levels. An equivalent scaling
factor derived for the population aged 62 and over is equal to 1.21. Due to the similarity of the implied scaling
factors, we apply the working aged scaling factor to all Social Security benefits for consistency.
40
   For those elderly who were awarded DI benefits, the DI benefit formula is used to calculate their benefit level
instead of the retirement formula. However, without detailed work histories for these individuals, we are unable to
use these formulas to calculate a true level of benefits under each program. Instead, we assume both DI and
retirement benefits to be equal to reported Social Security benefits for those determined to be receiving benefits on
their own account.
41
   We assume that those who do not report a limitation in the baseline are not in the pool of potential applicants.
This ignores the possibility that self-reported disability might respond to changes in the parameters of DI. Previous
work has suggested that the fraction of the working aged population identifying themselves as unable to work is
quite sensitive to the availability and generosity of disability benefits, but that the fraction identifying themselves as
in some way limited in their capacity for work is much less sensitive to such factors (Waidmann et al 1995).
    We exclude limited individuals who report SSI receipt since these individuals would have had to have passed the
same screening used for DI recipients and must have been determined to be ineligible for DI due to inadequate work
history. While true in general, this ignores the possibility that some SSI recipients are in the process of applying for
apply but be rejected. Each of these scenarios involves different indirect costs associated with

changes in benefit outlays, labor supply, transfers, and tax payments. Rather than attribute a

specific path to each individual within the potential applicant pool, we assign individuals a

probability of each of these three outcomes.

   In order to predict the likelihood of each of these three scenarios, we first must determine how

many individuals will be induced to apply by the increase in DI benefit generosity, and how

many of those applications will be successful. As described in the text, we assume that a 1%

increase in benefits leads to a 0.5% increase in applications and that the steady state number of

applicants is approximately double the number of recipients. Given these assumptions, the

average probability that a limited working aged individual applies in response to a 1% increase

in benefits is .01×.5×(2×D)/L, where D is the number of current beneficiaries and L is the

number of limited non-beneficiaries. To account for individual differences in this proclivity

across individuals, we adjust the above probability using information on the likelihood that

limited individuals with differing observable characteristics are on DI.42 The resulting estimates

of the probability of applying rely on the assumption that marginal applicants are observably

similar to current recipients.

   For elderly individuals, the probability of applying is derived directly from the imputed

likelihood that the individual is a current DI beneficiary. We scale the probability that an elderly

individual is a current DI beneficiary by .01×.5×2 to take into account the magnitude of the

benefit increase, the application elasticity, and the likelihood of acceptance.

   With estimates of the likelihood that an individual is induced to apply on hand, we derive the


DI.
42
   We multiply the average probability by a term that is equal to that individual's predicted likelihood of being on DI
relative to the average probability among the limited non-recipient population. This term is derived from the results
likelihood of each outcome for a potential applicant. If we define the probability that an

applicant applies as ai, then, given our assumption that half are accepted, the probabilities of

applying and being accepted and of applying and being rejected are both equal to .5×ai. The

likelihood of not applying is simply (1-ai).

   In the event the application is successful, the person is eligible to receive some amount of DI

payments. Since the CPS does not include earnings histories, we need to predict the level of

payments these individuals receive. We regress actual log payments to current working-aged

beneficiaries on their individual characteristics by gender (regression results can be found in

columns 5 and 6 of Table A2), and then use the resulting coefficients to predict individual

payments for our marginal working aged applicants. We then use the program rules to simulate

family benefits. For elderly potential applicants, we use the same calculation as for elderly

potential recipients, which ignores changes in benefit payments that would result from altered

work histories.




of logit regressions predicting DI receipt among limited individuals separately by gender (See columns 3 and 4 in
Table A2).
Table A1. Summary Statistics for the Working-Aged Population (21-61 years)
                                                            Males                                                       Females
                                    Non-Limited              DI                Potential         Non-Limited              DI                Potential
                                    Individuals          Beneficiaries        Applicants         Individuals          Beneficiaries        Applicants
Black                                  0.105                0.174               0.160               0.122                0.225               0.151
American Indian                         0.005               0.010                0.010               0.006               0.015                0.010
Asian                                   0.028               0.010                0.018               0.031               0.013                0.019
Hispanic                                0.086               0.061                0.095               0.082               0.058                0.068
Age                                      37.9                46.3                 43.1                38.2                48.4                 42.5
                                        (10.9)              (10.9)               (11.2)              (11.0)              (10.7)               (11.0)
Years of Education                      13.3                 10.4                11.9                 13.1                10.6                12.3
                                        (2.9)                (3.9)               (3.1)                (2.7)               (3.8)               (2.9)
Married                                 0.631               0.465                0.566               0.643               0.332                0.513
Never Married                           0.257               0.340                0.237               0.186               0.223                0.161
Number of Children                       0.77                0.33                 0.62                0.91                0.32                 0.68
Under 18                                (1.12)              (0.88)               (1.09)              (1.17)              (0.76)               (1.08)
Individual DI Benefits                    -                  7973†               7383†                  -                 6254†               5708†
                                                            (3854)              (1521)                                   (3088)              (1003)
Family DI Benefits                        -                  9016‡               8624‡                  -                 7448‡               6787‡
                                                            (5097)              (2622)                                   (4640)              (1713)

Probability Induced to                    -                    -                 0.005‡                 -                   -                 0.004‡
Apply                                                                           (0.002)                                                      (0.002)
Number of observations                 38561                  816               1776                 41946                618                  1651
Notes: The mean and standard deviation are shown for key characteristics of the working-aged population, broken down by gender and DI status. All
individuals aged 21-61 years in the March 1991 CPS are included in the sample. The first column in each panel reports statistics for able-bodied
individuals. The second column reports statistics for individuals who are imputed to be current DI worker beneficiaries (i.e. individuals who report a
work limitation and report Social Security receipt). The third column reports statistics for individuals who report a work limitation but are not currently
receiving Social Security income, individuals who we assume are within the pool of potential applicants. Observations are weighted using the CPS
person weight. †The reported individual DI benefits have been scaled up by 25% to account for underreporting in the CPS. ‡These are either calculated
or predicted values, using the methods described in the text.
Table A2. Predicting DI Participation and Payment Levels
                             Likelihood Elderly Individuals                 Likelihood Limited Working-                Predicting Individual DI
                                  are DI Beneficiaries                        Aged Individuals are DI                Payments for Working-Aged
                                                                                      Recipients                               Recipients
                                        Males              Females              Males          Females                  Males           Females
                                          (1)                 (2)                 (3)             (4)                     (5)              (6)
Constant                                -4.616              -6.550              -3.475          -1.837                   8.345            7.078
                                       (1.077)             (1.110)             (0.835)         (0.379)                 (0.146)          (0.549)
Black                                      --               0.617               -0.246             --                   -0.116              --
                                                           (0.167)             (0.152)                                 (0.058)
American Indian                         0.604               1.307                  --              --                      --               --
                                       (0.414)             (0.470)
Asian                                   -1.844                 --                -0.751                 --               0.390                  --
                                       (0.798)                                  (0.465)                                 (0.112)
Hispanic                                -0.853               -0.553              -0.701              -0.475                --                   --
                                       (0.232)              (0.262)             (0.159)             (0.192)
Age                                      0.062               0.081                0.128              0.041               0.006                0.051
                                       (0.018)              (0.018)             (0.038)             (0.006)             (0.002)              (0.023)
Age Squared (coefficient                   --                  --               -0.107                  --                  --                -0.054
× 100)                                                                          (0.043)                                                      (0.025)
Years of Education                      -0.071               -0.010              -0.080              -0.087              -0.014               -0.012
                                       (0.067)              (0.070)             (0.014)             (0.015)             (0.016)              (0.025)
Years of Education                      -0.007               -0.008                --                  --                0.002                0.003
Squared                                (0.003)              (0.004)                                                     (0.001)              (0.001)
Married                                   --                   --                  --                -0.757                --                 -0.077
                                                                                                    (0.122)                                  (0.059)
Never Married                           0.547                0.542               0.570               0.267               -0.311               -0.117
                                       (0.204)              (0.229)             (0.140)             (0.151)             (0.059)              (0.080)
Number of Children                        --                   --               -0.145               -0.157                --                   --
Under 18                                                                        (0.066)             (0.070)
Number of Observations                   7990                8741                2872                 2871                 816                 618
Notes: The first two columns are based on separate logistic regressions for males and females aged 51-61 in our March 1991 CPS sample, where the
dependent variable is equal to 1 if the individual is a worker beneficiary. Columns 3 and 4 present results from separate logistic regressions for males
and females aged 21-61 with work limitations, where the dependent variable is equal to 1 if the individual is a worker beneficiary. Columns 5 and 6
report the results form ordinary least squares regressions of the logarithm of reported individual DI benefits for male and female DI beneficiaries aged
21-61. Each observation is weighted by the CPS person weight and the standard errors are corrected using White's generalized method. Observable
characteristics that did not enter significantly were dropped from the regressions since our goal is to obtain the best prediction.
Table A3. Summary Statistics for the Elderly Population (62+ years)
                                                               Males                                                    Females
                                           Non-DI          DI Beneficiary,    DI Beneficiary,        Non-DI          DI Beneficiary,    DI Beneficiary,
                                         Beneficiaries     Own Benefits       Spouse Benefits      Beneficiaries     Own Benefits       Spouse Benefits
Black                                       0.089              0.078              0.012               0.071              0.084              0.099
American Indian                              0.005              0.003              0.015               0.004              0.006              0.004
Asian                                        0.032              0.009              0.000               0.021              0.017              0.013
Hispanic                                     0.047              0.036              0.017               0.050              0.040              0.032
Age                                         69.794             71.804             71.537              69.418             70.820             74.415
                                            (6.804)            (6.821)            (6.949)             (6.368)            (6.657)            (7.498)
Years of Education                          12.798             10.470             10.928              11.468             11.616             10.819
                                            (3.659)            (3.674)            (3.182)             (3.379)            (3.193)            (3.225)
Married                                      0.893              0.685              1.000               0.810              0.692              0.158
Never Married                                0.034              0.053              0.000               0.032              0.308              0.000
Number of Children under 18                  0.040              0.032              0.000               0.019              0.019              0.017
                                            (0.259)            (0.246)                                (0.181)            (0.167)            (0.180)
Probability is a DI Beneficiary                -                0.120‡             0.125‡                -                0.132‡             0.090‡
                                                               (0.078)            (0.061)                                (0.098)            (0.070)
Individual DI Benefits                         -                8818†                 -                  -                6328†                 -
                                                               (3545)                                                    (3280)
Family DI Benefits                             -                9692‡                 -                  -                6441‡                 -
                                                               (4478)                                                    (3530)
Probability Induced to Apply                   -                0.120‡             0.125‡                -                0.132‡             0.090‡
                                                               (0.078)            (0.061)                                (0.098)            (0.070)
(×100)
Number of observations                         3559               6023                66                 4565              1649               7104
Notes: The mean and standard deviation are shown for key characteristics of the elderly population, broken down by gender and DI status. The first
column in each panel presents statistics for elderly individuals who are assigned a zero probability of having been a working-aged DI recipient. The
second and third columns report statistics for individuals who are imputed to have at least some probability of having been DI worker beneficiaries.
Individuals included in the sample for the second column generate Social Security, or what we term DI benefits, on their own account. Individuals
included in the third column receive Social Security benefits due to another family member and will therefore not generate additional benefits due to the
policy reform. Observations are weighted using the CPS person weight. †The reported Social Security benefits have been scaled up by 25% to account
for underreporting in the CPS. ‡These are either calculated or predicted values, using the methods described in the text.
Appendix B: The Impact of Applying to DI

   In order to identify the impact of successful and unsuccessful applications for DI

benefits, we combine information on individuals who are observed in the SIPP either at

some point before applying, during the application process, or at some point after to

create a pseudo panel. Our regression framework allows us to track changes in key

variables around the time of initial application relative to a control group of similar

individuals with work limitations who never apply. Our approach will, if anything, tend

to overstate the causal impact of application since some of the change is likely due to the

onset of disability. The data and specification used in these regressions are discussed in

the next two sections. In the third and fourth sections, we discuss the results and how the

behavioral responses are incorporated in our simulations.

B.1 Data

   The Surveys of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) are a series of United States

Census panel surveys of representative populations of the United States. New panels

were fielded in 1990, 1991, 1992, and 1993.43 For the 1990 SIPP panel, the Census

interviewed a new rotation group each month for four months starting in February 1990.

These groups were interviewed eight times at four-month intervals. Each interview

contains monthly information for the preceding four months. Hence, the 1990 SIPP

panel provides monthly data for up to 32 months on each individual covering a 35-month

period from October 1989 through August 1992. The 1991 SIPP panel was fielded using

the same panel design, and in 1992 and 1993 a similar design including an additional

ninth wave of interviews was used to provide a total of 36 months of data.
     We match the 1990-1993 SIPP panels to the Social Security disability determination

records. The records are from Disability Determination Service (DDS) and

Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) stages of the determination process for those who

applied for DI benefits. We have information for individuals whose applications were

acted upon between 1986 and 1994 for the 1990 and 1991 panels and between 1977 and

1997 for the 1992 and 1993 panels.44 We use only those administrative records that

begin with an initial consideration or reconsideration by the DDS and contain valid date

of birth, filing date, and decision date information. The matching procedure produced a

total of 5,594 SIPP respondents who are identified as having applied for DI, with the bulk

of the applications occurring during the late 1980s and 1990s.

     In what follows, we consider only the first application date observed in the

administrative records for each respondent, and we consider only the final decision

observed for that application. Thus, a respondent who is initially denied benefits but is

awarded benefits at a later stage of the same application process will be referred to as

having been awarded benefits. A respondent who is denied benefits, then later re-applies

and is awarded benefits as a result of the later application, will be referred to as having

been denied benefits.

     In our analysis, we merge our four SIPP panels but do not do so along a calendar time

dimension. Instead, we focus on an event—initial application month and year for DI

benefits—and array our respondent panel data by individual from the months prior to

application (t − k ) through the months following application (t + k ) , where t is the


43
  New SIPP panels were fielded in earlier and later years but not all of these data have
been matched to Social Security Administration administrative records.
44
 These data are essentially the same as those used by Lahiri, Vaughan and Wixon (1995) and Hu, Lahiri,
Vaughan and Wixon (1997) in their work studying applications to the DI and SSI programs.
month of application. For those who applied for benefits prior to or in the early waves of

the SIPP, we have information on their household income following application. For

those who applied for benefits in a middle wave, we have information on their household

income in the months just prior to application and just following application. For those

who applied for benefits in the later waves of the SIPP or just afterwards, we have

information on their household income in the months prior to application. Using this

approach, we are able to obtain snapshots of respondents’ average household income in

the months and years prior to and following their application for DI benefits that extend

beyond the maximum of 36 months that any one respondent is followed in a given SIPP

panel.

   We include a control group of SIPP respondents who report having experienced a

work limitation, but whom we do not identify as having applied for federal disability

benefits (either DI or SSI) at any time. To ensure that we compare applicants to non-

applicants that have similar demographic characteristics, we assign weights to non-

applicants that correspond to the proportion of the DI applicant population within the

relevant age, race, sex, martial status, and educational attainment cell. There are 288

separate cells in the underlying matrix, and the same number of applicants and non-

applicants are assigned to each cell when DI applicants are weighted using the given

population weights and non-applicants are weighted using the newly defined weights.

B.2 Empirical Specification

   We set up a regression model that allows us to estimate how a variety of income

measures and indicators are affected by application. We include fixed effects for each

individual, i , and for each calendar month, t , in the sample period. A set of indicator
variables for months relative to application month is also included. These variables

(month zero, for example, representing the month of application, or month twelve, to take

another example, representing the month one year subsequent to application) are equal to

one if the observation of income data is taken from the month corresponding to the

indicator variable, and zero otherwise. Thus the equations have the form:

        yit = α i + γ t + ∑ β j mij + ε ij ,                                           (1B)
                           j



where yit represents monthly income (in January 1990 dollars), an indicator for positive

income, or an indicator for insurance coverage for individual i in time period t ,

depending on the case. The α ’s and the γ ’s represent applicant and calendar month

fixed effects and the mij ’s represent the indicator variables for each month relative to the

application month. There is a separate indicator variable for each month representing

data from 35 months before to 39 months after application. Observations from 39 or

more months prior to application or 40 or more months subsequent to application are

excluded from the regression sample. Therefore, the coefficients on application month

indicator variables (the β ’s) can be interpreted as the average change from the level

observed 36 to 38 months prior to application.

   Graphs in the figures that follow are constructed using estimated coefficients from

regressions with the format given by equation (1B). For purposes of presentation, the

β ’s are added to average baseline incomes (technically, the average α for applicants).

Thus, the graphs show average income from a particular source in each application

month. Since a control group is included in the regressions (and application month
dummies will be identically zero for all individuals in the control group), the calendar

month fixed effects remove time trends resulting from age or economy-wide trends.

   The time patterns for earnings, transfer receipts, and health insurance status are shown

in Figures B1 through B6 for awarded and denied applicants separately by gender. The

graphs in the left panel of each figure correspond to successful applicants (“awarded”),

and the right-hand side panel shows the results for unsuccessful applicants (“denied”).

The y-axis shows the average value of the variable of interest and the x-axis indicates the

number of months relative to the time of application, with a negative sign indicating

months before application. Each of the six figures is based on one of the following

monthly measures: own earnings conditional on positive earnings, own labor force

participation, spouse’s earnings (unconditional), other transfer income (excluding AFDC,

Food Stamps, and SSI),45 health insurance status, and public health insurance status.

B.3 Earnings and Transfers

   In order to simulate the impact of successful and unsuccessful applications, we first

use the regression results to predict how family income changes due to altered earnings

and "other" transfer receipts. We then directly model changes in eligibility through the

AFDC, Food Stamp, and SSI programs using the benefit algorithms for 1990. To

determine changes in receipt, we rely on assumptions about post-application take-up for

AFDC and SSI and apply SIPP-based estimates for the Food Stamp program. Finally, we

calculate changes in state and federal income and payroll taxes paid. We address changes

in public health insurance coverage in the next section.

   For successful applicants, the most important behavioral response is the reduction in

own labor force participation. While there is no clear trend in average earnings
(conditional on working) in Figure B1, Figure B2 demonstrates that nearly all successful

applicants leave the labor force permanently. For this group, there is no evidence of a

significant change in average spousal earnings (Figure B3).46 Figure B4 shows that the

same holds for other transfer income for males, though there is a small (but economically

insignificant) increase for females.

     Therefore, to measure the public costs associated with successful applications, we first

remove own earnings and add predicted DI benefits. We then calculate changes in

transfers through the three specific programs that are likely to be most important. By

definition, none of the marginal applicants were eligible for SSI prior to application since

the screening process for the two programs is essentially the same. For successful

marginal applicants with income low enough to qualify them for SSI, we assume 100%

take-up. For both AFDC and Food Stamps, we observe baseline participation in the CPS

and then predict eligibility post application. For the Food Stamp program, we use the

matched SIPP-SSA data to estimate average take-up among eligible awarded applicants

more than one year after application (57.9%), and apply this estimate to randomly assign

eligibles to the program.47 The sample is too small to generate reliable estimates of take-

up for those eligible for AFDC, so we assume full take-up.

     Though labor force participation rates of unsuccessful applicants drop sharply prior to

the month of application, participation rebounds somewhat over time (Figure B2). For


45
   Other transfer income includes state and county short-term cash, transportation, and childcare assistance.
46
   While this appears to be inconsistent with our assumption that wives of current beneficiaries respond to
the lump sum DI payment, application to DI involves competing changes in the value of leisure and in
income that apparently generate a net zero response for spouses. We report the results for unconditioned
earnings since we are interested in the average effect on earnings for spouses and have less reason to expect
the participation margin to be important.
47
   We assume that all baseline participants who continue to be eligible continue to receive Food Stamp
benefits. We then randomly determine which of the remaining eligible applicants receive Food Stamps to
obtain the appropriate aggregate take-up rate.
denied males, 31.8% as many are working by one year after application as were working

one year before. The same estimate for females is 49.9%. These rates reflect monthly

participation and could be consistent with some fraction returning to work full time and

some fraction returning to work part time or intermittently. In the absence of evidence on

the appropriate combination, we assume the above fractions of denied applicants who are

initially working in our sample return to work and that the remaining individuals leave

the labor force. The figure showing the pattern in earnings over time for denied

applicants (Figure B1) suggests that denied applicants who return to work earn the same

as before. There is no evidence of a sizeable impact of application on either spousal

labor supply or other transfers (Figures B3 and B4), so we ignore these. Finally, these

individuals will not be eligible for SSI, but we handle AFDC and Food Stamps in the

same way as for successful applicants, except that we use the estimated post-application

Food Stamps take-up rate specific to denied applicants (59.2%).

B.4 Health Insurance Coverage

   The final two figures present the coefficients from regressions of health insurance

coverage. Figure B5 graphs the coefficients on the time-since-application dummies for

any health insurance coverage, while Figure B6 graphs the same for any public health

insurance coverage. An individual is identified as having some form of public health

insurance if the individual is covered by Medicare, Medicaid, CHAMPUS, CHAMPVA,

or military health care.

   Figures B5 and B6 show that successful applicants experience a dramatic increase in

health insurance coverage driven by a nearly complete shift to Medicare, as would be

expected since all are eligible after two years on the DI program. Unsuccessful
applicants do not experience a net change in insurance coverage, though the composition

of coverage shifts somewhat toward public programs. Relative to pre-application levels,

public insurance coverage rates increase by 17.6 percentage points for females and 19.6

percentage points for male by two years after application.

   Determining the net fiscal externality associated with these changes is very difficult.

Even individuals who are insured through private plans may be receiving subsidies from

other lower cost individuals covered by the same plan. Similarly, individuals who are

uninsured may impose costs on others through the system. If there is a net subsidy

through health insurance or uncompensated health care prior to application, then the

effective increase in the financial burden on others from any shifts to Medicare or

Medicaid following application will be lower than the amount of new public outlays.

   The evidence suggests that that there are sizeable subsidies through these other

channels. Among workers, there appears to be some shifting of relative health care costs

through reduced wages according to demographic characteristics such as age (e.g. Gruber

1994). However, there is likely to be limited wage offset according to health status

(Currie and Madrian 1999). If so, privately insured marginal applicants, who are likely to

be of poorer than average health, receive a subsidy equal to the difference between their

medical costs and the average for workers within their age, and perhaps gender, group.

While there is limited evidence regarding subsidies for the uninsured, recent estimates

find that the typical uninsured individual pays only about one-third of the cost of received

care (Pauly and Herring 2001).

   We choose an approach that provides a clear upper bound on the new public health

insurance costs associated with marginal applicants. We assume that all individuals that
were not receiving public insurance prior to applying but then shift to public insurance

generate net new health care costs. Since the average ratio of Medicare payments to DI

family payments is 0.475,48 we scale the value of DI benefits to successful applicants

who were not initially publicly insured by 1.475 to incorporate Medicare costs. We

assume that the fractions of denied applicants estimated to be newly covered by public

health insurance generate new costs equal to per capita Medicaid expenditures in 1990

($6595).




48
  The Social Security Bulletin (1991) reports that total annual Medicare spending for DI beneficiaries was
$11,239 million in 1990. In that same year, monthly payments to DI worker beneficiaries, their spouses,
and children were $1,768 million, $40 million, and $162 million, respectively.
Figure B1. Applicant's Earnings (Conditional on Reporting Positive Earnings)
           Minus 1.96 SE                    Plus 1.96 SE                             Minus 1.96 SE                      Plus 1.96 SE


2143.95                                                               1652.29




     0                                                                         0
          -36      -24     -12          0        12        24   36                 -36       -24      -12            0         12       24    36
                              DI applicants awarded                                                         DI applicants denied
                           Own Earnings                                                               Own Earnings
           Minus 1.96 SE                    Plus 1.96 SE                             Minus 1.96 SE                      Plus 1.96 SE


2737.08                                                               2161.36




     0                                                                         0
          -36      -24     -12          0         12       24   36                 -36       -24      -12          0          12        24    36
                                  Male DI, awarded                                                            Male DI, denied
                           Own Earnings                                                               Own Earnings
           Minus 1.96 SE                    Plus 1.96 SE                           Minus 1.96 SE                      Plus 1.96 SE


2294.32                                                              1799.27




     0                                                                    0
          -36      -24     -12          0         12       24   36             -36         -24       -12         0          12         24    36
                                 Female DI, awarded                                                        Female DI, denied
                           Own Earnings                                                              Own Earnings
Figure B2. Applicant's Labor Force Participation
            Minus 1.96 SE                    Plus 1.96 SE                        Minus 1.96 SE                     Plus 1.96 SE


.879175                                                                .77809




-.006611                                                                   0
           -36      -24     -12          0        12        24   36             -36      -24     -12            0         12      24   36
                               DI applicants awarded                                                   DI applicants denied
                   Fraction Positive Own Earnings                                       Fraction Positive Own Earnings
            Minus 1.96 SE                    Plus 1.96 SE                        Minus 1.96 SE                     Plus 1.96 SE


.883306                                                               .791009




-.055122                                                                   0
           -36      -24     -12          0         12       24   36             -36      -24     -12          0          12       24   36
                                   Male DI, awarded                                                      Male DI, denied
                   Fraction Positive Own Earnings                                       Fraction Positive Own Earnings
            Minus 1.96 SE                    Plus 1.96 SE                        Minus 1.96 SE                     Plus 1.96 SE


.904787                                                               .815131




-.012153                                                                   0
           -36      -24     -12          0         12       24   36             -36      -24     -12         0          12        24   36
                                  Female DI, awarded                                                   Female DI, denied
                   Fraction Positive Own Earnings                                       Fraction Positive Own Earnings
Figure B3. Applicant's Spouse's Earnings (Unconditional)
           Minus 1.96 SE                      Plus 1.96 SE                        Minus 1.96 SE                       Plus 1.96 SE


1509.28                                                                1306.32




     0                                                                      0
          -36      -24       -12          0        12        24   36             -36      -24       -12            0         12      24   36
                                DI applicants awarded                                                     DI applicants denied
                           Spouse's Earnings                                                      Spouse's Earnings
           Minus 1.96 SE                      Plus 1.96 SE                        Minus 1.96 SE                       Plus 1.96 SE


917.988                                                                862.775




     0                                                                      0
          -36      -24       -12          0         12       24   36             -36      -24       -12          0          12       24   36
                                    Male DI, awarded                                                        Male DI, denied
                           Spouse's Earnings                                                      Spouse's Earnings
           Minus 1.96 SE                      Plus 1.96 SE                        Minus 1.96 SE                       Plus 1.96 SE


2595.02                                                                1935.53




     0                                                                      0
          -36      -24       -12          0         12       24   36             -36      -24       -12         0          12        24   36
                                   Female DI, awarded                                                     Female DI, denied
                           Spouse's Earnings                                                      Spouse's Earnings
Figure B4. Applicant's Transfer Income Excluding AFDC, Food Stamps, and SSI
            Minus 1.96 SE                      Plus 1.96 SE                         Minus 1.96 SE                       Plus 1.96 SE


32.7982                                                                  25.296




 -.56878                                                                -.753118
           -36      -24       -12          0        12        24   36              -36      -24       -12            0         12      24   36
                                 DI applicants awarded                                                      DI applicants denied
                          Other Transfer Income                                                   Other Transfer Income
            Minus 1.96 SE                      Plus 1.96 SE                         Minus 1.96 SE                       Plus 1.96 SE


45.1911                                                                 30.2029




-12.8136                                                                -8.54929
           -36      -24       -12          0         12       24   36              -36      -24       -12          0          12       24   36
                                     Male DI, awarded                                                         Male DI, denied
                          Other Transfer Income                                                   Other Transfer Income
            Minus 1.96 SE                      Plus 1.96 SE                         Minus 1.96 SE                       Plus 1.96 SE


43.8775                                                                 28.8592




 -.90449                                                                -1.44734
           -36      -24       -12          0         12       24   36              -36      -24       -12         0          12        24   36
                                    Female DI, awarded                                                      Female DI, denied
                          Other Transfer Income                                                   Other Transfer Income
Figure B5. Applicant's Health Insurance Status
         Plus 1.96 SE                       Minus 1.96 SE                   Plus 1.96 SE                        Minus 1.96 SE


   1                                                                  1



   .8                                                                 .8



   .6                                                                 .6



   .4                                                                 .4



   .2                                                                 .2



   0                                                                  0
        -36      -24       -12         0         12         24   36        -36      -24       -12            0         12       24   36
                              DI applicants awarded                                                 DI applicants denied
                        Any Health Insurance                                               Any Health Insurance


         Plus 1.96 SE                       Minus 1.96 SE                   Plus 1.96 SE                        Minus 1.96 SE


   1                                                                  1



   .8                                                                 .8



   .6                                                                 .6



   .4                                                                 .4



   .2                                                                 .2



   0                                                                  0
        -36      -24       -12          0          12       24   36        -36      -24       -12          0          12        24   36
                                  Male DI, awarded                                                    Male DI, denied
                        Any Health Insurance                                               Any Health Insurance


         Plus 1.96 SE                       Minus 1.96 SE                   Plus 1.96 SE                        Minus 1.96 SE


   1                                                                  1



   .8                                                                 .8



   .6                                                                 .6



   .4                                                                 .4



   .2                                                                 .2



   0                                                                  0
        -36      -24       -12          0          12       24   36        -36      -24       -12          0          12        24   36
                                 Female DI, awarded                                                  Female DI, denied
                        Any Health Insurance                                               Any Health Insurance
Figure B6. Applicant's Public Health Insurance Status
         Plus 1.96 SE                     Minus 1.96 SE                    Plus 1.96 SE                      Minus 1.96 SE


   1                                                                 1



   .8                                                                .8



   .6                                                                .6



   .4                                                                .4



   .2                                                                .2



   0                                                                 0
        -36      -24     -12         0         12          24   36        -36      -24     -12            0         12        24   36
                            DI applicants awarded                                                DI applicants denied
                  Any Public Health Insurance                                       Any Public Health Insurance


         Plus 1.96 SE                     Minus 1.96 SE                    Plus 1.96 SE                      Minus 1.96 SE


   1                                                                 1



   .8                                                                .8



   .6                                                                .6



   .4                                                                .4



   .2                                                                .2



   0                                                                 0
        -36      -24     -12          0          12        24   36        -36      -24     -12          0          12         24   36
                                Male DI, awarded                                                   Male DI, denied
                  Any Public Health Insurance                                       Any Public Health Insurance


          Plus 1.96 SE                     Minus 1.96 SE                    Plus 1.96 SE                      Minus 1.96 SE


    1                                                                 1



   .8                                                                .8



   .6                                                                .6



   .4                                                                .4



   .2                                                                .2



    0                                                                 0
        -36       -24     -12          0          12       24   36        -36       -24     -12          0          12        24   36
                                Female DI, awarded                                                 Female DI, denied
                   Any Public Health Insurance                                       Any Public Health Insurance
Appendix C: Predicting Family Consumption

   We would like to account for the fact that variation in the distribution of income

overstates variation in consumption since households can use savings and other means to

smooth transitory shocks to income. Therefore, we estimate the relationship between

consumption and income from the Bureau of Labor Statistics' Consumer Expenditure

Survey (CEX). We then use this relationship to adjust family income in the CPS.

C.1 Data

   The CEX interviews approximately 5,000 households every quarter on a rotating

basis. Households are interviewed for four consecutive quarters and then dropped from

the sample. Each quarter, households provide detailed reports on expenditures by

category for the prior three months. Information on income for the prior year, which

coincides with the timing of annual consumption, is gathered in the final interview.

   We use the family-level extracts compiled by Harris and Sabelhaus (2000). In order to

provide a ten-year window around 1990, we include households interviewed from the

first quarter of 1985 through the last quarter of 1995. We restrict the sample to the subset

of 40,848 households that provide complete income reports and remain in the sample for

a full year. Weights are provided that adjust the national CEX weights to account for

attrition by age and housing tenure. We use these adjusted weights in our analyses.

   Our income measure is calculated to match after-tax income in the CPS as closely as

possible. It includes all components of earned and unearned income (including Food

Stamp benefits) except for payments to employees in-kind and insurance refunds, which

are not available in the CPS. For the same reason, we do not subtract alimony or child
support payments made by the household. After-tax income is pre-tax income less

reported federal and state income and payroll taxes paid.

     Our total consumption measure is comprehensive and includes expenditures on the

following categories of goods and services: food, tobacco, alcohol, clothing, personal

care, medical, recreation, education, household, utilities, personal business, vehicles,

transportation, and non-mortgage interest payments. We include rent paid for renters and

home rental equivalent value for homeowners (and exclude home maintenance and

financial costs).

     Both income and consumption are converted to 1990 dollars using the CPI for all

goods. Mean annual after-tax income in the CEX sample is $27,930 (with a standard

error of $110), which is somewhat higher than the mean for our CPS sample ($23,597

($70)). This difference can at least be partly explained by the fact that the CEX family-

level data corresponds to more expansive household units than our CPS family-level data.

Mean annual consumption in the CEX sample is $25,715 ($81).

C.2 Predicting Consumption

     Our specification relates the natural logarithm of consumption to the natural logarithm

of income and a constant term. We replace income to $1 if income is less than $1 and

also include an indicator for these low-income households. We allow for heterogeneity

in the relationship between consumption and income by age and disability status. We

split households into three categories according to age of the household head: less than 45

years, 45-61 years, and 62 years and over. For the two non-elderly groups, we split the

sample further into households with and without a disabled working-aged individual.49


49
  Households with working-aged disabled members are identified as households that either report SSI
receipts or have no member over 61 years of age and report receiving Social Security income.
   We began with a specification that allowed for a full set of interactions between the

other control variables and indicators for each demographic group. We could not reject

the hypothesis that the slopes were the same across these five groups. While the

coefficients on the low-income indicator were significantly different from one another for

the groups that had low-income individuals, not all of our groups were represented.

Therefore, the specification that we implement constrains the coefficient on log income

and the coefficient on the low-income indicator to be the same across groups, and

includes separate constant terms for each group.

   The ordinary least squares results from this specification are shown below:

        Table C1. Predicting Annual Consumption
                                             Sample                        Standard
        Independent Variable                  Share         Coefficient      Error
        Constant                                              5.141         0.061
        Ln(annual after-tax income)                           0.486         0.006
        Indicator for income less than $1                     5.376         0.084
        Head under 45 years of age
          No working-aged disabled in CU      51.0%               -           -
          Working-aged disabled member        2.5%             -0.131       0.019
        Head between 45 and 61 years of age
          No working-aged disabled in CU      20.8%             0.074       0.007
          Working-aged disabled member        2.4%             -0.082       0.018
        Head aged 62+                         23.3%            -0.036       0.007


The dependent variable is log consumption and the omitted demographic category is

household head under 45 with no working-aged disabled members. The regression is

weighted using the adjusted weight. The number of observations is 40,848 and the

adjusted R-squared is 0.494.

   The coefficient on log income is surprisingly low, a robust finding that is not an

artifact of pooling the sample. There is certainly a great deal of measurement error in

income in the CEX that would lead to a downward bias in the estimated income
elasticity. As long as measurement error in the CPS is similar to that in the CEX, then

this prediction is still useful for our purposes. It is important to keep in mind, however,

that applying these estimates to predict consumption in the CPS likely leads to an overly

narrow distribution. One other finding that is worth noting is that disabled households

apparently consume less than non-disabled households with the same income.

   In order to predict consumption for our CPS sample, we apply the estimated

coefficients shown in Table B1. However, we first make one adjustment. Since we

conduct welfare analyses both for income and for consumption ("smoothed" income), we

want to ensure that any differences in the inferences are not driven by differences in

mean levels. We, therefore, redefine the constant term to equate mean income and mean

predicted consumption.
Appendix D: Estimating Out-of-pocket Medical Expenditures

   We model the role of health insurance in our welfare calculations through its impact

on the distribution of out-of-pocket expenditures. In this appendix, we describe how we

estimate this distribution for different demographic groups by insurance status.

D.1 Data

   We rely on the same CEX extracts that are described in Appendix C. We combine

these data with additional data on health insurance status from the detailed expenditure

files on hospitalization and health insurance included in the CEX since the first quarter of

1988. From these files, we are able to identify whether any members in the household

are covered by private insurance, Medicare, Medicaid, and/or another program that

provides free health care (e.g. CHAMPUS or military health care). To match these

quarterly data on insurance status to the annual income files, we identify a household as

covered by one of these plans if any member was covered at any point during the year.

Restricting the sample to households that are complete income reporters and remain in

the sample for a full year, the analysis sample includes 28,718 households interviewed

between the first quarter of 1988 and the last quarter of 1995.

D.2 Methodology

   We use the empirical distributions of out-of-pocket health care expenditures in the

CEX to randomly reduce income for households in the CPS. We estimate the distribution

separately for households with heads under 45 years, between 45 and 61 years, and over

62 years of age. We further distinguish among households within these groups by four

mutually exclusive classes of insurance coverage: no insurance (12.2%), private

insurance only (52.6%), Medicare (22.8%), and Medicaid or any other free care program
(12.4%). The Medicare category may include individuals covered by supplementary

private insurance plans. The Medicaid category includes any household covered by

Medicaid, including households that are also covered by Medicare or private insurance.

   Health care expenditures include expenditures on medical goods and services, as well

as payments for health insurance premiums and copayments. We calculate the income

share of health care expenditures by taking the ratio of expenditures to after-tax income,

as calculated in Appendix C. For each of our three age groups by the four insurance

statuses, we then identify the percentiles of the distribution of the income share (for every

two percentiles from the 2nd to the 98th) for each of our three demographic groups by the

four insurance statuses. The data are weighted by the adjusted household weight for

these calculations.

   Each household in the CPS sample is then randomly assigned the out-of-pocket

income share associated with one of the percentiles of the distribution that is appropriate

to them. For the welfare calculations, we subtract from (or add to) household income the

difference between the assigned health care expenditures and overall average health care

expenditures. The empirical distributions from the CEX are shown in the following

figures.
                       Figure D1. Income Share of Out-of-pocket Health Care Expenditures for
                                    Households with Head Under 45 Years of Age
                0.5
               0.45
                0.4
               0.35
Income Share




                0.3                                                                 Covered by Medicare
               0.25                                                                 Privately Insured
                0.2                                                                 Uninsured
               0.15                                                                 Covered by Medicaid
                0.1
               0.05
                 0
                      0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
                             Percentile of the Distribution of the Income Share

                       Figure D2. Income Share of Out-of-pocket Health Care Expenditures for
                                     Households with Head 45-61 Years of Age
                0.5
               0.45
                0.4
               0.35                                                                 Covered by Medicare
Income Share




                0.3                                                                 Privately Insured
               0.25                                                                 Uninsured
                0.2                                                                 Covered by Medicaid
               0.15
                0.1
               0.05
                 0
                      0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
                             Percentile of the Distribution of the Income Share

                       Figure D3. Income Share of Out-of-pocket Health Care Expenditures for
                                    Households with Head Over 61 Years of Age
                0.5
               0.45
                0.4
               0.35                                                                 Covered by Medicare
Income Share




                0.3                                                                 Privately Insured
               0.25                                                                 Uninsured
                0.2                                                                 Covered by Medicaid
               0.15
                0.1
               0.05
                 0
                      0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 65 70 75 80 85 90 95
                             Percentile of the Distribution of the Income Share
References

Anderson, Patricia M. and Bruce D. Meyer, 1995, “The Incidence of a Firm-Varying
    Payroll Tax: The Case of Unemployment Insurance,” NBER Working Paper No.
    5201 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research).
Autor, David H. and Mark G. Duggan, forthcoming, “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and
    the Decline in Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Bird, Edward, 1996, “Repairing the Safety Net: Is the EITC the Right Patch?,” Journal of
    Policy Analysis and Management 15(1) (Winter):1-31.
Barsky, Robert B., Thomas F. Juster, Miles S. Kimball and Matthew D. Shapiro, 1997,
    "Preference Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in
    the Health and Retirement Survey,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2): 537-79.
Bound, John and Richard Burkhauser, 1999, “Economic Analysis of Transfer Programs
    Targeted on People with Disabilities” Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 4,
    Ashenfelter and Card, editors.
Bound, John and Timothy Waidmann, 1992, “Disability Transfers, Self-Reported Health,
    and the Labor Force Attachment of Older Men: Evidence from the Historical
    Record,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(4): 1393-1419.
Bound, John and Timothy Waidmann, 2002, “Accounting for Recent Declines in
    Employment Rates among the Working-aged Men and Women with Disabilities,”
    Journal of Human Resources, 37(2) (Spring): 231-250.
Burkhauser, Richard V., Robert H. Haveman, and Barbara L. Wolfe, 1993, “How People
    with Disabilities Fare when Public Policies Change,” Journal of Policy Analysis and
    Management, 12(2) (Spring): 251-269.
Citro, Constance F. and Robert T. Michael, eds., 1995, Measuring Poverty: A New
    Approach, Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press.
Cullen, Julie Berry and Jonathan Gruber, 2000, “Does Unemployment Insurance Crowd
    Out Spousal Labor Supply?,” The Journal of Labor Economics, 18(3) (July): 546-72.
Currie, Janet and Brigitte C. Madrian, 1999, “Health, Health Insurance, and the Labor
    Market,” in Ashenfelter, Orley and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics
    Volume 3C (New York: Elsevier Science), 3309-3416.
Diamond, P.A. and J. A. Mirrlees, 1978, “A Model with Social Insurance with Variable
    Retirement,” Journal of Public Economics, 10: 295-336.
Diamond, Peter and Eytan Sheshinski, 1995, “Economic Aspects of Optimal Disability
    Benefits,” Journal of Public Economics, 57(1) (May): 1-23.
Feenberg, Daniel Richard and Elizabeth Coutts, 1993, "An Introduction to the TAXSIM
    Model," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 12(1) (Winter): 189-194.
Gruber, Jonathan, 1994, “The Incidence of Mandated Maternity Benefits,” American
    Economic Review, 84(3) (June): 622-641.
Gruber, Jonathan, 1996, “Disability Insurance Benefits and Labor Supply,” NBER
    Working Paper # 5866.
Halpern, Janice H., 1979, “The Social Security Disability Insurance Program: Reasons
    for Its Growth and Prospects for the Future,” New England Economic Review
    (May/June): 30-48.
Harris, Ed and John Sabelhaus, 2000, "Consumer Expenditure Survey Family-Level
    Extracts, 1980:1 -- 1998:2," Congressional Budget Office, (September).
Haveman, Robert H. and Barbara L. Wolfe, 1990, “The Economic Well-Being of the
    Disabled, 1962-1984,” Journal of Human Resources, 25(1): 32-55.
Hu, Lahiri, Vaughan, and Wixon, 1997, "A Structural Model of Social Security's
    Disability Determination Process," SSA Office of Research, Evaluation, and
    Statistics, Working Paper #72.
Killingsworth, Mark, 1983, Labor Supply (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge
    University Press).
Kreider, Brent, 1999, “Social Security Disability Insurance: Applications, Awards, and
    Lifetime Income Flows,” Journal of Labor Economics 17(4) (October): 784-827.
Lahiri, Vaughan, and Wixon, 1995, “Modeling SSA's Sequential Disability
    Determination Process Using Matched SIPP Data,” Social Security Bulletin, 58(4)
    (Winter): 3-42.
Lando, Mordechai E., Malcolm B. Coate and Ruth Kraus, 1979, “Disability Benefit
    Applications and the Economy,” Social Security Bulletin, 42: 3-10.
Levy, Helen, 2002, “Private Employer-Sponsored Disability Insurance: Where Are the
    Gaps in Coverage?,” University of Chicago unpublished paper (June).
Pauly, Mark and Bradley Herring, 2001, “Expanding Coverage Via Tax Credits: Trade-
    Offs and Outcomes,” Health Affairs January/February:9-26.
Stapleton, David C., Kevin Coleman, Kimberly Dietrich, and Gina Livemore, 1998,
    “Empirical Analysis of DI and SSI Application and Award Growth,” in Kalman Rupp
    and David C. Stapleton, eds., Growth in Disability Benefits (Kalamazoo, MI: W.E.
    Upjohn Institute).
   U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Social Security Administration.
1991. Social Security Bulletin, Annual Statistical Supplement.
   U.S. Senate. Committee on Finance. Hearings on the Social Security Amendments of
1955.
   Varian, H. R., 1980, “Redistributive Taxation as Social Insurance,” Journal of Public
Economics 14:49-68.
Waidmann, Timothy, John Bound, and Michael Schoenbaum, 1995, "The Illusion of
    Failure: Trends in the Self-Reported Health of the U.S. Elderly," NBER Working
    Paper 5017.
Table 1. Summary of the Costs of the Policy Reform
                                                                            Millions of
                                                                             Dollars

Net transfer to current DI recipients (static costs)                          286.3

Increased DI payments to worker beneficiaries                                 191.1
Increased DI payments to elderly beneficiaries                                129.6
Decreased SSI payments to current beneficiaries                               (28.9)
Decreased Food Stamp benefits to current beneficiaries                         (0.9)
Increase in federal taxes paid by current beneficiaries                        (4.1)
Increase in state taxes paid by current beneficiaries                          (0.5)

Costs associated with behavioral response (dynamic costs)                     143.0

DI payments to successful new applicants                                       89.7
Expected costs due to changes in taxes paid                                    53.1
   Decrease in federal taxes paid due to spousal labor supply response          1.1
   Decrease in state taxes paid due to spousal labor supply response            0.2
   Decrease in payroll taxes paid due to spousal labor supply response          0.9
   Decrease in federal taxes paid by marginal applicants                       22.5
   Decrease in state taxes paid by marginal applicants                          5.2
   Decrease in payroll taxes paid by marginal applicants                       23.2
Expected transfer costs (due to marginal applicants)                            0.2
   Change in SSI payments                                                       0.3
   Change in Food Stamp benefits                                                0.4
   Change in AFDC payments                                                     (0.5)

Implicit price of an additional $1 of insurance (total costs/static
                                                                               1.50
costs)
Notes: The policy reform considered is a 1% increase in the generosity of DI benefits.
The static costs are the calculated costs of financing the reform in the absence of
behavioral responses. The dynamic costs include costs arising due to behavioral
responses of spouses of current beneficiaries and of individuals induced to apply to the
program on the margin. Note that the payroll tax costs include the employer share. All
costs are simulated using the March 1991 CPS. The values in bold represent totals, and
the values that are not in bold are subtotals. Parentheses () are used to indicate cost
savings. All values are in 1990 millions of dollars.
Table 2. Representative Individuals' Willingness to Pay
                               Earnings/        Family DI                         Pre-tax HH         After-tax HH           Willingness to Pay ($)
                              HH income benefits/earnings                         income RR           income RR            θ=1      θ=2         θ=4
                                  (1)               (2)                               (3)                 (4)              (5)       (6)        (7)

All Eligible Workers
 Less than High School                   0.615                 0.477                  0.724              0.829             1.21          1.46          2.12
 High School Degree                      0.558                 0.417                  0.714              0.819             1.22          1.49          2.22
 Some College                            0.589                 0.370                  0.665              0.779             1.28          1.65          2.72
 College Degree                          0.634                 0.282                  0.569              0.691             1.45          2.09          4.39

Eligible Male Workers
 Less than High School                   0.689                 0.490                  0.690              0.808             1.24          1.53          2.35
 High School Degree                      0.660                 0.433                  0.657              0.784             1.28          1.63          2.65
 Some College                            0.666                 0.378                  0.616              0.742             1.35          1.82          3.30
 College Degree                          0.681                 0.279                  0.535              0.655             1.53          2.33          5.43

Eligible Female Workers
 Less than High School                   0.450                 0.451                  0.790              0.869             1.15          1.32          1.75
 High School Degree                      0.413                 0.399                  0.772              0.854             1.17          1.37          1.88
 Some College                            0.449                 0.360                  0.728              0.824             1.21          1.47          2.17
 College Degree                          0.483                 0.283                  0.674              0.765             1.31          1.71          2.92
Notes: The statistics presented in the table are medians estimated from the matched 1990-1993 SIPP data. The sample for the calculations is the subset
of individuals that is aged 45-61 and is eligible for DI (i.e. has not applied for DI by the time observed in the SIPP and has the requisite number of
quarters of covered earnings as reported in the SER data). We also use only the subset of these DI-eligible individuals who are observed in the 3rd wave
of the SIPP, so that income can be aggregated over the first full calendar year of the SIPP. We project the amount of family DI benefits that each
individual would be eligible for from SER data on earnings from 1951 until the year before the individual is observed. Reported earnings as a share of
total household income and family DI benefits as a share of own earnings are reported in columns 1 and 2, respectively. Column 3 shows the ratio of
total family income less own earnings plus family DI benefits to total family income, which is the pre-tax replacement rate for household income. We
use TAXSIM and the annual payroll tax parameters to calculate the parallel replacement rate for after-tax income. (Note that we never feed the
restricted-use income data through TAXSIM. We instead feed simulated data through TAXSIM that allows us to approximate the nonlinear tax
schedule, and then apply that schedule to the actual data.) The last three rows present the willingness to pay for $1 of DI benefits at different levels of
risk aversion. Given the separable constant relative risk aversion utility function presented in the text, willingness to pay is simply the ratio of the
marginal utility of income in the disabled relative to the non-disabled state, which is equal to the ratio of after-tax incomes in the two states raised to the
power of −θ.
Table 3. Implicit Price of Additional Insurance by Education Category
                                  Static     Dynamic       Total        Total Cost/                           Pr(DI            Benefit         Implicit
                                   Cost         Cost        Cost      Income (×1000)                        Recipient)        Increase          Price
                                    (1)          (2)         (3)            (4)                                (5)               (6)             (7)

Less than High School                    1.05            0.47            1.52               0.089              0.092           52.42             0.32
                                        (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.02)             (0.001)            (0.002)          (0.65)
High School Degree                       2.31            1.09            3.40               0.145              0.036           62.96             1.50
                                        (0.01)          (0.01)          (0.02)             (0.001)            (0.001)          (0.77)
Some College                             2.90            1.41            4.31               0.159              0.023           64.25             2.92
                                        (0.02)          (0.01)          (0.03)             (0.001)            (0.001)          (1.31)
College Degree                           3.80            2.08            5.88               0.165              0.012           68.53             7.15
                                        (0.02)          (0.01)          (0.03)             (0.001)            (0.001)          (1.46)

Notes: The unit of observation is the family. The first two columns show the average static and dynamic costs borne by families without current
working-aged or elderly DI beneficiaries, separately for families broken down by education level of the head. The third column presents the average
total cost (sum of the static and dynamic costs) for families in each educational category, while the fourth column shows total cost as a share of baseline
family income (these values are multiplied by 1000). Column 5 shows the probability that a family has a worker or elderly DI beneficiary. Among
families with DI beneficiaries, column 6 shows the average increase in family benefits associated with a 1% increase in DI benefit generosity. The
increase in family benefits is net of the mechanical increase in federal and state income taxes paid and the mechanical reduction in other transfer
benefits. The last column shows the average of total costs divided by expected benefits across families, where the expected benefits of the policy reform
are calculated as the probability that a family has a current beneficiary multiplied by the expected net increase in DI payments. All results are based on
the 1991 March CPS with household observations weighted by the person weight of the head. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Table 4. Pre-reform and Post-reform Income
                                        Individuals in families with:                   Individuals in families with:
                                  No DI          DI worker        Elderly DI      No DI         DI worker        Elderly DI
                                beneficiary     beneficiary      beneficiary    beneficiary     beneficiary      beneficiary
                                      In the base period (pre-reform):            Change in income following the reform:
Family after-tax income           28455            22302            21655          -4.74            78.2              54.5
                                 (20113)          (15820)          (15350)        (3.94)           (63.7)           (56.2)
Smoothed family after-tax         25971           20432            21584          -2.00            38.5             28.8
income                            (9431)          (7178)           (7064)         (1.31)          (27.5)           (29.0)
Per capita after-tax income       11277            9572            12046          -1.77            36.5             30.0
                                  (9046)          (6856)           (7986)         (1.67)          (32.1)           (32.6)
Per capita smoothed after-        11257            9782            12631          -0.80            20.4             16.4
tax income                        (6906)          (4595)           (4557)         (0.70)          (20.2)           (18.9)
Per capita equivalent after-      14854           12204            14225          -2.39            45.3             35.6
tax income                       (10483)          (7982)           (9398)         (2.00)          (35.9)           (37.3)
Per capita equivalent             14383           12012            14663          -1.05            24.2             19.3
smoothed after-tax income         (6482)          (4173)           (4530)         (0.76)          (20.6)           (20.7)
Number of Observations            155633           2685            21929         155633            2685            21929
Weighted Number of Obs         240.2 million    4.3 million     4.1 million    240.2 million    4.3 million     4.1 million
Notes: The first three columns present mean income pre-reform for individuals classified by family type. The last three
columns show the average change in income following the reform. The rows correspond to different measures of after-tax
income. Rows 1, 3, and 5 are based on income measures that have not been smoothed using the relationship between after-tax
income and consumption in the CEX, while rows 2, 4, and 6 are based on smoothed versions. Rows 1 and 2 use family
income, rows 3 and 4 use per capita family income, and rows 5 and 6 use adjusted (for economies of scale and number of
adults relative to children) per capita family income. All cells are weighted using the March CPS person weight. Standard
deviations are shown in parentheses.
Table 5. Welfare Analysis
                   Average change in utility, divided by average marginal value of $1
       θ              No DI         DI Worker           DI Elderly
                   Beneficiary      Beneficiary         Beneficiary    All Individuals

1) Individual Income = per capita family income, not smoothed
        0              -1.77              36.46            30.00               -0.59
        1              -1.68              48.08            32.88               -0.26
        2              -6.27              97.95            62.40               -3.34
                              9
        4            -2.06×10           8478.14          27726.56            -1.99×109

2) Individual Income = per capita family income, smoothed
        0              -0.80              20.36              16.44             -0.15
        1              -0.82              23.35              15.97             -0.12
        2              -1.13              34.54              18.00             -0.20
        4             -372.57            221.05              55.53            -355.27

3) Individual Income = adjusted per capita family income, not smoothed
        0              -2.39              45.29            35.58               -0.94
        1              -2.21              63.19            43.21               -0.34
        2              -7.28             131.36            91.95               -3.25
        4            -1.52×109         13408.35           73299.58           -1.47×109

4) Individual Income = adjusted per capita family income, smoothed
        0                -1.05             24.23                19.26               -0.28
        1                -1.04             29.77                20.36               -0.16
        2                -1.22             41.38                24.13               -0.07
        4               -247.56            143.27               77.97              -235.45
Notes: Each panel shows the results of the welfare analysis using a different measure of
individual income. The top two panels use unadjusted per capita income (µ=$11,260), while the
bottom two are based on per capita income adjusted for economics of scale and the number of
adults and children as described in the text (µ=$14,798). The measure for after-tax family
income that underlies the individual income measures in panels 2 and 4 is smoothed according to
the relationship between after-tax income and consumption in the CEX. With each panel, the
rows present the results using the indicated relative risk aversion parameter value (θ). For each
level of risk aversion, we show the average change in utility from before to after the reform for
separate groups in the first three columns, as well as for all individuals in the last column. The
values are converted to dollar equivalents by dividing by the overall average marginal utility of
$1.
Table 6. Average Welfare Impact by Education Level
                                        Level of Educational Attainment
    θ             All        Less than    High school        Some                 College
              individuals   high school      degree        college                degree

     0            -0.28            1.22            -0.28           -0.76           -1.19

     1            -0.16            1.27            -0.23           -0.71           -1.18

     2            -0.07            1.41            -0.22           -0.75           -1.33

     4          -235.45          -381.80          -39.83          -409.85          -3.21

Notes: The calculations of the net change in utility are based on smoothed and adjusted per
capita after-tax family income (as in panel 4 in the prior table). Positive values indicate that the
net welfare impact of a 1% increase in DI benefit generosity is positive for the subgroup and
level of risk aversion (θ) indicated, while negative values indicate a net welfare loss. The
average change in utility for each group is converted to dollar equivalents by dividing by the
average marginal value of $1 for the group.
Table 7. Net Welfare Impact with no Factor Loading, by Education Level
                                         Level of Educational Attainment
   θ            All         Less than      High school       Some              College
            individuals    high school       degree         college            degree

   0            0.05            1.38            0.03            -0.39           -0.71

   1            0.16            1.66            0.08            -0.34           -0.60

   2            0.29            2.17            0.14            -0.32           -0.57

   4          -173.39         -512.41          -35.00          -277.70          -1.00

Implicit
                1.00            0.22            1.02             1.96            4.62
 Price
Notes: The calculations of the net change in utility are based on smoothed and adjusted per
capita after-tax family income. Positive values indicate that the net welfare impact of a 1%
increase in DI benefit generosity is positive for the subgroup and level of risk aversion (θ)
indicated, while negative values indicate a net welfare loss. The average change in utility for
each group is converted to dollar equivalents by dividing by the average marginal value of $1 for
the group. Note that the results in this table ignore any costs arising from behavioral responses,
and consider only the static or direct costs of the reform. The last row shows implicit prices for
an additional $1 of disability insurance. The first column simply presents the ratio of overall
total costs to the increase in income for current DI recipients, which is equal to one in the
absence of behavioral responses. The other columns show the implicit price for families with
heads that have the indicated levels of education, constructed in the same way as the last column
in Table 3. These values are the average ratio of family costs to expected benefits in the case
where there are no behavioral responses.
Table 8. Net Welfare Impact with Health Insurance, by Education Level
                                        Level of Educational Attainment
   θ            All         Less than      High school        Some              College
            individuals    high school       degree          college            degree

   0           -0.36            1.18            -0.34            -0.85           -1.32

   1           -0.22            1.44            -0.29            -0.76           -1.11

   2           -0.11            1.89            -0.28            -0.74           -1.04

   4            0.38            4.34            -0.13            -0.70           -1.33

Implicit
                1.66            0.34             1.65            3.21             7.99
 Price
Notes: The calculations of the net change in utility are based on smoothed and adjusted per
capita after-tax family income. Positive values indicate that the net welfare impact of a 1%
increase in DI benefit generosity is positive for the subgroup and level of risk aversion (θ)
indicated, while negative values indicate a net welfare loss. The average change in utility for
each group is converted to dollar equivalents by dividing by the average marginal value of $1 for
the group. Note that the results in this table incorporate health insurance in two easy. First, the
total costs of the reform include any costs associated with shifts to public insurance among
marginal applicants ($30.5 million in new Medicare costs and $14.8 million in new Medicaid
costs). Second, family income is randomly reduced to account for differences in medical outlays
as described in Appendix D. The last row shows implicit prices for an additional $1 of disability
insurance. The first column simply presents the ratio of overall total costs to the increase in
income for current DI recipients. The other columns show the implicit price for families with
heads that have the indicated levels of education, constructed in the same way as the last column
in Table 3. These values are the average ratio of family costs to expected benefits when health
insurance is incorporated in the analysis.
