NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE MARKET FOR CORPORATE LAW
Oren Bar-Gill
Michal Barzuza
Lucian Bebchuk
Working Paper 9156
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9156
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

This paper is a substantial revision of and earlier version circulated in June 2001 via SSRN. We have
benefited from the helpful comments of Bernard Black, John Coates, Denis Gromb, Sharon Hannes, Oliver
Hart, Bert Huang, Louis Kaplow, Michael Klausner, Leeat Yariv and workshop participants at Harvard,
Stanford, Sidley, Austin, Brown & Wood, and the annual meeting of the American Law and Economics
Association. We wish to thank the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business for its financial
support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Oren Bar-Gill, Michal Barzuza, and Lucian Bebchuk. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

The Market for Corporate Law
Oren Bar-Gill, Michal Barzuza, and Lucian Bebchuk
NBER Working Paper No. 9156
September 2002
JEL No. G30, G38, H70, K22
ABSTRACT
This paper develops a model of the competition among states in providing corporate law
rules. The analysis provides a full characterization of the equilibrium in this market. Competition
among states is shown to produce optimal rules with respect to issues that do not have a substantial
effect on managers' private benefits but not with respect to issues (such as takeover regulation) that
substantially affect these private benefits. We analyze why a Dominant state such as Delaware can
emerge, the prices that the dominant state will set and the profits it will make. We also analyze the
roles played by legal infrastructure, network externalities, and the rules governing incorporations.
The results of the model are consistent with, and can explain, existing empirical evidence; they also
indicate that the performance of state competition cannot be evaluated on the basis of how
incorporation in Delaware in the prevailing market equilibrium affects shareholder wealth.
Oren Bar-Gill
Harvard Law School
1557 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Harvard Society of Fellows
bargill@law.harvard.edu
Lucian Bebchuk
Harvard Law School
1557 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu

Michal Barzuza
Harvard Law School
1557 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
mbarzuza@law.harvard.edu

1. Introduction
This paper develops a model of the market for corporate incorporations and
uses it to study the outcome and performance of this market. A central feature of the
US corporate environment is the presence of competition among jurisdictions.
Companies are free to choose their state of incorporation, and they are governed by
the corporate law of the state they choose. Whether and to what extent this
competition works well has been one of the most hotly debated subjects in corporate
scholarship in the last quarter of a century. As the European Union has been moving
toward giving European companies some freedom to choose their country of
incorporation, this subject has become important there as well.
The large existing literature on state competition has focused on two questions.
One question concerns the quality of the incentives produced by competition.
According to the dominant view among corporate law scholars, competition
generally pushes states, including Delaware, to adopt rules that benefit shareholders
(see Winter (1977, 1989), Easterbrook and Fischel (1991), Fischel (1982) and Romano
(1993a, 1993b, 1998)). An alternative view holds that state competition pushes states
to adopt rules benefiting managers, not shareholders, with respect to an important
set of corporate issues (see Cary (1974), Bebchuk (1992) and Bebchuk and Ferrell
(1999, 2001)).
The other subject that has attracted much attention concerns the structure of the
incorporations market. The market has been long characterized by one dominant
player. Among publicly traded non-financial firms, Delaware is the domicile of 58%
of the publicly traded companies, 59% of the Fortune 500 companies, and 67% of the
companies that went public during 1996-2000 (Bebchuk and Cohen (2002)). In the
face of this market structure, researchers have discussed what explains the
emergence and persistence of a dominant state (Romano (1985), Black (1990),
Klausner (1995), Kamar (1998)) and how the desire to maintain and take advantage
of such dominance affects the behavior of this dominant state (Ayres (1995), Kamar
(1998), Kahan and Kamar (2001)).
Although a great deal has been written on state competition in the past three
decades, there has been surprisingly little effort to develop a formal framework that
would enable a rigorous study of the subject. The present paper seeks to fill this
void. It develops a model of the market for corporate law, and it uses this model to
study the questions long discussed informally with the discipline provided by a
formal model. The model enables us to resolve significant debates in the literature,
to confirm some informally made claims while rejecting others, and to identify
issues that have been thus far overlooked.

1

In our model, each state chooses its strategy — what rules to offer, whether to
invest in creating a legal infrastructure, what prices to charge, and so forth.
Companies then make incorporation decisions. Clearly, states choose their strategies
in anticipation of the reactions to them by other states and by companies. We solve
for the equilibrium outcome and study its features.
When a company is incorporated in a given state, payoffs to shareholders and
managers are determined by (i) the substantive content of the state’s corporate law
rules, (ii) the institutional texture of the state’s corporate environment, including the
existence (or absence) of legal infrastructure (e.g. a specialized judiciary) and the
presence (or absence) of beneficial network externalities, and (iii) the price charged
by the state – either directly (e.g. franchise taxes) or indirectly (e.g. fees paid to the
local bar).
As far as the substantive content of corporate rules is concerned, we shall
distinguish (following Bebchuk (1992)) between two categories of rules. The first
category includes rules that have little or no effect on the ability of managers to
extract private benefits of control. With respect to these rules – which can be labeled
insignificantly redistributive rules – both the managers and the shareholders of
existing companies prefer rules that maximize cash flows to shareholders. The
second category of rules includes those that might have a significant effect on
managers’ ability to extract private benefits. Rules governing takeovers, self-dealing,
and taking of corporate opportunities are examples of such rules. With respect to
these rules – which might be called significantly redistributive rules – managers of
existing companies might prefer rules that would increase their private benefits
even if such rules would not maximize the cash flows to shareholders.
We allow payoffs to depend not only on the substantive content of legal rules
but also on “institutional” factors such as the existence of a legal infrastructure and
network externalities. Because Delaware’s investment in a specialized judiciary
might provide benefits to Delaware companies (see Romano (1985), Black (1990) and
Fisch (2000)), we assume that cash flows may increase from the presence of a legal
infrastructure. Following the arguments that companies benefit from having many
other companies incorporated in the same state (see Klausner (1995) and Kahan and
Klausner (1997)), we allow for network externalities. Such externalities include the
benefits that a company may enjoy from having more precedents to rely on and
from being subject to rules and practices with which capital market participants are
well familiar.
We also allow payoffs to depend on the price charged by the state of
incorporation. More importantly, we include the price charged by states as an
endogenous element of states’ strategies. The literature had largely assumed that
states can maximize profits from incorporations by maximizing the number of
2

incorporated companies, implicitly assuming that the price paid by companies is
exogenously fixed. As Kahan and Kamar (2001) pointed out, however, Delaware
also makes choices with respect to the prices it charges.1 In our model, in setting the
prices charged, the dominant state takes into account the effects of the price it sets
both on Delaware’s revenues and on the incentives of other states to mount a
challenge to Delaware’s dominance.
We will focus in the first part of our analysis on the (re)incorporation decisions
of existing publicly traded companies. We then extend our analysis to allow for
IPOs. We show that our results largely apply to the case in which the stock of
publicy traded firms is increased in any given period by new IPOs as long as the
number of such IPOs is not too large relative to the existing stock of non-Delaware
companies. When analyzing reincorporation decisions, we take as given the longstanding rules of US corporate law, under which reincorporation of an existing
company requires board initiation followed by a vote of shareholder approval.
As to the payoffs of states, we shall assume that states seek to maximize
revenues. A state’s revenue (or payoff) is the product of the price it charges
incorporated companies multiplied by the number of such companies. Also, for any
given level of revenues, we assume that a state prefers more incorporation to less.
In making its decisions, each state will take into account how companies as well as
other states will react to it. The dominant state will also consider whether its
decisions will create an incentive for other states to expend resources to challenge its
dominance.
Using the above building blocks, we derive the equilibrium in the state
competition game. One main result is that state competition works differently for
rules that do and do not have a significant effect on managers’ private benefits of
control. When a corporate issue does not have a significant effect on managers’
private benefits of control, state competition will push states to adopt rules that
would best serve shareholders. However, with respect to rules that have a
substantial effect on managers’ private benefits of control, such as rules governing
corporate takeovers or managerial conflicts of interests, states might adopt rules that
make shareholders worse off. In particular, the dominant state will have to do so in
order to attract reincorporations from other states and in order to prevent other
states from being able to beat it in attracting companies willing to leave their
“home” state. In this respect, our results support the view taken by Bebchuk (1992)
Kahan and Kamar (2001) focus on the possibility that, facing heterogeneous companies that differ
in the benefits they derive from the advantages offered by Delaware, Delaware will seek to charge
different prices to different companies. In contrast, we focus on a strategic role that the setting of
price has regardless of whether such heterogeneity is present.

1

3

and Bebchuk and Ferrell (1999, 2001) that state competition might produce rules
tilted in favor of managers’ interests with respect to significantly redistributive
issues.
State competition might lead to the adoption of rules that excessively favor
managers not just by the dominant state but also by other states. In the identified
equilibrium, all states seeking to maximize their success in the incorporation market
will adopt the same rules. In this equilibrium, companies moving to the dominant
state would make shareholders better off. Even though the dominant state has rules
that are not optimal for shareholders with respect to some issues, so do other states,
and the dominant state at least offers companies advantages in terms of legal
infrastructure and network externalities. Thus, in equilibrium, even though state
competition does not perform well with respect to issues that are significantly
redistributive, companies will benefit from reincorporation in Delaware. Therefore,
the performance of state competition cannot be assessed based on examining how a
move to Delaware affects corporate value, which has been the standard approach in
the empirical analysis of the subject.
Our analysis highlights the importance of the established procedure for
“switching” from state to state for the equilibrium in the market for corporate law.
Under this procedure, managers have a veto power over reincorporations.
Moreover, whereas the shareholders also have a veto power, managers must initiate
the vote on reincorporation, which essentially gives them the power to make a takeit-or-leave-it offer to the shareholders regarding reincorporation. Thus, if a move
from a company’s home state to either one of two states would benefit shareholders,
the managers would be able to determine the state to which the company would
move. Faced with a choice between remaining in their home state and
reincorporating to whichever one of the two states managers favor, shareholders can
be expected to approve the reincorporation. This feature of the situation strengthens
the incentives of the dominant state to choose certain rules that are favored by
managers but not shareholders.2
Our model explains how a state that has moved first to invest in legal
infrastructure will be able to obtain, and subsequently maintain, a dominant
position. The initial advantage that the state might have due to its legal
infrastructure will be reinforced by network externalities, as companies will
(correctly) anticipate that other companies also will be drawn to the dominant state.
Furthermore, the dominant state will set its rules and prices in such a way as to

For an analysis of the general problems arising from managers’ control over the corporate agenda,
and their ability to make take-it-or-leave-it offers to shareholders, see Bebchuk (2001).
2

4

provide no incentive for other states to make similar investments in legal
infrastructure.
Finally, our model explains how the dominant state will be able to make profits
from the incorporation business but will not be able to capture the full benefits to
companies incorporated in the dominant state from the legal infrastructure and
network externalities they enjoy by incorporating in this state.3 The model thus can
explain the phenomenon recently highlighted by Kahan and Kamar (2001) — that
Delaware seems to make a high return on its investments but that it does not raise
its prices to the highest level that companies would likely be willing to pay for
Delaware incorporation. Indeed, Bebchuk and Hamdani (2002) calculate that
Delaware obtains tax revenues from the incorporations business on the order of
$2,000 for each family of four. We show that the advantage that a dominant state has
can enable it to make positive profits without inducing a rival to challenge its
dominance. To prevent such a challenge, however, the dominant state will not raise
its prices to fully capture the benefits companies would gain from incorporating in
it.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the
framework of the analysis. Section 3 solves the model and presents the resulting
equilibrium in the market for corporate law. Section 4 studies several extensions to
the basic model. Section 5 offers concluding remarks on the positive and normative
implications of our analysis.

2. Framework of Analysis
2.1. Sequence of events
The sequence of events in the model is as follows:
T = 0: There is a set of states N = {1,..., n} where n ≥ 2 , including a dominant state,
named “Delaware,” and other states; and a (large) number of companies,
m >> n , whose initial incorporations are distributed among the n states.
T = 1: The states choose their strategies, which include: whether they invest in
creating a legal infrastructure; which legal rules they adopt; and what price
they will charge companies incorporated in the state.
Thus, our model may explain why Delaware’s franchise tax seems low compared with any
reasonable estimate of the value generated by Delaware’s legal infrastructure and the network
externalities it provides to large publicly traded companies. While the value of the median company
in Delaware is approximately $237 million (Daines (2001)), Delaware’s franchise tax does not exceed
$150 thousand a year. This is the maximum tax even for companies whose stock market
capitalization is in the dozens of billions of dollars.

3

5

T = 2: Companies choose where to (re)incorporate.
T = 3: All payoffs—to shareholders, managers and states—are realized.

The initial
situation

States choose
strategies

Companies
choose where to
(re)incorporate

Payoffs are
realized
T

0

1

2

3

Fig. 1: Sequence of Events

The assumptions about each of the stages are described in detail below.
2.2

T = 0: The Initial Situation

We assume that, at T = 0, one state—which we call Delaware—has a legal
infrastructure that may improve cash flows for companies incorporated in that state.
The said infrastructure can be thought of as a specialized judiciary. As will be
shown later on, network externalities will complement and reinforce Delaware’s
initial infrastructure advantage.
We assume that each one of the m companies has a “home” state, i.e. the state
in which the company’s headquarters is located. At T = 0, each company is assumed
to be incorporated either in its “home” state or in Delaware. (In the case of
companies located in Delaware, the “home” state and Delaware will be of course the
same.) In particular, among the local companies of any given state, some (at least
one) are incorporated “at home” and some (at least one) are incorporated in
Delaware. We assume that at T = 0 Delaware already enjoys a significant number of
incorporations.4

It is further assumed that, even though Delaware starts with a significant number of
incorporations, there is at T=0 a significant number of companies incorporated outside Delaware.
The fraction of companies that are initially out-of-state is assumed to be sufficiently large to make
Delaware interested in luring companies from their “home” states rather than pursuing a strategy
focusing solely on companies that are already incorporated in Delaware. Footnote 28 in Appendix A
further elaborates on the analytical underpinnings of this condition. It also describes the equilibrium
in the case in which Delaware focuses solely on the companies which it has at T=0; this case is of
lesser importance, of course, in understanding the existing state competition in the US.

4

6

Note that reincorporation does not affect the location of a company’s
headquarters or its place of operation—but only the corporate law system to which
the company will be subject. We initially assume that all of the companies have gone
public prior to T = 0. This assumption will be relaxed in Section 4.2. Each company
is assumed to have dispersed ownership, with managers holding only a small
fraction α of the company’s shares.
2.3 T=1: States Choose their Strategies
At this stage, states choose, and make public, strategies consisting of three
elements: (1) whether they make a special investment in legal infrastructure (of
course, since Delaware already has such an infrastructure, this choice is relevant
only for the other states), (2) which rules they adopt, and (3) what price they will
charge incorporated companies.
The states select and announce their strategies sequentially, with Delaware
moving first and the order in which the remaining states move being chosen
randomly. A state announcing its strategy cannot amend its strategy later on; but, of
course, states will choose their strategy in anticipation of what other states will do.
We next specify the assumptions about each of the three elements of the strategy
each state chooses.
2.3.1 Legal Infrastructure
We assume that, by investing K, a state can establish a legal infrastructure—
similar to Delaware’s infrastructure—that would operate to improve cash flows for
companies incorporated in the state. Formally, each state, other than Delaware,
chooses its investment in infrastructure, k, from the set {0, K } . The infrastructure can
be thought of as including a specialized judiciary and the various other services and
institutions needed to have an experienced, smooth, and fast system for litigating
cases.
2.3.2. Rules
Each state must choose its rules with respect to each corporate issue. We
characterize a legal rule by its effects on (1) the company’s cash flows, Y, and (2) the
level of private benefits that managers can extract from the company, B. Issues can
be divided into two categories: (i) issues that do not have a significant effect on
private benefits, which are labeled “insignificantly redistributive issues,” and (ii)
issues that have such a significant effect, which are labeled “redistributive issues.”
7

Whereas shareholders and managers have overlapping interests and preferences
with respect to issues of type (i), their interests and preferences diverge with respect
to issues of type (ii).
(i) Insignificantly redistributive issues: We assume that there is one issue, denoted
NR, which belongs to this category. With respect to this issue, states must choose
between the LNR rule and the H NR rule. We normalize the effect of the LNR rule on
cash flows to zero, and denote the effect of the H NR rule on cash flows by Y NR > 0 .
Hence, shareholders will be better off under H NR than under LNR . The choice
between the two rules will have no or little effect on managers’ private benefits, and
managers thus also prefer H NR over LNR .
Our results generally carry over to the case in which the choice between the
two rules has an effect on managers’ private benefits but this effect is small enough
that managers prefer H NR because of its positive effect on cash flows.5 The main
point is that, with respect to the insignificantly redistributive rules, there is no
conflict of interests, and both shareholders and managers prefer H NR over LNR . For
simplicity of exposition, and without loss of generality, we assume that both the LNR
rule and the H NR rule have an identical effect on managers’ private benefits, and we
normalize this effect to zero.
An example of an insignificantly redistributive rule is the rule requiring
directors to attend board meetings. Although the rule imposes some small private
cost on managers, this cost might be sufficiently small (relative to the cash flow
benefits of having directors attend board meetings) that managers would not favor
absenteeism.
(ii) Redistributive issues: This category includes rules with respect to which the
interests of shareholders and managers diverge, because the rule that would
increase cash flows would also significantly reduce private benefits, thus making it
disfavored by managers. For example, shareholders might favor a takeover rule that
managers would disfavor because of its effect on the managers’ private benefits, or
shareholders might prefer a rule concerning conflict of interests that managers
would disfavor. We do not claim, of course, that any reduction in managers’ private
benefits would benefit shareholders. Some provision of private benefits is desirable
in many cases. But once the optimal level of private benefits is reached, there is still
commonly a choice between a rule that establishes this level and a rule that would
go beyond it to provide managers with higher benefits. It is this choice that we focus
on.
5

Specifically, suppose that, compared with H

> 0 . As long as α ⋅ Y

NR

, L

increases managers’ private benefits by

> 0 , managers will have the same preferences regarding this
NR
NR
issue as shareholders and will also prefer H
over L .
B

NR

NR

−B

NR

NR

8

Specifically, we assume that there is one issue that belongs to this category, R,
and states can choose with respect to this issue R between the LR rule and the H R
rule. We normalize the effect of the LR rule on cash flows to zero, and denote the
effect of the H R rule on cash flows by Y R > 0 . Hence, shareholders prefer H R over
LR . Similarly, we normalize the effect of the H R rule on managers’ private benefits
to zero, and denote managers’ private benefits under the LR rule by B R > 0 .
We also assume, contrary to the assumption in the category of insignificantly
redistributive rules, that α ⋅ Y R − B R < 0 , so that managers prefer LR over H R . The
main point is that, with respect to the significantly redistributive rules, there is a
conflict of interests between shareholders and managers. While shareholders prefer
H R over LR , managers prefer LR over H R .
We further assume that while α ⋅ Y R − B R < 0 , Y R − B R > 0 -- namely, the LR rule
is inefficient. Managers still prefer the inefficient LR rule, since they capture the
increase in private benefits produced by the rule but bear only a small fraction α of
the reduction in cash flows created by it. The interesting question is whether state
competition will result in the adoption of the efficient H R rule, as supporters of state
competition believe, or rather the inefficient LR rule will be adopted, as critics
contend. The claim that we seek to examine does not assert that competition would
produce big inefficiencies but rather that its outcomes would be biased in their
favor. To explore the possibility of such bias, we will assume that the inefficiency
costs of the LR rule are not too large in a sense to be more precisely defined below.
2.3.3. Price
A state’s strategy will also include the price P ≥ 0 that each company
incorporated in the state will have to pay. The price consists of the incorporation tax
and all other payments to institutions and citizens of the state as a result of the
incorporation – including court fees, fees paid to members of the local bar, and so
forth. Prior literature, which has assumed that maximization of profits from
incorporations is synonymous with maximization of the number of incorporations,
has implicitly assumed that the revenue to the state from each company is
exogenously fixed. A complete analysis of our subject, however, should not take
price to be exogenous, and we shall therefore include price as an element of each
state’s strategy. At the same time, we shall allow for the possibility that political
forces might impose an exogenous bound on the price.6
Our analysis can be extended, with little change in the results, to the case in which the price cannot
go below a certain positive level because, even if the franchise tax is set at zero, the state’s lawyers
will make some profits from the presence of incorporations.
6

9

2.4

T = 2: Incorporation Decisions

At T = 2, the m companies choose their state of incorporation, making a choice
between remaining where they were initially incorporated and reincorporating in
another state. The companies move sequentially in a randomly selected order. Let t
= 1,...,m denote the rounds within period T = 2, in which the m companies choose
their state of incorporation (in random order), and let t = 0 denote the period before
the first company moves. At t = 0, the companies are assumed to know the strategies
chosen by the different states at T = 1.7
It is assumed that reincorporation involves no transaction costs. The procedure
for reincorporation is assumed to be the one that has been long established under
US corporate law. The managers must initiate a reincorporation, making a proposal
to the shareholders; if the shareholders approve, the company will move. Thus,
reincorporation will occur if and only if both managers and shareholders wish to
reincorporate. Furthermore, managers have the power to make take-it-or-leave-it
offers to the shareholders. As a result, if reincorporation in either one of two states is
superior to the present incorporation, the managers can direct reincorporation to the
state that the managers prefer.
We make several tie-breaking assumptions. When managers are indifferent
between incorporating in the company’s home state and another state, they will
prefer the home state. If managers are indifferent between reincorporating in two
states none of which is the company’s home state, they will choose each one of the
two states with a probability of fifty percent. Finally, we assume that, if shareholders
are indifferent between accepting and rejecting a proposal by management, they
will accept it.
2.5

T=3: Payoffs

At this stage, all players will receive their payoffs. The cash flows of a company
that chooses to incorporate in state i will be:
Yi = Y0 + δ j ⋅ E (k i , mi ) + Yi NR + Yi R − Pi ,
where Y0 represents the element of a company’s cash flows that is independent of
the legal system; Yi NR and Yi R represent the effects of the non-distributive and the
distributive rules, respectively; Pi represents the franchise tax and other charges;

As explained in section 2.5 below, there are two types of companies – those that benefit from a legal
infrastructure and from network externalities and those that do not derive such benefits. It is
assumed that at t = 0 the companies know their type.
7

10

and E (k i , mi ) represents the benefits flowing from the state’s legal infrastructure and
network externalities.
Companies do not benefit equally from a legal infrastructure or from network
externalities. In particular, to some companies, the benefit of remaining incorporated
in their “home” states may outweigh the increased cash flows generated by another
state’s legal infrastructure and network externalities. For simplicity, we capture this
effect by assuming that a company j is characterized by a parameter δ j ∈ {0,1} , which
determines whether or not the company benefits from infrastructure and network
externalities. It is assumed that the share δ of companies that do not benefit from
infrastructure and networks, i.e. companies with δ j = 0 , is smaller than 0.5.
Legal infrastructure increases the cash flows of δ j = 1 companies incorporated
in a state with such an infrastructure. Hence,

∂E (k i , mi )
> 0 .8 The effect of the legal
∂k i

environment in Delaware is denoted E ( K , m D ) , even though Delaware’s investment
in establishing an infrastructure is considered sunk in the present framework.
However, potentially more important than the legal infrastructure are network
externalities, which arise when many companies choose to incorporate in one
specific state. These positive externalities include familiarity of the legal community
and the participants in capital markets with the rules of that state, as well as the
generation of a larger body of precedents, both of which can operate to increase the
value of the company’s securities to investors (see Klausner (1995) and Kahan and
Klausner (1997)). Formally, we assume that the network externalities effect in state i
is increasing in the number of companies, which are incorporated in state i, mi , i.e.
∂E (k i , mi )
> 0 .9 Finally, let E = E (K , (1 − δ ) ⋅ m ) denote the maximal level of benefits
∂mi

from a legal infrastructure and network externalities -- i.e., the level that would be
enjoyed by companies that benefit from such institutional advantages if all such
companies were incorporated in the same state (which, as we shall see, is what
would happen in equilibrium). Given our interest in exploring the possibility of the
adoption of rules somewhat (rather than hugely) tilted in favor of managers, we will
assume that E outweighs the potential inefficiency on the R rule dimension, Y R .
We assume that a legal infrastructure is efficient to establish, i.e. the per-company value of an
infrastructure exceeds the per-company cost of establishing an infrastructure (at least if all of the

8

δ j = 1 companies benefit from the infrastructure): E (K , (1 − δ ) ⋅ m ) − E (0, (1 − δ ) ⋅ m ) >
9

We assume that the number of

K
.
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m

δ j = 0 companies incorporated in any non-Delaware state at T=0 is

insufficient to produce a positive level of network externalities.

11

The shareholders will receive their fraction of the company’s cash flows,
(1 − α ) ⋅ Yi . The manager will receive the private benefits of control in addition to their
fraction of the cash flows, and they will thus get α ⋅ Yi + BiR .
Each state will receive the revenues, if any, from the incorporations it will have
at the final T=3 stage. The state will get the price it set for incorporated companies,
P, multiplied by the number of companies which end up incorporated in the state at
the end of the T = 2 stage of (re)incorporation decisions.
2.6

States’ Objectives

With respect to the decision whether to establish a legal infrastructure, as well
as with respect to the pricing strategy, states are assumed to seek to maximize their
T = 3 revenues. Also, as a tie-breaking assumption, we assume that between two
outcomes that provide the state with the same revenues, the state will prefer to have
an outcome in which more companies are incorporated in that state.
With respect to the legal rules, states will also be assumed to maximize
revenues (and, as a tie-breaker, maximize the number of incorporations). However,
we shall also explore below the possibility that the choice of legal rules in some
states is not based on the above objective but rather on some historical, political,
cultural, or ideological factors. In order to capture this potential heterogeneity, we
will allow for states that deviate from the equilibrium revenue maximizing R rule
(there is no reason to expect heterogeneity in the NR category). Specifically, we
assume that if such deviations occur they are adopted by at least two (nonDelaware) states. We refer to such states as “deviating states”. Even when we permit
for such deviations, we shall assume that Delaware maximizes revenues from
incorporations.

3. The Market Equilibrium
This section presents our results concerning the equilibrium outcome in the
market for corporate law and the intuition underlying these results. The following
proposition describes the equilibrium in the market:
Proposition 1: The market for corporate law has a unique equilibrium that has the following
features:
(1) All of the states choose the rule favored by shareholders with respect to the insignificantly
redistributive issue (NR)-- H NR .

12

(2) The dominant state of Delaware chooses the inefficient LR rule with respect to the
significantly redistributive issue (R).
(3) With respect to the significantly redistributive issue (R), any state other than Delaware
that chooses rules in order to attract incorporations chooses the inefficient LR rule. (By
assumption, if there are deviating states that do not choose legal rules this way, these states
will choose the efficient H R rule).
(4) The dominant state of Delaware sets the highest possible price that (i) preempts a
potential rival from entering and establishing a competing legal infrastructure, (ii) makes
reincorporation to it still profitable for all the companies that benefit from a legal
infrastructure and from network externalities (i.e. companies with δ j = 1 ), and (iii) does not
exceed the politically imposed price cap, P . Formally:


K
,E −Y R,P .
PD = min 
 (1 − δ ) ⋅ m

(5) Delaware makes a positive profit from its incorporation business.
(6) Delaware does not capture the full value of the benefits it confers on companies
incorporated in it.
(7) States that at T=0 do not have a legal infrastructure, i.e. all states other than Delaware,
do not invest in establishing a legal infrastructure, i.e. k i ≠ D = 0 .
(8) All states, other than Delaware, set a price of zero, i.e. Pi ≠ D = 0 .
(9) All of the companies that benefit from a legal infrastructure and network externalities
will be incorporated in Delaware.
(10) The companies that reincorporate in Delaware enjoy an increase in their share value.
(11) Among non-Delaware states, if there are deviating states, then the states that choose the
rule favored by managers with respect to the significantly redistributive issue (R), LR , will
enjoy more incorporations than the deviating states that choose the rule favored by
shareholders with respect to the significantly redistributive issue (R), H R .

13

The results stated in proposition 1 are proved in appendix A. Below we
describe the underlying intuition for each of the eleven features of the identified
equilibrium and discuss the implications of the results.
3.1 Efficient Choice of Rules concerning Insignificantly Redistributive Issues
Since both managers and shareholders prefer H NR over LNR , a state that sets
LNR will have no company incorporated in it at T = 3. Consider two states that differ
only on the NR dimension with the first state setting LNR and the second state
setting H NR . Any company that is initially incorporated in the first state will
reincorporate into the second state. Moreover, if a company that is initially
incorporated in a third state considers reincorporation into one of the two states, it
will surely choose the second state with the H NR rule.
3.2 Delaware’s Inefficient Choice concerning Redistributive Issues
Delaware must set the pro-manager redistributive rule, LR , in order to lure
reincorporations. Otherwise (if Delaware sets H R ), a rival state would establish a
competing infrastructure, set LR , and lure all of the δ j = 1 companies that benefit
from a legal infrastructure and from network externalities. What is critical here is
that, if reincorporation to more than one state would benefit shareholders, the
managers will have the power to direct the incorporation to the state they prefer.
Moreover, since managers must initiate reincorporation, if Delaware does not set
LR , it will not be able to lure companies from states that do set LR , even if these
states do not establish a legal infrastructure.
By setting LR , Delaware ensures its ability to lure δ j = 1 companies from any
state that does not establish a competing infrastructure. Delaware can clearly lure
δ j = 1 companies from no-infrastructure states that also choose LR . Delaware can
also lure δ j = 1 companies from the deviating states that set H R , since the
inefficiency of the LR rule is outweighed by Delaware’s infrastructure and network
externalities advantage ( E > Y R ).
3.3 The Inefficient Choices of Non-Delaware States
concerning Redistributive Issues
States other than Delaware cannot attract δ j = 1 companies that benefit from a
legal infrastructure and from network externalities. Therefore, the non-Delaware

14

states that choose their legal rules to maximize revenues and incorporations will
focus on the δ j = 0 companies. By choosing the inefficient LR rule these states can
retain their local δ j = 0 companies that were incorporated in-state at T=0. By setting
LR (as well as H NR and P = 0 ), a state prevents managers from initiating
reincorporation. This strategy further allows states to regain δ j = 0 local companies

that were incorporated in Delaware at T=0.
Note that a state can retain its local δ j = 0 companies that were incorporated
in-state at T=0 by setting H R (as well as H NR and P = 0 ), which would prevent
shareholders from approving reincorporation. But setting LR enables the state not
only to retain the local companies which were initially incorporated in the state but
also to attract the incorporations of δ j = 0 local companies that were incorporated in
Delaware at T=0. (Otherwise, these companies will remain in Delaware or
reincorporate to non-Delaware state that offers LR .)
The results presented in sections 3.2 and 3.3 are consistent with the
proliferation of antitakeover statutes and other takeover defenses among states (see
Gartman (2000)). The body of academic opinion has largely viewed state takeover
law as providing excessive protections against takeovers. Researchers who generally
support state competition have been among those viewing state antitakeover
statutes as excessive (see, e.g., Easterbrook and Fischel (1991), Romano (1993a,
1993b)). The many scholars who believe that antitakeover statutes do not serve
shareholders find support for their view in the empirical evidence on the effects of
such statutes. The overwhelming majority of the event studies done on the adoption
of state antitakeover statutes found either no price reactions or negative price
reactions (see Karpoff and Malatesta (1989) and Gartman (2000)). Furthermore,
researchers have also found evidence that state antitakeover statutes have operated
to increase agency costs (Bertrand and Mullinathan (1998, 1999)). The result under
consideration can explain why takeover law has nonetheless developed in this
direction.
3.4 Price Charged by Delaware
Delaware will set the highest possible price that still satisfies three
goals/constraints. Let us explain in turn the reason for each one of them:
(1) Preempting Rivals: In setting the price, Delaware will seek to make it
unattractive for rivals to mount a challenge on its dominance. To compete for
dominance in the market for corporate law, a rival would need to establish an
equivalent legal infrastructure. Delaware will therefore seek to discourage potential
rivals from establishing such an infrastructure. Thus, Delaware will not set a price
15

above

K
, which is the per-company (focusing on δ j = 1 companies) cost of
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m

establishing an infrastructure. This price ensures that all of the δ j = 1 companies will
choose to incorporate in Delaware, even if another state establishes an infrastructure
K
and sets the lowest possible price (without losing money),
.10 If Delaware
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m
sets a higher price, a second state will establish a competing infrastructure and lure
all δ j = 1 incorporations.11
(2) Luring reincorporations from other states: Another goal of Delaware is to
lure companies from states without a legal infrastructure. Delaware must make sure
that the overall package it offers is preferred by companies that benefit from a legal
infrastructure and from network externalities, over the package offered by the other
states. Delaware can achieve this goal by setting a price not higher than E − Y R .
Namely, Delaware cannot price above the value of its infrastructure and potential
network externalities minus the disadvantage to shareholders from its pro-manager
redistributive rules. This price takes into account that all states offer the same
insignificantly redistributive rule, H NR (see part (1) of proposition 1), but that states
may attempt to prevent shareholders of local companies from approving
reincorporation in Delaware by offering the redistributive rule H R (this price also
takes into account that other states will set P = 0 – see part (8) of proposition 1).
Note that as long as Delaware prices below E − Y R (and given the previous
constraint on Delaware’s pricing strategy), it will lure all the companies that benefit
from a legal infrastructure and from network externalities. Because Delaware’s
luring all of these companies can be anticipated by each one of them in advance, the
constraint on Delaware’s pricing strategy presumes the full extent of network
externalities (recall that E = E (K , (1 − δ ) ⋅ m ) ).
K
, a second state can hope to attract any incorporations only if
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m
K
. Given our tie-breaking
it establishes a competing infrastructure and sets a price of
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m

10

If Delaware sets a price of

assumption, the second state will enjoy all incorporations with a probability of 50%, and will thus
lose money on average. Therefore, no state other than Delaware will establish an infrastructure.
11

R

Theoretically, a no-infrastructure state with L

can attempt to lure the

δ j = 1 companies. To

prevent this, Delaware must abide by another constraint on its pricing strategy. It cannot price above
the value of its infrastructure advantage, i.e. PD ≤ E (K , (1 − δ ) ⋅ m ) − E (0, (1 − δ ) ⋅ m ) . However,
since E (K , (1 − δ ) ⋅ m ) − E (0, (1 − δ ) ⋅ m ) >

K
(see note 8 above), this constraint is never
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m

binding.

16

(3) The political constraint: The final relevant consideration for Delaware’s
pricing strategy is the political constraint, if any, on the range of acceptable prices.
First, note that if there is no effective political constraint, i.e. P is very large, then
Delaware’s price will be determined by the two previous goals/constraints.
However, if the political constraint is binding, it may force Delaware to price below
the price levels dictated by the two previous goals/constraints.
3.5 Delaware’s Profits
In a market that is perfectly competitive, producers will break even, making no
net profits. But the market for corporate law is not perfectly competitive. The
benefits from legal infrastructure imply that there are economies of scale. And the
presence of network externalities provides another departure from the perfect
competition case. Because of the imperfect competition, the dominant state will be
able to make positive profits from its incorporation business.
As we have seen, Delaware will set a positive price. Since it will be successful
in luring all of the δ j = 1 companies (see part (9) of proposition 1), this means that
Delaware will make a positive profit. (Recall that we are assuming, for now, that
Delaware’s investment in establishing its legal infrastructure is sunk.)
3.6

Delaware’s Inability to Capture the Full Value
of its Institutional Advantages

As shown above, Delaware will make a positive profit. Generally, however,
Delaware will not capture the full value to companies of the benefits they receive
from incorporating in the state. To begin with, the desire to preempt other states
from challenging its dominance will keep a lid on Delaware’s price (see part (4)(i) of
proposition 1). Additionally, further price capping might or might not be introduced
by the political constraint (see part (4)(iii) of proposition 1).
Lastly, Delaware will generally not capture the full value it provides, even if
the decisive consideration in its pricing strategy is Delaware’s desire to lure
companies from other states (see part (4)(ii) of proposition 1). Recall, that in order to
lure companies from other states Delaware must offer an overall package that is
attractive to the shareholders of the target companies. As explained in section 3.4
above, this overall package must include a price not higher than the value of
Delaware’s infrastructure and potential network externalities minus the
disadvantage to shareholders from its pro-manager redistributive rules ( E − Y R ). In
particular, this price takes into account the fact that states may attempt to prevent
shareholders of local companies from approving reincorporation in Delaware by
17

offering the redistributive rule H R . However, at equilibrium these other states will
offer LR , just like Delaware, and not H R (see part (3) of proposition 1). Hence, again
Delaware’s price does not reflect the benefits it provides to companies. This result is
consistent with the observations of (Kahan and Kamar (2001) that Delaware’s actual
prices seems to fall below a reasonable estimate of the infrastructure and network
benefits flowing from Delaware incorporation.
3.7

No Competing Investments in Infrastructure

As stated in part (4) of proposition 1, and as explained above, Delaware will set
a price that would preempt any other state from establishing a competing
infrastructure. In particular, Delaware’s pricing strategy ensures that if a rival state
establishes a legal infrastructure, that state will not be able to cover the costs of
establishing the infrastructure.
This result is consistent with the empirical observation that no state other than
Delaware offers a legal infrastructure such as a specialized court (Kahan and Kamar
(2001)).
3.8 Prices Charged by States other than Delaware
States other than Delaware do not offer a legal infrastructure or network
externalities (see parts (7) and (11) of proposition 1). These states do not offer
anything unique. There are at least two revenue-maximizing states (or states that
maximize the number of incorporations) that offer the exact same “product”.
Similarly, there are at least two deviating states (with H R ) that offer the exact same
“product”. Competition within each of these two groups of states forces the price to
the competitive level of zero. In particular, these states can only hope to retain their
local companies that do not benefit from a legal infrastructure or from network
externalities (companies with δ j = 0 ).12 If a non-dominant state sets a price of zero, it
will be able to retain its local δ j = 0 companies, due to our tie-breaking assumption
that captures a limited “home”-bias. However, if a non-dominant state sets a
positive price, it will lose even its δ j = 0 companies to another non-dominant state
that sets a lower price. As a result, at equilibrium all of these states will set a price of
zero.

Revenue-maximizing states (or states that maximize the number of incorporations) can also regain
their local δ j = 0 companies that at T=0 were incorporated in Delaware.
12

18

These results are consistent with observed patterns. Delaware seems to be the
only state to derive meaningful revenues from its incorporation business (see Kahan
and Kamar (2001)). While Delaware charges a significant, though still relatively low,
franchise tax, no state other than Delaware charges a meaningful franchise tax.
As just explained, states other than Delaware would not be able to charge
companies incorporated in them a positive price. But there is another feature of the
equilibrium suggesting that these states might not be interested in doing so anyway.
At equilibrium, the companies incorporated in each such state will be the state’s
local companies13 (see part (11) of proposition 1 and section 3.11 below). While we
have assumed that states seek to maximize the revenues from incorporated
companies, an alternative and perhaps more appealing assumption would be that
each state seeks to maximize revenues from out-of-state incorporations. The reason
is that the state has many other means of securing revenues from local companies
(e.g. through standard taxes), and it has no reason to resort to the franchise tax with
respect to such companies.
3.9 The Delaware Incorporation of all Companies that Benefit from
Legal Infrastructure and Network Externalities
Delaware will be successful in attracting all of the companies that enjoy the
benefits of a legal infrastructure and of network externalities (companies with
δ j = 1 ), and will thus become the dominant state. As shown above, no other state
will establish a competing infrastructure (see parts (4) and (7) of proposition 1).
Hence, by setting LR (see part (2) of proposition 1) and an appropriate price (see part
(4) of proposition 1), Delaware ensures its ability to lure all δ j = 1 companies.
Delaware clearly lures δ j = 1 companies from no-infrastructure states that also
choose LR . Delaware also lures δ j = 1 companies from the deviating states that set
H R , since the inefficiency of its LR rule is outweighed by Delaware’s infrastructure

and network externalities advantage ( E > Y R ).14
13

And perhaps some of the

14

That all

δ j = 0 companies, whose “home” state is one of the deviating states.

δ j = 1 companies incorporate in Delaware is a feature of the unique equilibrium due to

our assumption that the companies’ (re)incorporation decisions are made sequentially. In a model
with simultaneous (re)incorporation decisions, there may exist additional equilibria where Delaware
does not enjoy such dominance. In particular, if for some reason all of the δ j = 1 companies decide
to (re)incorporate in Ohio, then Ohio will provide network externalities that may outweigh
Delaware’s infrastructure advantage, thus sustaining the Ohio-dominance equilibrium. (The
uniqueness of the Delaware-dominance equilibrium is also maintained in a model where
(re)incorporation decisions are made cooperatively.)

19

3.10 The Equilibrium Benefits of Incorporating in Delaware
As stated in parts (1) and (2) of proposition 1, and as explained above, in
equilibrium, all of the states, except for the deviating H R states, set the same rules
with respect to both the insignificantly redistributive and the redistributive issues.
Thus, all of these states stand on equal ground with respect to the legal rules
themselves, but Delaware also offers the benefits of a legal infrastructure and of
network externalities – benefits for which Delaware does not charge a price equal to
their full value (see part (6) of proposition 1). As shown above, this will lead
companies that benefit from a legal infrastructure and from network externalities
(i.e. δ j = 1 companies) to incorporate in Delaware. These companies will benefit in
terms of their share value, and the share value of Delaware companies will be higher
than the share value of non-Delaware companies.15
This implication of the model is worth highlighting in light of the approach
taken by much of the empirical work on state competition. Substantial work has
focused on the effects of reincorporation to Delaware and has concluded that such
reincorporation produces increases in stock market prices (see Bhagat and Romano
(2001), and Bebchuk, Cohen, and Ferrell (2002) for a survey). In addition, some
recent work has focused on differences in Tobin’s Q among states, and has
concluded that incorporation in Delaware increases Tobin’s Q compared with
incorporation in other states (see Daines (2001)). The analysis here indeed predicts
that Delaware incorporation will have a positive effect on shareholder value.
The analysis also implies, however, that a positive effect of Delaware
incorporation on shareholder value would not imply in any way that state
competition works well, as past empirical work has assumed. As demonstrated,
evidence that Delaware incorporation or a move to Delaware raises share value
would be perfectly consistent with competition providing adverse incentives with
respect to an important set of issues. This is the case because, in equilibrium, states
would offer similar rules, but one state would also offer the benefits of legal
infrastructure and network externalities. Thus, the performance of state competition,
and the quality of the rules it produces, cannot be assessed by studying – in the
prevailing market equilibrium – the relative differences between Delaware and nonDelaware incorporations.16

If Delaware’s second price constraint is binding (see part (4) of proposition 1), then the share value
of Delaware companies will not be higher than the share value of companies in deviating states.
16 Note also that, in our model, the firms going to Delaware are different from those remaining in
their home state. This suggests that empirical studies comparing Delaware and non-Delaware firms
should pay close attention to problems of selection.
15

20

3.11 The Relative Performance of Deviating States that Choose Efficient Rules
As shown above Delaware will be successful in attracting all of the companies
that benefit from an infrastructure and from network externalities (i.e. the δ j = 1
companies). Hence, non-Delaware states can only hope to attract companies that do
not enjoy the benefits of a legal infrastructure and of network externalities
(companies with δ j = 0 ), since these companies will not be willing to pay the
positive price charged by Delaware.
Starting with the non-Delaware states that choose their legal rules in order to
attract incorporations, since all of these states set the same rules (see parts (1) and (3)
of proposition 1) and a price of zero (see part (8) of proposition 1), each δ j = 0
company that is originally incorporated in a non-Delaware state will remain in its
home state (recall our tie-breaking assumption); and companies of this kind that are
originally incorporated in Delaware will reincorporate to their home state. The nonDelaware deviating states that set H R will succeed in retaining their local δ j = 0
companies that are originally incorporated in-state, but will not be able to bring
home the local companies that were originally incorporated in Delaware. Therefore,
deviating states will be relatively less successful as compared to states that choose
their legal rules in order to attract incorporations.
These results are consistent with the observed patterns. More than 90% of the
firms are incorporated either in Delaware or in their home state (Bebchuk and
Cohen (2002)). Furthermore, among non-Delaware states, recent evidence in
Bebchuk and Cohen (2002) and Subramanian (2002) suggests that states offering
fewer antitakeover statutes are less successful in retaining their local companies.
This evidence is consistent with the model’s prediction that states offering proshareholder H R rules will end-up with fewer local incorporations, as compared to
states that offer the pro-manager LR rules.

4. Extensions
4.1 The Emergence of a Dominant State
Thus far we have assumed the existence of a dominant state, Delaware.
Delaware’s initial advantage has been characterized by the existence of a legal
infrastructure, a specialized judiciary, and by a greater number of initial
incorporations compared to the other states. In the present section, we drop these
assumptions, and demonstrate how a dominant state may emerge endogenously. In
particular, we take away from Delaware any initial advantage that it previously
21

had. Now, without an initial legal infrastructure, we allow Delaware, as well as all
other states, to establish such an infrastructure. Also, we now assume that all states,
including Delaware, enjoy the same number of initial incorporations, m(t = 0) . The
outcome in the market for corporate law under these assumptions is derived below.
Proposition 2: Assuming that the cost of establishing a legal infrastructure is not too high
compared to the benefits that companies may derive from such an infrastructure, so that the
emerging dominant state can cover the cost of establishing a legal infrastructure (K)17, then
the market for corporate law will have the following unique equilibrium:
(1) The first state to move, Delaware, establishes a legal infrastructure; and
(2) The results stated in proposition 1 hold, with the first-mover state taking the place of the
(pre-determined) dominant state in proposition 1.
Remark: The intuition for this result, whose detailed proof is omitted, is as follows.
The first state to move, Delaware, will establish a specialized judiciary because,
given that it can be expected to be the only state to do so, it will be able to attract all
of the companies that benefit from a legal infrastructure and from network
externalities, and thus cover the costs of its investment, K. (While only covering its
investment, it will be willing to do so since states are assumed to prefer having more
companies, ceteris paribus.) After the first-mover establishes an infrastructure, and
since all other states are preempted from entering with a competing infrastructure,
the remainder of the analysis exactly parallels the analysis summarized in
proposition 1.
4.2 IPOs
Section 4.2 extends the analysis to allow for the possibility of IPO-stage
incorporations. As was done in Section 3, we continue to assume the initial existence
of a dominant state with a legal infrastructure. Suppose that a number m IPO of
companies go public after the legal strategies are chosen by the states. Specifically,
assume that at period T = 2, after the m publicly held companies (henceforth
“existing companies”) make their (re)incorporation decisions, a number m IPO of
companies (henceforth “IPO companies”) are taken public by a “founder,” who also
17

This condition can be formally stated as follows:



K
K
min 
,E −Y R,P =
.
 (1 − δ ) ⋅ m
 (1 − δ ) ⋅ m

22

chooses their initial state of incorporation. After the initial incorporation of the IPO
companies, and before period T = 3, the IPO companies, which by then are assumed
to have a manager with a fraction α of the company’s shares, can reincorporate into
another state. The outcome in the IPO extension can be summarized by the
following proposition.
Proposition 3: As long as the number of IPO-stage companies, m IPO , is sufficiently small
compared to the number of existing companies which are not incorporated in Delaware at T
= 0, ∑ mi (t = 0) ,18 then the market for corporate law will have the following unique
i≠ D

equilibrium:
(1) The results stated in proposition 1 hold, except for the following adjustment in
Delaware’s pricing strategy:19
(2) Delaware sets the highest possible price that: preempts a potential rival from entering and
establishing a competing legal infrastructure; secures the reincorporation (into Delaware—
even from states with H R and P = 0) of all the companies that benefit from a legal
infrastructure and from network externalities (i.e. companies with δ j = 1 ); and does not
exceed the politically imposed price cap, P . Formally:


K
K
, E ( K , m + m IPO ) − Y R , [E ( K , m + m IPO ) − E ( K , m IPO )] − Y R +
, P
PD = min 
δ
δ
(
1
)
(
)
(
1
)
−
⋅
m
+
m
−
⋅
m
IPO
IPO



Remarks: The intuition for this result, which is generalized and proved in appendix
B, is as follows:
Under the condition specified in proposition 3, the outcome in the market for
corporate law is not altered by the inclusion of IPO-stage incorporations, subject to
the following adjustment in Delaware’s pricing strategy. Delaware will set the
highest possible price that still satisfies the following three goals/constraints:
(1) Preempting rivals: Delaware seeks to preempt rival states from establishing
a competing infrastructure. To prevent a rival state from establishing an

The precise condition is derived in appendix B. The outcome, when this condition is not satisfied,
is also derived in appendix B as part of a more general analysis of the IPO model.
19 The results stated in proposition 1 should also be supplemented by specifying the equilibrium
states of incorporation of the IPO companies, which do not enjoy the benefits of a legal
infrastructure or of network externalities (companies with δ j = 0 ). These companies will initially
18

incorporate in any one of the non-dominant states, and will remain there.

23

infrastructure and luring all of the companies with LR and P =
Delaware cannot price above

K
,
(1 − δ ) ⋅ (m + m IPO )

K
K
(as compared to
in the no(1 − δ ) ⋅ (m + m IPO )
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m

IPO model – see proposition 1). In a model with IPOs, Delaware must also preempt
a rival state from establishing an infrastructure and luring only IPO-stage
K
. Therefore, Delaware cannot price above
companies with H R and P =
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m IPO
K
[E ( K , m + m IPO ) − E ( K , m IPO )] − Y R +
. (2) Luring reincorporations from other
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m IPO
states: Delaware will also wish to ensure that shareholders of companies located in
other states will approve reincorporation in Delaware. Therefore, Delaware cannot
price above E ( K , m + m IPO ) − Y R .
(3) The political constraint: Delaware cannot exceed the exogenous (political)
price-cap, P .
Proposition 3 assumes that the number of IPO-stage companies is not too large
relative to the number of existing firms not initially incorporated in Delaware. If this
condition was not satisfied, Delaware could prefer to set H R and focus on the IPOstage companies and on the existing companies, which are already incorporated in
Delaware. With such a strategy Delaware lures fewer companies, but can set a
higher per-company price. In this case, the second-mover state will establish an
infrastructure, set LR and lure the existing companies that are not already
incorporated in Delaware.20 The fact that such an outcome—one with two leading
states, one focusing on attracting IPO incorporations and one focusing on
reincorporations by existing publicly traded companies—has not been observed
suggests that the conditions for the emergence of this equilibrium do not prevail.
For this reason we have chosen to focus on the equilibrium characterized in
proposition 3.
4.3

Home-State Bias

In our model, the only reason for some companies to incorporate in their home
state was that they did not derive benefits from legal infrastructure and network
20

If the number of IPO-stage companies is small, but the number of existing companies, which are
R

already incorporated in Delaware, is large, Delaware may choose a third strategy. It may set L and
focus only on the existing companies, which are already incorporated in it. Again, with such a
strategy Delaware lures fewer companies, but can set a higher per-company price.

24

externalities. Consequently, they would derive no benefits from incorporating in
Delaware and would only have to pay the positive incorporations charges levied by
Delaware. In the equilibrium, companies not going to Delaware were indifferent
among the other states, and it was the tie-breaking assumption that resulted in their
incorporation in their home state in the analyzed equilibrium.
There are reasons why companies might have a preference for incorporating in
their home state (see Bebchuk and Cohen (2002) and Daines (2002) for an empirical
investigation of these reasons). For example, handling legal business at a distance
might be more costly, and incorporating in the home state might signal the
company’s loyalty to the state and help the company in its dealings with the state.
In any event, the model can be extended to allow for home preferences of
different magnitude. Suppose that for each company there is a cost C ≥ 0 to
incorporating outside its state of headquarters, and suppose that C has a positive
support in [0, C ] . Then companies that in equilibrium will incorporate in their home
state will not be only those that derive no benefits from legal infrastructure and
network externalities but also those companies for which C is sufficiently large.
Note that, if the state that is home to such companies had an interest in doing so, it
would be able to charge such companies a positive price for incorporation in them.
However, as discussed, since states are already taxing in other ways companies
headquartered in them, it is far from clear that they would have an interest in
deriving revenues from them via incorporation charges as well.
4.4 Stickiness and the Power of Network Externalities
In our model, we assume that at T=2 all m companies consider reincorporation.
It is, however, somewhat unrealistic to assume that all companies find it equally
easy to alter their state of incorporation. Presumably, a certain level of stickiness
accompanies the T=0 incorporation endowment. To capture this stickiness effect
assume that at T=2 only a proportion θ of all companies can seriously consider
reincorporation, while the complementary proportion 1 − θ of all companies remain
in their T=0 state of incorporation.
The stickiness effect further reinforces Delaware’s dominance by invoking the
power of its initial network externalities. Recall that in the basic model at T=0 a
significant percent of all companies were incorporated in Delaware, but nothing
prevented these companies from leaving Delaware at T=2. Hence, Delaware could
not exploit the potential network externalities generated by these companies in its
pricing strategy. However, when stickiness is accounted for, a proportion 1 − θ of
Delaware’s T=0 incorporations will necessarily remain in Delaware. Thus, Delaware

25

can reflect the network effect generated by these companies in its pricing strategy
(as if it were part of Delaware’s legal infrastructure).
In particular, in order to preempt other states from establishing a competing
infrastructure Delaware no longer needs to limit its price to the per-company value
K
. Delaware can raise its price by the value of the
of the legal infrastructure,
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m
network externalities generated by companies that due to the stickiness effect are
known to remain in Delaware. Moreover, the power of these network externalities
will help Delaware in any potential competition with a no-infrastructure state that
wishes to lure incorporations.
4.5 Price Responses by Delaware to Undercutting by a Rival
In our model, Delaware is not allowed to alter its price after observing other
states’ pricing strategies. Thus, if Delaware sets an excessively high price, another
state can choose a slightly lower price, lure all companies away from Delaware, and
emerge as the dominant state. Of course, as shown above, Delaware can still
discourage such challenges from other states by appropriately choosing its pricing
strategy. However, clearly Delaware’s inability to undercut a rival’s price limits its
market power and forces it to lower its initial (and, in the basic model, final) price.
Since arguably counter-moves by Delaware are often possible, it is interesting to
examine an alternative assumption that allows for price undercutting.
Allowing for price undercutting would further strengthen Delaware’s
dominant position and its ability to discourage challenges. In such a case, an entrant
might be concerned about how Delaware would respond and, in particular, that a
matching by Delaware of what it offers would leave it with no profits. In particular,
K
(contrary to part (4)(i) of proposition 1),
if Delaware initially prices above
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m
a rival state will still be discouraged from establishing a competing infrastructure.
This potential rival would know that if a competing infrastructure is indeed
K
established, Delaware would lower its price below
and thus lure all δ j = 1
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m
companies, leaving the rival state with a net loss. Consequently, the first constraint
on Delaware’s pricing strategy (see part (4)(i) of proposition 1) is alleviated by the
possibility of price undercutting. The other two constraints (see parts (4)(i) and (4(ii)
of proposition 1), however, remain effective. 21
For further discussion on how investments by challengers might be discouraged when countermoves by Delaware are allowed - see Bebchuk and Ferrell (2001) and Bebchuk and Hamdani (2001).
21

26

5. Concluding Remarks
The market for corporate law is hardly a simple market. On the supply side, the
value of the product offered by states depends partly on choices that do not involve
costs (states’ choices among rules), partly on choices that require a fixed investment
with little or no variable cost (choices to invest in legal infrastructure), and partly on
network externalities. On the demand side, the market suffers from an agency
problem due to the private interests of corporate managers, who have a
considerable influence on incorporation decisions.
This paper has developed an analytical framework that enables a fuller and
more rigorous examination of this unique market than has been thus far possible.
This framework has enabled us to derive a full characterization of the equilibrium in
this market. In particular, we have identified how the market performs with respect
to different categories of corporate rules, the factors that might lead to the
emergence and persistence of a dominant state, the division of the market, the
strategies and profits of the dominant state, and the effects that incorporation in (or
reincorporation to) the dominant state have on corporate value.
Our analysis has highlighted the significance of the agency problem on the
demand side of the market. Managers’ veto power over reincorporations, and their
power to make take-it-or-leave-it offers to shareholders with respect to
reincorporations, substantially affect the equilibrium. The market for corporate law
can be expected to perform well with respect to rules that do not have a significant
effect on private benefits, where the interests of shareholders and managers are
aligned. However, with respect to rules that do have such an effect on private
benefits, where the interests of shareholders and managers might conflict,
competition drives states to offer some rules that managers, but not shareholders,
favor. Because the prevailing procedures for switching from state to state play a
critical role in creating this problem, proposals for changing these rules, in a way
that would eliminate or diminish managers’ power over switching, are worth
considering. 22
Our analysis has implications for the empirical assessment of the performance
of state competition. Competition might drive all states to adopt the same inefficient
rules with respect to rules that have significant effects on private benefits of control.
In equilibrium, moving to the dominant state that provides network and legal
infrastructure advantages will benefit shareholders, even though the competition as
See Bebchuk and Ferrell (2001) for an analysis of the possibility of allowing shareholders to switch
to another jurisdiction, even against the wishes of managers, with respect to some or all of the rules
governing the company.

22

27

a whole is not performing well with respect to rules that significantly affect private
benefits. Thus, inferences concerning the overall performance of state competition
cannot be drawn, as past empirical work has done, from studying the effects that
Delaware incorporation has on stock prices or Tobin’s Q.
Our analysis has also contributed to understanding the “industrial
organization” structure of the market. Our model explains how investments in legal
infrastructure (even if not large) combined with network externalities can enable a
state to establish a dominant position in this market. Furthermore, the analysis
explains how this dominant state can maintain its position over time, and how the
desire to maintain this dominance will influence the pricing and rule selection
decisions of this state.
An overlooked aspect of the corporate law market, which our analysis has
identified, concerns the interaction between quality-based competition and pricebased competition in the market for corporate law. We have shown how the
dominant state, using the fact that it offers unique advantages in terms of legal
infrastructure and network externalities, can price higher than other states.
Nevertheless, in order to discourage rival states from challenging its dominance, the
dominant state will not extract the full value to companies of its relative advantages.
Our conclusions in this regard can explain the observed pricing patterns in the
market for corporate law.

28

APPENDIX A
Proof of Proposition 1:
(1) Delaware will set H NR . Otherwise, a rival state will establish a legal
infrastructure, set H NR and lure the δ j = 1 companies, or Delaware will be forced to
lower its price to preempt such a rival. All other states will set H NR to retain their
local companies.
(2) Delaware will set LR , otherwise managers will not initiate reincorporation into
Delaware (recall the assumption that α is sufficiently small so that managers will
always prefer a state with LR over a state with H R ).
(3) States other than Delaware that choose their legal rules to maximize revenues
and incorporations will set LR in order to retain their local δ j = 0 companies. By
setting LR (as well as H NR and P = 0 ), a state prevents managers from initiating
reincorporation. This strategy further allows states to regain δ j = 0 local companies
that were originally incorporated in Delaware. Note that a state can retain its δ j = 0
local companies by setting H R (as well as H NR and P = 0 ), which would prevent
shareholders from approving reincorporation. But, since the state also wants to
regain its δ j = 0 local companies that were originally incorporated in Delaware, it
will choose LR . (Otherwise, these companies will reincorporate in another nonDelaware state.)
(4) Consider the three scenarios implied by part (4) of the proposition:


K
K
(i) min 
,E −Y R,P =
 (1 − δ ) ⋅ m
 (1 − δ ) ⋅ m
Delaware chooses its pricing strategy to ensure that all the δ j = 1 companies
incorporate in it. In particular, Delaware sets a price of PD =

K
in order
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m

to preempt other states from establishing a competing infrastructure and
luring the δ j = 1 companies.23 Note that a state that decides to establish a legal

If no other state could establish a competing infrastructure, Delaware would be able to secure a
dominant position by setting PD = E (K , (1 − δ ) ⋅ m ) − E (0, (1 − δ ) ⋅ m ) . Recall the assumption that
23

E (K , (1 − δ ) ⋅ m ) − E (0, (1 − δ ) ⋅ m ) >

K
(see note 8, supra).
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m

A -1

infrastructure will not price below

K
; otherwise it will surely lose
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m

money.24


K
,E −Y R,P = E −Y R
(ii) min 
 (1 − δ ) ⋅ m

To ensure that shareholders of δ j = 1 companies located in other states will
approve reincorporation in Delaware, Delaware must make sure that the
overall package that it offers is more beneficial to shareholders than the
package offered by the other states (see parts (1), (7) and (8) of the
proposition), even if these states offer H R :
E − Y R − PD ≥ 0
or
PD ≤ E − Y R .
Note that the constraint presumes that Delaware is successful in luring all the
δ j = 1 companies, and therefore provides substantial network externalities.
Delaware’s success derives from the preemption of any potential rival, as
guaranteed by the previous constraint. In the absence of a contender, each one
of the δ j = 1 companies anticipates Delaware’s dominance and the resulting
network effect (see also proof of part (9) below).


K
(iii) min 
,E −Y R,P = P
 (1 − δ ) ⋅ m

An exogenously imposed constraint prevents Delaware from pricing above
P . Thus, to maximize its profits, Delaware will price at P . (Recall that, by
assumption, in this scenario a price of P satisfies the constraints imposed by
the two previous considerations).
(5) Immediate from the proof of part (4), given that Delaware succeeds in luring
incorporations (see the proof of part (9) below).
24

Delaware can preempt other states from establishing a competing infrastructure by setting a price

K
K
, and it need not set a price below PD =
. To see this, consider the case
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m
K
, and a second state establishes an infrastructure and sets a
in which Delaware sets PD =
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m
K
. The two states are equally appealing to companies, and therefore according to
price of
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m
of PD =

our tie-breaking assumption each state will enjoy all incorporations with a probability of fifty
percent. However, this means that the second state will lose money on average, and therefore will
not establish an infrastructure.

A- 2

(6) Delaware’s ability to extract value is limited by the constraints on its pricing
strategy (see part (4) of proposition 1). Consider first the case where the second
constraint on Delaware’s pricing strategy (see part (4)(ii) of proposition 1) is
binding, i.e. PD = E − Y R . This price takes into account the fact that states may
attempt to prevent shareholders of local companies from approving reincorporation
in Delaware by offering the redistributive rule H R . However, at equilibrium these
other states will offer LR , just like Delaware, and not H R (see part (3) of proposition
1). Hence, again Delaware’s price does not reflect the benefits it provides to
companies. (This price will reflect the benefits provided by Delaware, as compared
to the deviating states that set H R .) If Delaware does not capture the full value of
the benefits it confers when the second constraint is binding, as explained above,
then clearly it will not capture the full value of these benefits if either the first or
third constraints (see parts (4)(i) and (4)(iii), respectively) are binding.
(7) Immediate from the proof of part (4).
(8) As explained above, all states that choose their legal rules to maximize revenues
and incorporations will set identical legal rules. Therefore, if a non-dominant state
sets a positive price, it will lose even its δ j = 0 companies to another non-dominant
state that sets a lower price. Moving on to the deviating H R states, again since there
are at least two such states that offer an identical “product”, competition will drive
the price to zero.
(9) Since all of the states (except for the deviating H R states that cannot lure
companies anyway) set identical rules, and in particular LR , all of the δ j = 1
companies will reincorporate (or remain) in the state with the most attractive overall
package, including the full network advantage (created when all δ j = 1 companies
incorporate in that state).
Consider competition between two states with H NR and LR , Delaware and
another state, say Ohio. It will be clear that the proof can be readily extended to
multi-state competition. Let m D (t ) and mO (t ) denote the number of companies that
have made a decision to incorporate in Delaware and in Ohio, respectively, after
round t. Also, let V D (m D (t ) ) = E ( K , m D (t )) − PD and VO (mO (t ) ) = E (k O , mO (t )) − PO denote
the value provided for δ j = 1 companies by Delaware and Ohio, respectively
(excluding the effects of the legal rules which are identical in both states). We now
show that all the δ j = 1 companies will reincorporate in Delaware if and only if
V D (m ) > VO (m ) .25 As shown above (see part (4) of proposition 1), at equilibrium this
Recall the tie-breaking assumption that if both Delaware and Ohio are equally appealing,
companies will reincorporate in each of the two states with a probability of fifty percent. In the
25

A- 3

condition is satisfied. The proof is by backward induction. For simplicity of
exposition, the proof assumes that all companies are δ j = 1 companies.
In the final round, t = m, a company will choose to reincorporate in Delaware if and
only if V D (m D (t − 1) + 1) > VO (mO (t − 1) + 1) . In round t = m - 1, a company will choose to

reincorporate in Delaware if and only if V D (m D (t − 2) + 2) > VO (mO (t − 2) + 2) . To see this,

two cases should be distinguished. First, consider the case in which the company
has
no
effect
on
the
t
=
m
reincorporation
decision.
If
V D (m D (t − 2) + 1) > VO (mO (t − 2) + 2 ) , the t = m company will reincorporate (or remain)
in Delaware, regardless of the choice made by the t = m – 1 company. In this
scenario, the t = m - 1 company will clearly choose Delaware as well. (
V D (m D (t − 2) + 1) > VO (mO (t − 2) + 2 ) implies that V D (m D (t − 2) + 2) > VO (mO (t − 2) + 1) . ).

Similarly, if VO (mO (t − 2) + 1) > VD (m D (t − 2) + 2 ) , both the t = m company and the t = m

- 1 will reincorporate (or remain) in Ohio. Now consider the case, where the t = m - 1
company determines the t = m reincorporation decision, namely
V D (m D (t − 2) + 2) > VO (mO (t − 2) + 1)
but
V D (m D (t − 2) + 1) < VO (mO (t − 2) + 2) ,
or

VO (mO (t − 2) + 2 ) > V D (m D (t − 2) + 1) but V D (m D (t − 2) + 1) < VO (mO (t − 2) + 2) . In this case,

the t = m - 1 company will choose to reincorporate (or remain) in Delaware if and
only if V D (m D (t − 2) + 2) > VO (mO (t − 2) + 2) . Combining the two cases, the t = m - 1
company will choose to reincorporate (or remain) in Delaware if and only if
V D (m D (t − 2) + 2) > VO (mO (t − 2) + 2) . We have also established that if the t = m - 1
company will choose to reincorporate (or remain) in Delaware, then also the t = m
company will reincorporate (or remain) in Delaware.
To complete the backward induction argument, we now show that if
V D (m D (i − 1) + m − (i − 1) ) > VO (mO (i − 1) + m − (i − 1) ) induces all t ≥ i companies to
reincorporate
(or
remain)
in
Delaware,
then
V D (m D (i − 2) + m − (i − 2) ) > VO (mO (i − 2) + m − (i − 2) ) induces all t ≥ i − 1 companies to
reincorporate (or remain) in Delaware (a parallel argument can be made for Ohio).
First consider the case where V D (m D (i − 2) + m − i + 1) > VO (mO (i − 2) + m − i + 2 ) . In this
case, even if the i – 1 company chooses Ohio, in the next round we will still have
V D (m D (i − 1) + m − (i − 1) ) > VO (mO (i − 1) + m − (i − 1) ) . Namely, all t ≥ i companies will
reincorporate (or remain) in Delaware. And, consequently, the i – 1 company will
also
choose
Delaware.
Next,
consider
the
case
where
V D (m D (i − 2) + m − i + 2) > VO (mO (i − 2) + m − i + 2)
(but
remainder of the proof we abstract from cases in which two states are equally appealing and thus
use strict inequalities. The analysis can be readily extended to allow for cases in which two states are
equally appealing using the tie-breaking assumption.

A- 4

V D (m D (i − 2) + m − i + 1) < VO (mO (i − 2) + m − i + 2) ). If the i – 1 company chooses

Delaware,
then
in
the
next
V D (m D (i − 1) + m − (i − 1) ) > VO (mO (i − 1) + m − (i − 1) )

round
and all

we
will
have
t ≥ i companies will

reincorporate (or remain) in Delaware. On the other hand, if the i – 1 company
chooses
Ohio,
then
in
the
next
round
we
will
have
V D (m D (i − 1) + m − (i − 1) ) < VO (mO (i − 1) + m − (i − 1) ) and all t ≥ i companies will
reincorporate (or remain) in Ohio. The i – 1 company thus compares
V D (m D (i − 2) + m − i + 2 )
and
VO (mO (i − 2) + m − i + 2) ,
and
if

V D (m D (i − 2) + m − i + 2) > VO (mO (i − 2) + m − i + 2) it will choose to reincorporate (or

remain)
in
Delaware.
Combining
the
V D (m D (i − 2) + m − i + 2) > VO (mO (i − 2) + m − i + 2) , then all

two
t ≥ i −1

cases,
companies

if
to

reincorporate (or remain) in Delaware.
Going back to the first round, all of the companies will choose to reincorporate (or
remain) in Delaware if V D (m ) > VO (m ) .26
(10) Immediate from the proof of part (6).
(11) Companies with δ j = 0 will not reincorporate in Delaware, since they do not
enjoy Delaware’s infrastructure and network advantages, and thus will not be
willing to pay Delaware’s high price. Since all non-dominant states that choose their
legal rules to maximize revenues and incorporations adopt the same strategy (see
parts (1), (3), (7) and (8) above), then due to our tie-breaking assumption each of
these states will retain its local companies (and regain its local δ j = 0 companies that
were initially incorporated in Delaware). Non-dominant deviating states that set
H R will retain their existing δ j = 0 companies, but will not regain their local δ j = 0
companies that were initially incorporated in Delaware. These latter companies will
reincorporate into one of the non-dominant states that choose their legal rules to
maximize revenues and incorporations.27
The same result would be obtained if all the companies made their incorporation decisions
cooperatively, rather than non-cooperatively and sequentially.
27 The equilibrium characterized in proposition 1 relies on the assumption that the fraction of
companies that are initially incorporated outside Delaware is sufficiently large (see note 4, supra).
Under this assumption, Delaware is interested in luring companies from their “home” states rather
than pursuing a strategy of focusing solely on companies that are already incorporated in Delaware.
However, if the fraction of companies that are initially incorporated outside Delaware is small,
Delaware may choose a different strategy. It may prefer to focus on its existing companies instead of
luring all of the δ j = 1 companies. Although Delaware ends up with fewer companies, it may be
26

able to charge a higher per-company price. A related issue concerns Delaware’s strategic choice to
preempt other states from establishing a competing infrastructure. Theoretically, Delaware can focus
on its existing companies (rather than lure companies from other states), with and without a
preemption strategy. If Delaware chooses to preempt, it will have to limit its price accordingly. If

A- 5

A technical refinement is required to support the equilibrium described in


K
K
proposition 1. If min 
(see part (4) of the proposition),
,E −Y R,P =
 (1 − δ ) ⋅ m
 (1 − δ ) ⋅ m
at least one state must adopt a strategy by which it will establish an infrastructure
K
if Delaware deviates from H NR or LR or prices
and set H NR , LR , and P =
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m
K
above
. Without this refinement, Delaware would be able to raise its price
(1 − δ ) ⋅ m
(i.e. the stated price would not be a best response). Of course, such a higher price
cannot be sustained at equilibrium, since another state would step in and lure all
incorporations.


K
Similarly, if min 
, E − Y R , P  = E − Y R (see part (4) of the proposition), at

 (1 − δ ) ⋅ m
least one state must adopt a strategy by which it will set H NR , H R , and P = 0 if
Delaware prices above E − Y R . Without this refinement, Delaware would be able to
raise its price (i.e. the stated price would not be a best response). Of course, such a
higher price cannot be sustained at equilibrium, since the other states will be able to
adjust their strategies and retain their companies.
QED
APPENDIX B
Appendix B contains the complete analysis of the IPO extension. The analysis
assumes δ → 0 for expositional simplicity. It can be readily extended to
accommodate larger values of δ .
Lemma

B.1:

(i)

Delaware

can

employ

strategy

σ 1D (H NR , LR , P1 ) ,

with

K

P1 = min  , E ( K , m) − Y R , P  , lure only existing companies, and make a profit of
m

D
Π 1 = m ⋅ P1 if and only if
K
.
(1) P1 > [E ( K , m + m IPO ) − E ( K , m IPO )] − Y R +
m IPO
Delaware chooses not to preempt, another state, say Nevada, may establish a legal infrastructure
and focus on δ j = 1 companies outside Delaware. Still, Delaware will have to make sure that
Nevada will not attempt to attract Delaware’s existing companies. For this purpose, Delaware again
will have to limit the price it charges. The limited price, coupled with the smaller number of
incorporations that Delaware enjoys, suggests that under reasonable assumptions Delaware would
rather preempt the establishment of a competing infrastructure and lure all δ j = 1 companies,
rather than focus on its existing companies.

A- 6

If condition (1) is not satisfied, strategy σ 1D cannot be part of an equilibrium.
(ii)

Delaware

can

employ

strategy

σ 2D (H NR , LR , P2 ),

with



K
K
P2 = min 
, E ( K , m + m IPO ) − Y R , [E ( K , m + m IPO ) − E ( K , m IPO )] − Y R +
, P  , lure
m IPO 
 m + m IPO

all of the companies, and make a profit of Π 2D = (m + m IPO ) ⋅ P2 if and only if
(2) [E ( K , m + m IPO ) − E ( K , m IPO )] − Y R +

K
≥0.
m IPO

If condition (2) is not satisfied, strategy σ 2D cannot be part of an equilibrium.

(iii) Delaware can employ strategy σ 3D (H NR , H R , P3 ) with

 K

K
P3 = min 
+ Y R − [E (K , m − m D (t = 0) + m IPO ) − E ( K , m D (t = 0) + m IPO )], P  ,
,
 m IPO m − m D (t = 0)


lure only IPO-stage companies, and make a profit of

Π 3D = (m D (t = 0) + m IPO ) ⋅ P3

if and only if
(3)

K
+ Y R − [E (K , m − m D (t = 0) + m IPO ) − E ( K , m D (t = 0) + m IPO )] ≥ 0 .
m − m D (t = 0)

If condition (3) is not satisfied, strategy σ 3D cannot be part of an equilibrium.
Proof:
(i) Strategy σ 1D , the equilibrium strategy from the no-IPO model, was shown to
bring all the existing companies to Delaware in the absence of IPOs. With IPOs, the
question is whether this strategy will also lure IPO-stage incorporations to
Delaware. If so, then this strategy can no longer be part of an equilibrium, since a
rival state would be able to establish a competing infrastructure, set LR , and lure all
the companies—both existing companies and IPO-stage companies—with a lower
price. This lower price will now cover the costs of the rival state, since there are
more incorporations. The question is, therefore, whether strategy σ 1D lures IPOs.
Clearly, if no other state establishes an infrastructure, then strategy σ 1D will lure
IPO-stage companies (even if these companies initially incorporate outside
Delaware). But, with IPOs, strategy σ 1D might not lure IPO-stage companies, as a
rival state may establish an infrastructure, set H R , and lure the IPO-stage companies
K
in order to cover its costs and preempt other states
(the rival will set a price of
m IPO
from targeting IPOs in a similar fashion). Such an IPO-targeting rival will be
successful in drawing the IPO-stage companies away from Delaware if and only if

A- 7

E ( K , m + m IPO ) − PD < E ( K , m IPO ) + Y R −

K
m IPO

or
PD > [E ( K , m + m IPO ) − E ( K , m IPO )] − Y R +

K 28
.
m IPO

(ii) Strategy σ 2D is aimed at luring all companies. Therefore, Delaware cannot set a
K
. Otherwise, a rival state will establish an infrastructure,
price higher than
m + m IPO
set LR , and lure all the companies. Also, since a rival state may establish an
K
),
infrastructure, set H R , and target IPO-stage companies (with a price of
m IPO
Delaware

will

be

able

to

preempt such a rival if and only if
K
E ( K , m + m IPO ) − PD ≥ E ( K , m IPO ) + Y R −
,
i.e.
m IPO
K
PD ≤ [E ( K , m + m IPO ) − E ( K , m IPO )] − Y R +
. Hence, strategy σ 2D is feasible if and only
m IPO
K
≥0.
if [E ( K , m + m IPO ) − E ( K , m IPO )] − Y R +
m IPO

(iii) As a third possibility, Delaware can forego existing companies (except for those
which are initially incorporated in it) and focus on the IPO-stage companies by
employing strategy σ 3D . When targeting IPOs, Delaware cannot set a price higher
than

K 29
. Otherwise, a rival state will establish an infrastructure, set H R , and lure
m IPO

all the IPO-stage companies. Also, since a rival state may establish an infrastructure,
K
), Delaware will
set LR , and target existing companies (with a price of
m − m D (t = 0)
be able to lure the IPO-stage companies if and only if
Theoretically, a third state might try to establish an infrastructure and lure companies from both
Delaware and its IPO-targeting rival. However, in order to offer companies a package that is better
28

R

than the ones offered by the two other infrastructure states (Delaware with L

and the IPO-

R

targeting state with H ) this third state would have to offer an extremely low price – a price that
would likely be too low to cover the costs of establishing an infrastructure.
29

We assume that E ( K , m IPO ) − E (0, m IPO ) >

supra). Therefore, PD <

K
(compare to the assumption stated in note 8
m IPO

K
implies PD < E ( K , m IPO ) − E (0, m IPO ) , which means that IPO-stage
m IPO
R

companies will prefer Delaware over states without an infrastructure (and with H ).

A- 8

E ( K , m D (t = 0) + m IPO ) + Y R − PD > E (K , m − m D (t = 0) + m IPO ) −

K
m − m D (t = 0)

or
PD ≤

K
+ Y R − [E (K , m − m D (t = 0) + m IPO ) − E ( K , m D (t = 0) + m IPO )] .
m − m D (t = 0)

Hence, strategy σ 3D is feasible if and only if
K
+ Y R − [E (K , m − m D (t = 0) + m IPO ) − E ( K , m D (t = 0) + m IPO )] ≥ 0 .
m − m D (t = 0)

QED
Lemma B.2: If condition (1) is not satisfied, then condition (2) is necessarily satisfied,
i.e. ¬(1) ⇒ (2) . Therefore, at least one of the two strategies, σ 1D and σ 2D , is always
feasible.
Proof: If condition (1) is not satisfied, then P1 < [E ( K , m + m IPO ) − E ( K , m IPO )] − Y R +
which, given P1 ≥ 0 , implies condition (2).

K
,
m IPO

QED

Proposition B.1: If a number m IPO of IPO-stage companies choose their states of
incorporation at the end of period T = 2, then:
(i) If condition (1) is satisfied but conditions (2) and (3) are not satisfied, then
Delaware will choose strategy σ 1D , i.e.
(1) ∩ ¬(2) ∩ ¬(3) ⇒ σ D = σ 1D .

(ii) If condition (1) is not satisfied—which implies that condition (2) is satisfied—and
condition (3) is not satisfied, then Delaware will choose strategy σ 2D , i.e.
¬(1) ∩ ¬(3) ⇒ σ D = σ 2D .

(iii) If conditions (1) and (2) are satisfied but condition (3) is not satisfied, then
Delaware will choose strategy σ D = arg max σ D {Π 1D (σ 1D ), Π 2D (σ 2D )}, i.e.
i

(1) ∩ (2) ⇒ σ

D

{

}

= arg max σ D Π 1D (σ 1D ), Π 2D (σ 2D ) .
i

(iv) If conditions (1) and (3) are satisfied but condition (2) is not satisfied, then
Delaware will choose strategy σ D = arg max σ D {Π 1D (σ 1D ), Π 3D (σ 3D )}, i.e.
i

(1) ∩ ¬(2) ∩ (3) ⇒ σ

D

{

}

= arg max σ D Π 1D (σ 1D ), Π 3D (σ 3D ) .
i

(v) If condition (1) is not satisfied—which implies that condition (2) is satisfied—and
condition
(3)
is
satisfied,
then
Delaware
will
choose
strategy
D
D
D
D
D
σ = arg max σ D {Π 2 (σ 2 ), Π 3 (σ 3 )}, i.e.
i

A- 9

{

}

¬(1) ∩ (3) ⇒ σ D = arg max σ D Π 2D (σ 2D ), Π 3D (σ 3D ) .
i

(vi) If all three conditions, (1), (2) and (3), are satisfied, then Delaware will choose
strategy σ D = arg max σ D {Π 1D (σ 1D ), Π 2D (σ 2D ), Π 3D (σ 3D )}, i.e.
i

{

}

(1) ∩ (2) ∩ (3) ⇒ σ D = arg max σ D Π 1D (σ 1D ), Π 2D (σ 2D ), Π 3D (σ 3D ) .
i

Proof: Immediate from the previous two lemmas.

A - 10

REFERENCES
Ayres, Ian, Supply-Side Inefficiencies in Corporate Charter Competition: Lessons
from Patents, Yachting and Bluebooks, 43 University of Kansas Law Review 541
(1995).
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, Federalism and the Corporation: The Desirable Limits on
State Competition in Corporate Law, 105 Harvard Law Review 1435, 1442–51
(1992).
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, The Allocation of Power between Managers and
Shareholders, working paper, Harvard Law School (2001).
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Alma Cohen, Firms’ Decisions where to Incorporate,
Harvard Olin Discussion Paper No. 351 (2002), available at
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=296492.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, Alma Cohen, and Allen Ferrell, Does the Evidence Favor
State Competition in Corporate Law? Harvard Olin Discussion Paper No. 352,
forthcoming
in
California
Law
Review
(2002),
available
at
http://papers.ssrn.com/abstract=303417.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Allen Ferrell, Federalism and Corporate Law: The Race
to Protect Managers from Takeovers, 99 Columbia Law Review 1168-1199 (1999).
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Allen Ferrell, A New Approach to Takeover Law and
Regulatory Competition, 87 Virginia Law Review 127 (2001).
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Assaf Hamdani, Vigorous Race or Leisurely Walk:
Reconsidering the State Competition Debate in Corporate Law, Working Paper,
Harvard Law School (2002), forthcoming in Yale Law Journal.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Oliver Hart, Takeover Bids vs. Proxy Fights in Contests
for Corporate Control, Discussion Paper No. 338, John M. Olin Center, Harvard
Law School (2001).
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan, Executive Compensation and
Incentives: The Impact of Takeover Legislation, NBER Working Paper No.
6830 (1999a).
R-1

Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan, Is There Discretion in Wage Setting?
A Test Using Takeover Legislation, 30 Rand Journal of Economics 535-554
(1999b).
Bhagat, Snajai and Roberta Romano, Event Studies and the Law: Part II – Empirical
Studies of Corporate Law, Yale ICF working paper no. 00-33 (2001).
Black, Bernard S., Is Corporate Law Trivial? - A Political and Economic Analysis, 84
Northwestern University Law Review 542-590 (1990).
Cary, William, Federalism and Corporate Law: Reflections upon Delaware, 83 Yale
Law Journal 663 - 701 (1974).
Daines, Robert, Does Delaware Law Improve Firm Value? 62 Journal of Financial
Economics 525-558 (2001).
Daines, Robert, How Firms Choose Corporate Law Rules: Some Evidence on Law,
Layers, and the Market for IPO Charters, work in progress, NYU, presented at
the ALEA meeting (2002).
Easterbrook, Frank H. and Daniel R. Fischel, The Economic Structure of Corporate Law
212–27 (1991).
Fisch, Jill E., The Peculiar Role of the Delaware Courts in the Competition for
Corporate Charters, 68 Cincinnati Law Review 1061 (2000).
Fischel, Daniel R., The “Race to the Bottom” Revisited: Reflections on Recent
Developments in Delaware’s Corporation Law, 76 Northwestern University Law
Review 913 (1982).
Gartman, Grant A., State Antitakeover Laws (Investor Responsibility Research Center,
Washington D.C., 2000).
Kahan, Marcel and Ehud Kamar, Price Discrimination in the Market for Corporate
Law, 86 Cornell Law Review 1205-1256 (2001).

R-2

Kahan, Marcel and Michael Klausner, Standardization and Innovation in Corporate
Contracting (or "The Economics of Boilerplate"), 83 Virginia Law Review 713
(1997).
Kamar, Ehud, A Regulatory Competition Theory of Indeterminacy in Corporate
Law, 98 Columbia Law Review 1908 (1998).
Klausner, Michael, Corporations, Corporate Law, and Networks of Contracts, 81
Virginia Law Review 757 (1995).
Macey, Jonathan R. and Geoffrey P. Miller, Toward an Interest-Group Theory of
Delaware Corporate Law, 65 Texas Law Review 469 (1987).
Karpoff, Jonathan M. and Paul H. Malatesta (1989), The Wealth Effects of SecondGeneration State Takeover Legislation, 25 Journal of Financial Economics 291322 (1989).
Romano, Roberta, Law as a Product: Some Pieces of the Incorporation Puzzle, 1
Journal of Law, Economics & Organization 225 (1985).
Romano, Roberta, The Genius of American Corporate Law (1993a).
Romano, Roberta, Competition for Corporate Charters and the Lesson of Takeover
Statutes, 61 Fordham Law Review 843 (1993b).
Romano, Roberta, Empowering Investors: A Market Approach to Securities
Regulation, 107 Yale Law Journal 2359, 2383–88 (1998).
Subramanian, Guhan, The Influence of Antitakeover Statutes on Incorporation
Choice: Evidence on the “Race” Debate and Antitakeover Overreaching,
Working Paper, Harvard Business School, forthcoming University of
Pennsylvania Law Review _ (2002).
Winter, Ralph K. Jr., State Law, Shareholder Protection, and the Theory of the
Corporation, 6 Journal of Legal Studies 251 (1977).
Winter, Ralph K. Jr., The “Race for the Top” Revisited: A Comment on Eisenberg, 89
Columbia Law Review 1526 (1989)

R-3

