NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WINNERS AND LOSERS OVER TWO CENTURIES OF GLOBALIZATION
Jeffrey G. Williamson
Working Paper 9161
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9161
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

Paper to be delivered as the 2002 WIDER Annual Lecture, Copenhagen (September 5, 2002). The research
reported in this paper draws heavily on recent collaborations with Michael Clemens, John Coatsworth, Tim
Hatton, Kevin O’Rourke, and especially Peter Lindert. I am grateful to all five. I also acknowledge with
pleasure financial support from the National Science Foundation SES-0001362. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Jeffrey G. Williamson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Winners and Losers Over Two Centuries of Globalization
Jeffrey G. Williamson
NBER Working Paper No. 9161
September 2002
JEL No. F0, N0, O5, D3
ABSTRACT
The world has seen two globalization booms over the past two centuries, and one bust. The first
global century ended with World War I and the second started at the end of World War II, while the
years in between were ones of anti-global backlash. This lecture reports what we know about the
winners and losers during the two global centuries, including aspects almost always ignored in
modern debate – how prices of consumption goods on the expenditure side are affected, and how
the economic position of the poor is influenced. It also reports two responses of the winners to the
losers’ complaints. Some concessions to the losers took the form of anti-global policy manifested
by immigration restriction in the high-wage countries and trade restriction pretty much everywhere.
Some concessions to the losers were also manifested by a “race towards the top” whereby legislation
strengthened losers’ safety nets and increased their sense of political participation. The lecture
concludes with four lessons of history and an agenda for international economists, including more
attention to the impact of globalization on commodity price structure, the causes of protection, the
impact of world migration on poverty eradication, and the role of political participation in the whole
process.

Jeffrey G. Williamson
Department of Economics
Harvard University and the Center for International Development
Cambridge MA 02138
and NBER
jwilliam@kuznets.fas.harvard.edu

Globalization and World Inequality

Globalization in world commodity and factor markets has evolved in fits and starts since
Columbus and de Gama sailed from Europe more than 500 years ago. This lecture begins with a survey
of this history so as to place contemporary events in better perspective. It then asks whether globalization
raised world inequality. This question can be split into two more: What about income gaps between
nations? What about income gaps within nations? Collaborative work with Peter Lindert stresses the first
question (Lindert and Williamson 2002a, 2002b), but this lecture stresses the second two, the reason
being that answers to these have more relevance for policy and for the ability of a globally-integrated
world to survive. Indeed, at various points in the lecture, I ask when there has been global backlash in the
past – driven by complaints of the losers, and whether and how the complaints of the losers were
accommodated by the winners. Finally, this lecture also stresses the contribution of world migration to
poverty eradication.
Recent scholarship has documented a dramatic divergence in incomes around the globe over the
past two centuries. Furthermore, all of this work shows that the divergence was driven overwhelmingly
by the rise of between-nation inequality, not by the rise of inequality within nations (Berry et al. 1991;
Maddison 1995; Pritchett 1997; Bourguignon and Morrisson 2000). Figure 1 uses the work of François
Bourguignon and Christian Morrisson to summarize these trends, and it confirms that changing income
gaps between countries explains changing world inequality. However, the fact that the rise of inequality
within nations hasn’t driven the secular rise in global inequality hardly implies that it has been irrelevant:
policy is formed at the country level, and changing inequality within borders has often triggered policy
responses. Furthermore, the absence of a net secular change in within-country inequality at the global
level may simply reveal an equilibrium process whereby rising within-country inequality breeds policy
responses that force the distribution back to some culturally-acceptable steady state. That level may be

1

far higher for the United States than for Japan, to take two modern economic giants as examples.
I start by decomposing the centuries since 1492 into four distinct globalization epochs. Two of
these were pro-global, and two were anti-global. I then explore whether the two pro-global epochs made
the world more unequal, and whether it produced backlash.

Making a World Economy

Epoch I Anti-Global Mercantilist Restriction 1492-1820
The Voyages of Discovery induced a transfer of technology, plants, animals and diseases on an
enormous scale, never seen before and maybe since. But the impact of Columbus and da Gama on trade,
factor migration and globalization was a different matter entirely. For globalization to have an impact on
relative factor prices, absolute living standards and GDP per capita, domestic relative commodity prices
and/or relative endowments must be altered. True, there was a world trade boom after 1492, and the
share of trade in world GDP increased markedly (O’Rourke and Williamson 2002a). But was that trade
boom explained by declining trade barriers and global integration? A pro-global decline in trade barriers
should have left a trail marked by falling commodity price gaps between exporting and importing trading
centers, but there is absolutely no such evidence (O’Rourke and Williamson 2002b). Thus, ‘discoveries’
and transport productivity improvements must have been offset by trading monopoly markups, tariffs,
non-tariff restrictions, wars, and pirates, all of which served in combination to choke off trade.
Since there is so much confusion in the globalization debate about its measurement, it might pay
to elaborate on this point. Figure 2 (taken from O’Rourke and Williamson 2002a) presents a stylized
view of post-Colombian trade between Europe and the rest of the world (the latter denoted by an
asterisk). MM is the European import demand function (that is, domestic demand minus domestic
supply), with import demand declining as the home market price (p) increases. SS is the foreign export

2

supply function (foreign supply minus foreign demand), with export supply rising as the price abroad (p*)
increases. In the absence of transport costs, monopolies, wars, pirates, and other trade barriers,
international commodity markets would be perfectly integrated: prices would be the same at home and
abroad, determined by the intersection of the two schedules. Transport costs, protection, war, pirates, and
monopoly drive a wedge (t) between export and import prices: higher tariffs, transport costs, war
embargoes and monopoly rents increase the wedge while lower barriers reduce it. Global commodity
market integration is represented in Figure 2 by a decline in the wedge: falling transport costs, falling
trading monopoly rents, falling tariffs, the suppression of pirates, or a return to peace all lead to falling
import prices in both places, rising export prices in both places, an erosion of price gaps between them,
and an increase in trade volumes connecting them.
The fact that trade should rise as trade barriers fall is, of course, the rationale behind using trade
volumes or the share of trade in GDP as a proxy for international commodity market integration. Indeed,
several authors have used Angus Maddison’s (1995) data to trace out long-run trends in commodity
market integration since the early nineteenth century, or even earlier (e.g. Hirst and Thompson 1996).
However, Figure 2 makes it clear that global commodity market integration is not the only reason why
the volume of trade, or trade’s share in GDP, might increase over time. Just because we see a trade boom
doesn’t necessarily mean that more liberal trade policies or transport revolutions are at work. After all,
outward shifts in either import demand (to MM’) or export supply (to SS’) could also lead to trade
expansion, and such shifts could occur as a result of population growth, the settlement of previouslyunexploited frontiers, capital accumulation, technological change, a shift in post-Colombian income
distribution favoring those who consume imported ‘exotic’ luxuries, and a variety of other factors. Thus,
Figure 2 argues that the only irrefutable evidence that global commodity market integration is taking
place is a decline in the international dispersion of commodity prices, or what I call commodity price
convergence. However, we cannot find it (O’Rourke and Williamson 2002b).

3

If it wasn’t declining trade barriers that explains the world trade boom after Columbus, what was
it? Just like world experience from the 1950s to the 1980s (Baier and Bergstrand 2001), it appears that
European income growth -- or growth of incomes of the landed rich -- might have explained as much as
two thirds of the trade boom over the three centuries as a whole (O’Rourke and Williamson 2002a).1 The
world trade boom after Columbus would have been a lot bigger without those anti-global interventions.
And labor migration and capital flows were, of course, only a trickle.

Epoch II The First Global Century 1820-1913
The 1820s were a watershed in the evolution of the world economy. International commodity
price convergence did not start until then. Powerful and epochal shifts towards liberal policy (e.g.
dismantling mercantilism) were manifested during that decade. In addition, the 1820s coincide with the
peacetime recovery from the Napoleonic wars on the Continent, launching a century of global pax
Britannica. In short, the 1820s mark the start of a world regime of globalization.
Transport costs dropped very fast in the century prior to World War I. These globalization forces
were powerful in the Atlantic economy, but they were partially offset by a rising tide of protection.
Declining transport costs accounted for two-thirds of the integration of world commodity markets over
the century following 1820, and for all of world commodity market integration in the four decades after
1870, when globalization backlash offset some of it (Lindert and Williamson 2002a). The political
backlash of the late nineteenth century and interwar period was absent in Asia and Africa -- partly
because these regions contained colonies of free trading European countries, partly because of the power
of gunboat diplomacy, and partly because of the political influence wielded by natives who controlled the

1

The causality is worth stressing here. While the modern globalization-inequality debate chases the causation from
globalization to within-country inequality, the period 1500-1800 was characterized by population pressure on the
land which raised land rents and thus the incomes of Europe’s rich. Rising inequality increased the demand for
imported luxuries, causing a trade boom. It also caused a boom in all well-placed European ports around the Atlantic
economy. It seems to me that a recent paper by Acemoglu, Johnson and Robinson (2002) has the causality wrong.

4

natural resources that were the base of their exports. As a result, the globalization-induced domestic
relative price shocks were even bigger and more ubiquitous in Asia and Africa than those in the Atlantic
economy (Williamson 2002). To put it another way, commodity price convergence between the European
industrial core and the periphery was even more dramatic than it was within the Atlantic economy.
In short, the liberal dismantling of mercantilism and the world-wide transport revolution worked
together to produce truly global commodity markets across the nineteenth century. The persistent decline
in transport costs world wide allowed competitive winds to blow hard where they had never blown
before. True, there was an anti-global policy reaction after 1870 in the European center but it was
nowhere near big enough to cause a return to the pre-1820 levels of economic isolation. On the other
hand, these globalization events were met with rising levels of protection in Latin America, the United
States, and the European periphery, and to very high levels, as Figure 3 documents. However, I postpone
until the end of this lecture the question as to whether it was globalization backlash that triggered
protection in the periphery or whether it was something else. If history is to offer any lessons for the
present, we had better get the causes of backlash straight.
Factor markets also became more integrated world wide. As European investors came to believe
in strong growth prospects overseas, global capital markets became steadily more integrated, reaching
levels in 1913 that may not have been regained even today (Clemens and Williamson 2001b; Obstfeld
and Taylor 2002). International migration soared in response to unrestrictive immigration policies and
falling steerage costs (Hatton and Williamson 1998), but not without some backlash: New World
immigrant subsidies began to evaporate toward the end of the century, political debate over immigrant
restriction became very intense, and, finally, the quotas were imposed. In this case, it is clear that the
retreat from open immigration policies to quotas was driven by complaints from the losers at the bottom
of the income pyramid, the unskilled native born (Goldin 1994; Timmer and Williamson 1998;
Williamson 1998).

5

Epoch III Beating an Anti-Global Retreat 1913-1950
The globalized world started to fall apart after 1913, and it was completely dismantled between
the wars. New policy barriers were imposed restricting the ability of poor populations to flee miserable
conditions for something better, barriers that exist today, a century later. Thus, the foreign-born share in
the United States population fell from a pre-1913 figure of 14.6 percent to an interwar figure of 6.9
percent. Higher tariffs and other non-tariff barriers choked off the gains from trade. Thus, barrier-ridden
price gaps between Atlantic economy trading partners doubled, returning those gaps to 1870 levels
(Lindert and Williamson 2002a: Table 1). The appearance of new disincentives reduced investment in
the diffusion of new technologies around the world, and the share of foreign capital flows in GDP
dropped from 3.3 to 1.2 percent (Obstfeld and Taylor 1998: p. 359). In short, the interwar retreat from
globalization was carried entirely by anti-global economic policies.

Epoch IV The Second Global Century 1950-2002
Globalization by any definition resumed after World War II. It has differed from pre-1914
globalization in several ways (Baldwin and Martin 1999). Most important by far, factor migrations are
less impressive: the foreign-born are a much smaller share in labor-scarce economies than they were in
1913, and capital exports are a smaller percentage of GDP in the postwar United States (0.5 percent in
1960-73 and 1.2 percent 1989-96: Obstfeld and Taylor 1998, Table 11.1) than they were in prewar
Britain (4.6 percent in 1890-1913). On the other hand, trade barriers are probably lower today than they
were in 1913. These differences are tied to policy changes in one dominant nation, the United States,
which has switched from a protectionist welcoming immigrants to a free trader restricting their entrance.
Ever since Hecksher and Ohlin wrote almost a century ago (Flam and Flanders 1991), their
theory has taught that trade can be a substitute for factor migration. While modern theory is much more
ambiguous on this point, history is not: in the first global century, before quotas and restrictions, factor

6

mobility had a much bigger impact on factor prices, inequality, and poverty than did trade (Taylor and
Williamson 1997). Perhaps this explains why the second global century has been much more enthusiastic
about commodity trade than about migration. In any case, I start with the more recent globalization
experience, the second global century.

Did the Second Global Century Make the World More Unequal?

International Income Gaps: A Postwar Epochal Turning Point?
The Bourguignon and Morrisson evidence in Figure 1 documents what looks like a mid-twentieth
century turning point in their between-country inequality index, since its rise slows down after 1950.
However, the Bourguinon and Morrisson long-period data base contains only 15 countries. Using
postwar purchasing-power-parity data for a much bigger sample of 115, Arne Melchior, Kjetil Telle and
Henrik Wiig (2000) actually document a decline in their between-country inequality index in the second
half of the twentieth century, and Xavier Sala-i-Matin (2002) shows the same when focusing on poverty.
The first three authors document stability in between-country inequality up to the late 1970s, followed by
convergence. Four other studies find the same fall in between-country inequality after the early 1960s
(Schultz 1998; Firebaugh 1999; Boltho and Toniolo 1999; Radetzki and Jonsson 2000).2 Among these
recent studies, perhaps the most useful in identifying an epochal regime switch is that of Andrea Boltho
and Gianni Toniolo (1999), who show a rise in between-country inequality in the 1940s, rough stability
over the next three decades, and a significant fall after 1980, significant enough to make their betweencountry inequality index drop well below its 1950 level.
Did the postwar switch from autarky to global integration contribute to this epochal change in the

2

They all use purchasing-power-parity data for which the fall is far clearer. Indeed, it disappears in studies that use
income data in US dollars (Melchior, Telle and Wiig 2000: p. 16).

7

evolution of international gaps in average incomes?

Trade Policy and International Income Gaps: Late Twentieth Century Conventional Wisdom
Conventional (static) theory argues that trade liberalization should have benefited Third World
countries more than it benefitted leading industrial countries. After all, trade liberalization should have a
bigger effect on the terms of trade of countries joining the larger integrated world economy than on
countries already members.3 And the more the change in the terms of trade, the bigger the gain in GDP
per capita.
So much for theory. Reality suggests the contrary. After all, the postwar trade that was
liberalized the most was in fact intra-OECD trade, not trade between the OECD and the rest. From the
very beginning in the 1940s, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade explicitly excused low-income
countries from the need to dismantle their import barriers and exchange controls. This GATT permission
served to lower GDP in low-income countries below what might have been, but the permission was
consistent with the anti-global ideology prevailing in previously-colonial Asia and Africa, in Latin
America where the great depression hit so hard, and in eastern Europe dominated as it was by statedirected USSR. Thus the succeeding rounds of liberalization over the first two decades or so of GATT
brought freer trade and gains from trade mainly to OECD members. However, these facts do not show
that late twentieth century globalization favored rich countries. Rather, they show that globalization
favored all (industrial) countries who liberalized and penalized those (pre-industrial) who did not.
There is, of course, an abundant literature showing that liberalizing Third World countries gained
from freer trade after the OECD leaders set the liberal tone, after the 1960s.

3

For example, when Mexico joined NAFTA in 1994, its economy was only about 6 percent the size of the United
States. Furthermore, only about 9 percent of US trade was with Mexico, while about 75 percent of Mexican imports
and 84 percent of Mexican exports involved the US (Robertson 2001: p. 1). These shares suggest that Mexico
satisfied the “small country assumption” and took North American market prices as given, thus getting the full
measure of terms of trade gains by going open.

8

First, the authors of a large National Bureau of Economic Research project assessed trade and
exchange-control regimes in the 1960s and 1970s by making classic partial-equilibrium calculations of
deadweight losses (Bhagwati and Krueger 1973-1976). They concluded that the barriers imposed
significant costs in all but one case. However, these welfare calculations came from standard models
which did not allow protection a chance to lower long-run cost curves as would be true of the traditional
infant-industry case, or to foster industrialization and thus growth, as would be true of those modern
growth models where industry is the carrier of technological change and capital deepening. Thus,
economists have looked for more late twentieth century proof to support the openness-fosters-growth
hypothesis.
Second, analysts have contrasted the growth performance of relatively open with relatively
closed economies. The World Bank has conducted such studies for 41 Third World countries going back
before the first oil shock. The correlation between trade openness and growth is abundantly clear in these
studies, as illustrated in Table 1. Yet, such analysis is vulnerable to the criticism that the effect of trade
policies alone cannot be isolated since other policies usually change at the same time. Thus, countries
that liberalized their trade also liberalized their domestic factor markets, liberalized their domestic
commodity markets, and set up better property-rights enforcement. The appearance of these domestic
policies may deserve more credit for raising income while the simultaneous appearance of more liberal
trade policies may deserve less.
Third, there are country event studies, where the focus is on periods when Third World trade
policy regimes change dramatically enough to see their effect on growth. For example, Anne Krueger
(1983, 1984) looked at trade opening moments in South Korea around 1960, Brazil and Colombia around
1965, and Tunisia around 1970. Growth improved after liberalization in all four cases. More recently,
David Dollar and Aart Kraay (2000a) examined the reforms and trade liberalizations of 16 countries in
the 1980s and 1990s, finding, once again, the positive correlation between freer trade and faster growth.

9

Of course, these reform episodes may have changed more than just global participation, so that an
independent trade effect may not have been isolated.
Fourth, macro-econometric analysis has been used in an attempt to resolve the doubts left by
simpler historical correlations revealed by the other three kinds of studies. This macro-econometric
literature shows that free trade policies have had a positive effect on growth in the late twentieth century,
especially with many other relevant influences held constant. The most famous of these is by Jeffrey
Sachs and Andrew Warner (1995), but many others have also confirmed the openness-fosters-growth
hypothesis for the late twentieth century (e.g. Dollar 1992; Edwards 1993; Dollar and Kraay 2000a).
In spite of this evidence, it must be said that there are still some skeptics who doubt that support
for the openness-fosters-growth hypothesis is unambiguous, of which more later.

When the Twentieth Century Leader Went Open: The United States
The recent American surge in wage and income inequality generated an intense search for its
sources. First, there were the globalization sources. These included the rise in unskilled worker
immigration rates, due to rising foreign immigrant supplies and to a liberalization of United States
immigration policy. Increasing competition from imports that used unskilled labor intensively was added
to the globalization impact, a rising competition due to foreign supply improvements (aided by US
outsourcing), international transportation improvements, and trade-liberalizing policies. Second, there
were sources apparently unrelated to globalization, like a slowdown in the growth of per worker skill
supply and biased technological change that cut the demand for unskilled workers relative to skilled
workers.
The debate evolved into a ‘trade versus technology’ contest, although it might have learned far
more by greater attention to immigration and skills (or schooling) supply. Some contestants agree with
Adrian Wood (1994, 1998) that trade was to blame for much of the wage widening. Others contestants

10

reject this conclusion, arguing that most or all of the widening was due to a shift in technology that has
been strongly biased in favor of skills. Most estimates tend to resemble the guess by Robert Feenstra and
Gordon Hanson (1999) that perhaps 15-33 percent of the rising inequality was due to trade competition.
Still, everyone seems to agree that going open in late twentieth century was hardly egalitarian for
America.
William Cline offers the boldest attempt at an overall quantitative accounting of these potential
sources. Cline blames globalization less than do most writers, and concludes that skill-biased
technological change is bigger than any globalization effect (Cline 1997: Table 5.1). Cline’s
interpretation of his own estimates is, however, very different from mine, and perhaps my historical
perspective accounts for the difference. The proper question, it seems to me, is left unasked by Cline and
other economists in the debate: namely, how did the period 1973-1993 differ from the one that preceded
it, 1953-1973? If the other sources added up to pretty much the same impact in the first postwar period,
then it would be the change in globalization forces between the two periods that mattered. Thus, it seems
to me that Cline’s study illustrates how economists throw away information by confining their analysis to
the recent widening of wage gaps. When the world economy became increasingly integrated in the two
centuries before 1980, technology also had its factor bias, and the mismatch between technological bias
and skills growth kept shifting, with inequality implications (Williamson and Lindert 1980; Goldin and
Katz 1999, 2000; Lindert 2000). Why ignore this history?

Globalization, Inequality and the OECD
The United States wasn’t the only OECD country to undergo a recent rise in inequality. The
trend toward wider wage gaps has also been unmistakable in Britain. Although there wasn’t much
widening in full-time labor earnings for France or Japan, and none at all for Germany or Italy, income

11

measures that take work hours and unemployment into account reveal some widening even in those last
four cases. A recent study surveyed the inequality of disposable household income in the OECD since
from the mid-1970s (Burniaux et al. 1998). Up to the mid-1980s, the Americans and British were alone in
having a clear rise in inequality. From the mid-1980s to the mid-1990s, however, 20 out of 21 OECD
countries had a noticeable rise in inequality. Furthermore, the main source of rising income inequality
after the mid-1980s was the widening of labor earnings. The fact that labor earnings became more
unequal in most OECD countries, when full-time labor earnings did not, suggests that many countries
took their inequality in the form of more unemployment and hours reduction, rather than in wage rates.

Globalization, Inequality and the Third World
The sparse literature on the wage-inequality and trade liberalization connection in developing
countries is mixed in its findings and narrow in its focus. It has concentrated on six Latins (Argentina,
Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico, and Uruguay) and three East Asians (Korea, Singapore, and
Taiwan), and the assessment diverges sharply between regions and epochs. Wage gaps seemed to fall
when the three Asian tigers liberalized in the 1960s and early 1970s. Yet wage gaps generally widened
when the six Latin American countries liberalized after the late 1970s (Wood 1994, 1997, 1998; Robbins
1997; Robbins and Gindling 1999; Hanson and Harrison 1999). Why the difference?
As Adrian Wood (1997) has rightly pointed out, historical context was important, since other
things were not equal during these liberalizations. The clearest example where a Latin wage widening
appears to refute the egalitarian Stolper-Samuelson prediction was the Mexican liberalization under
Salinas in 1985-1990. Yet this pro-global liberalization move coincided with the major entry of China
and other Asian exporters into world markets. Thus Mexico faced intense new competition from less
skill-intensive manufactures in all export markets. Historical context could also explain why trade
liberalization coincided with wage widening in the five other Latin countries, and why it coincided with

12

wage narrowing in East Asia in the 1960s and early 1970s. Again, timing matters. Competition from
other low-wage countries was far less intense when the Asian tigers pulled down their barriers in the
1960s and early 1970s compared with the late 1970s and early 1980s when the Latin Americans opened
up.
But even if these findings were not mixed, they could not have had a very big impact on global
inequalities. After all, the literature has focused on nine countries that together had less than 200 million
people in 1980, while China by itself had 980 million, India 687 million, Indonesia 148 million, and
Russia 139 million. All four of these giants recorded widening income gaps after their economies went
global. The widening did not start in China until after 1984, because the initial reforms were rural and
agricultural and therefore had an egalitarian effect. When the reforms reached the urban industrial sector,
China’s income gaps began to widen (Griffin and Zhao 1993, esp. p. 61; Atinc 1997). India’s inequality
has risen since liberalization started in the early 1990s. Indonesian incomes became increasingly
concentrated in the top decile from the 1970s to the 1990s, though this probably owed more to the
Suharto regime’s ownership of the new oil wealth than to any conventional trade-liberalization effect.
Russian inequalities soared after the collapse of the Soviet regime in 1991, and this owed much to the
handing over of trading prerogatives and assets to a few oligarchs (Flemming and Micklewright 2000).

Border Effects, Limited Access and the Third World
Income widening in these four giants dominates global trends in within-country inequality,4 but

4

The giants also dominate trends in between-country inequality. Much of the fall in the between-country inequality
index offered by Melchior, Telle and Wiig (2000, p. 15) is due to the fact that the populations in Japan and the US
are getting relatively fewer and less rich, while those in China and India are getting richer and more populous.

13

how much was due to liberal trade policy and globalization? Probably very little. Indeed, much of the
inequality surge during their liberalization experiments seems linked to the fact that the opening to trade
and foreign investment was incomplete. That is, the rise in inequality appears to have been based on the
exclusion of much of the population from the benefits of globalization. The question is what accounts for
the exclusion? China, where the gains since 1984 have been so heavily concentrated in the coastal cities
and provinces (Griffin and Zhao 1993; Atinc 1997), offers a good example. Those that were able to
participate in the new, globally-linked economy prospered faster than ever before, while the rest in the
hinterland were left behind,5 or at least enjoyed less economic success. China’s inequality had risen to
American levels by 1995 (a gini of .406), but the pronounced surge in inequality from 1984 to 1995 was
dominated by the rise in urban-rural and coastal-hinterland gaps, not by widening gaps within any given
locale. This pattern suggests that China’s inequality -- like that of Russia, Indonesia and other giants -has been raised by differential access to the benefits of the new economy, not by widening gaps among
those who participate in it, or among those who do not. But why have the globalization-induced growth
shocks favored China’s coastal provinces? How much is due to policy, and how much to border effects
associated with external trade, effects that have favored the coastal provinces for centuries?
Consider another example. In the aftermath of GATT-related liberalization in 1986 and of
NAFTA-related liberalization in 1994, Mexico has undergone rising inequality, not falling inequality as
most observers predicted. However, Gordon Hanson (2002) has shown that much of this result can be
traced to an uneven regional stimulus and, in particular, to the boom along the US border. Is it only a
matter of waiting for these ‘border effects’ to spread? Apparently, since Raymond Robertson (2001) has
shown that the Stolper-Samuelson predictions work just fine for Mexico after 1994, if one allows for a 35 year lag.

5

Migration from the hinterland to the cities was pretty much prohibited before the mid-1990s.

14

Did the First Global Century Make the World More Unequal?

Global Divergence Without Globalization
Figure 1 documents the rise of income gaps between nations since 1820. While the evidence may
not be as precise, we also know that global income divergence started long before 1820. Indeed,
international income gaps almost certainly widened after 1600 or even earlier. Real wages, living
standards, health and (especially) output per capita indicators all point to an early modern ‘great
divergence’ which took place in three dimensions -- between European nations, within European nations
and between Europe and Asia. Real wages in England and Holland pulled away from the rest of the
world in the late seventeenth century (van Zanden 1999; Pomeranz 2000; Allen 2001; Pamuk and
Ozmucur 2002). Furthermore, between the sixteenth and the eighteenth centuries the landed and
merchant classes in England, Holland, and France pulled far ahead of everyone -- their compatriots, the
rest of Europe, and probably any other region on earth. This divergence was even greater in real than in
nominal terms, because luxuries became much cheaper relative to necessities (Hoffman et al. 2002; Allen
et al. 2002). While we will never have firm estimates of the world income gaps between 1500 and 1820,
what we do have suggest unambiguously that global inequality rose long before the First Industrial
Revolution. Thus, industrial revolutions were never a necessary condition for widening world income
gaps. It happened with industrial revolutions and it happened without them.6
Despite the popular rhetoric about an early modern world system, there was no true globalization
move after the 1490s and the voyages of de Gama and Columbus. As I argued previously using Figure 2,
intercontinental trade was monopolized, and huge price markups between exporting and importing ports
were maintained even in the face of improving transport technology. Furthermore, most of the traded

6

Granted, nineteenth century industrial revolutions greatly contributed to an acceleration in the growing gap between
industrial core and pre-industrial periphery (e.g. Pritchett 1997).

15

commodities were non-competing: that is, they were not produced at home and thus did not displace
some competing domestic industry. In addition, these traded consumption goods were luxuries out of
reach of the vast majority of each trading country’s population. In short, pre-1820 trade had only a trivial
impact on the living standards of anyone but the very rich. Finally, and as I pointed out above, the
migration of people and capital was only a trickle before the 1820s. True globalization began only after
the 1820s.
Thus, while global income divergence has been with us for more than four centuries,
globalization has been with us for less than two. This conflict raises serious doubts about the premise that
rising world integration is responsible for rising world inequality. According to history, globalization has
never been a necessary condition for widening world income gaps. It happened with globalization and it
happened without it.

When the Nineteenth Century Leader Went Open: Britain
Britain’s nineteenth-century free-trade leadership, especially its famous Corn Law repeal in
1846, offers a good illustration of how the effects of global liberalization depend on the leader, and how
the effects of going open can be egalitarian for both the world and for the liberalizing leader. The big
gainers from nineteenth century British trade liberalization were British labor -- especially unskilled
labor -- and the rest of Europe and its New World offshoots, while the clear losers were British landlords,
the world’s richest individuals (Williamson 1990). How much the rest of the world gained (and whether
British capitalists gained at all) depended on foreign-trade elasticities and induced terms of trade effects.
But since these terms of trade effects were probably quite significant for what was then called ‘the
workshop of the world,’ Britain must have distributed considerable gains to the rest of the world as well
as to her own workers. Workers -- especially unskilled workers -- gained because Britain was a food-

16

importing country7 and because labor was used much less intensively in import-competing agriculture
than was land (Irwin 1988; Williamson 1990). Whether and how much the periphery gained also must
have depended on de-industrialization there, a long run force I explore further below.
History offers two enormously important historical cases where the world leader going open had
completely different effects: pro-global liberalization in nineteenth century Britain was unambiguously
egalitarian at the national and, in the short run at least, the world level; American liberalization in the late
twentieth century was not.

European Followers and the New World
What about the globalization and inequality connection for the rest of Europe and its New World
offshoots? Two kinds of (admittedly imperfect) evidence document distributional trends within countries
participating in the global economy. One relies on trends in the ratio of unskilled wages to farm rents per
acre, a relative factor price whose movements launched inequality changes in a world where the
agricultural sector was big and where land was a critical component of total wealth.8 It tells us how the
typical unskilled worker near the bottom of the income pyramid did relative to the typical landlord at the
top (w/r). The other piece of inequality evidence relies on trends in the ratio of the unskilled wage to
GDP per worker (w/y). These trends tell us whether the typical unskilled worker near the bottom was
catching up with or falling behind the income recipient in the middle.
When w/r and w/y trends are plotted for the Atlantic economy against initial labor scarcity
between 1870 and World War I (Williamson 1997), they conform to the conventional globalization
prediction (Figure 4). Inequality fell and equality rose in land-scarce and labor-abundant Europe either
7

Labor would not have gained much from free trade on the continent since, among other things, agriculture was a far
bigger employer, so big that the employment effects (the nominal wage) dominated the consumption effects (the cost
of living). See O’Rourke (1997).
8
Agricultural output and land input shares are certainly smaller today even in the Third World, but to ignore them in
inequality debate is a mistake. Yet, economists studying the Third World seem to have an obsession with earnings
distributions.

17

due to trade boom, or to mass emigration, or to both, as incomes of the abundant factor (unskilled labor)
rose relative to the scarce factor (land). In addition, those who faced the onslaught of cheap foreign grain
after 1870, but chose not to impose high tariffs on grain imports (like Britain, Ireland and Sweden),
recorded the biggest loss for landlords and the biggest gain for workers. Those who protected their
landlords and farmers against cheap foreign grain (like France, Germany and Spain) generally recorded a
smaller decline in land rents relative to unskilled wages. To the extent that globalization was the
dominant force, inequality should have fallen in labor-abundant and land-scarce Europe. And fall it did.
However, these egalitarian effects were far more modest for the European industrial leaders who, after
all, had smaller agricultural sectors. Land was a smaller component of total wealth in the European
industrial core where improved returns on industrial capital, whose owners were located near the top of
the income distribution, at least partially offset the diminished incomes from land, whose owners tended
to occupy the very top of the income distribution.
Globalization had an inegalitarian effect in the land-abundant and labor-scarce New World, and
for symmetric reasons. Not surprisingly, Latin America, the United States, Australia, Canada and Russia
all raised tariffs to defend themselves against an invasion of European manufactures and the deindustrialization it would have caused (Coatsworth and Williamson 2002; Blattman, Clemens and
Williamson 2002). Indeed, the levels of protection in the United States, Canada, Australia, Latin America
and the European periphery were huge compared to continental Europe. Figure 5 reports that in the 1880s
the US and Latin America had tariffs five to six times higher than western Europe, and the European
periphery had levels three times higher! It is absolutely essential to know why tariffs were so much
higher in the periphery than in the European core up to the 1930s, but we save this discussion for the end
of the lecture.

Terms of Trade Gains in the Periphery before 1913

18

Terms of trade movements might signal who gains the most from trade, and a literature at least
two centuries old has offered opinions about whose terms of trade should improve most and why
(Diakosavvas and Scandizzo 1991; Hadass and Williamson 2002). Classical economists thought the
relative price of primary products should rise given an inelastic supply of land and natural resources.
This conventional wisdom took a revisionist U-turn in the 1950s when Hans Singer and Raoul Prebisch
argued that since 1870 the terms of trade had deteriorated for poor countries in the periphery -- exporting
primary products, while they had improved for rich countries in the center – exporting industrial
products.
The terms of trade can be influenced by changes in transport costs and changes in policy. It can
also be influenced by other events, such as world productivity growth differentials across sectors,
demand elasticities, and factor supply responses. Since transport costs declined so dramatically in the
first global century (O’Rourke and Williamson 1999; Williamson 2002), this is one likely source that
served to raise everybody’s terms of trade. Furthermore, and as we have seen, rich countries like Britain
took a terms-of-trade hit when they switched to free trade by mid-century, an event that must have raised
the terms of trade in the poor, non-industrial periphery even more. But in some parts of the periphery,
especially before the 1870s, other factors were at work that mattered even more, and they greatly
reinforced these pro-global forces.
Probably the most powerful nineteenth century globalization shock did not involve transport
revolutions at all. It happened in Asia, and it happened in mid century. Under the persuasion of American
gun ships, Japan switched from virtual autarky to free trade in 1858. In the fifteen years following 1858,
Japan’s foreign trade rose 70 times, from virtually nil to 7 percent of national income (Huber 1971). The
prices of exportables soared in home markets, rising towards world market levels. The prices of
importables slumped in home markets, falling towards world market levels. One researcher estimates
that, as a consequence, Japan’s terms of trade rose by a factor of 4.9 over those fifteen years (Yasuba

19

1996). Thus, the combination of declining transport costs world wide and a dramatic switch from autarky
to free trade unleashed a powerful terms of trade gain for Japan.
Other Asian nations followed this liberal path, most forced to do so by colonial dominance or
gunboat diplomacy. Thus, China signed a treaty in 1842 opening her ports to trade and adopting a 5
percent ad valorem tariff limit. Siam adopted a 3 percent tariff limit in 1855. Korea emerged from its
autarkic Hermit Kingdom a little later (with the Treaty of Kangwha in 1876), undergoing market
integration with Japan long before colonial status became formalized in 1910. India went the way of
British free trade in 1846, and Indonesia mimicked Dutch liberalism. In short, and whether they liked it
or not, Asia underwent tremendous improvements in their terms of trade by this policy switch, and it was
reinforced by declining transport costs world wide.
For the years after 1870, there is better evidence documenting terms of trade movements the
world around, country by country (Williamson 2002: Hadass and Williamson 2002). Contrary to the
assertions which Prebisch and Singer made a half-century ago, not only did the terms of trade improve
for a good share of the poor periphery9 up to World War I, but they improved a lot more than they did in
Europe. Over the four decades prior to World War I, the terms of trade rose by only 2 percent in the
European center, by almost 10 percent in East Asia, and by more than 21 percent in the Southern Cone,
Egypt and India combined.
Why am I able to report such different historical findings than did Prebisch and Singer, or than
did W. Arthur Lewis a little later? One reason is that I have only reported the terms of trade performance
during the first global century (up to 1913), not during the anti-global interlude that followed. Another
reason is that the peripheral terms of trade reported here are those which prevailed in each home market

9

In two of the studies cited (Williamson 2002; Hadass and Williamson 2002), the periphery sample is limited to
nine: Argentina, Burma, Egypt, India, Japan, Korea, Taiwan, Thailand and Uruguay. This sample from the periphery
is augmented by twelve more in the third study: Brazil, Ceylon, Chile, China, Columbia, Cuba, Greece, Indonesia,
Mexico, the Philippines, Peru, and Turkey (Blattman, Clemens and Williamson 2002).

20

(e.g. Alexandria, Bangkok or Montevideo), not the inverse of those prevailing in London or New York.
In a world where transport costs plunged steeply, everybody could have found their terms of trade
improving, but some primary producers in the periphery actually enjoyed the biggest pre-war
improvements. If other members of the periphery did not enjoy the same big gains, it was not the fault of
globalization induced by transport revolutions and liberal policy. Rather, the fault lay with the
characteristics of those primary products
This pre-1913 terms of trade experience seems to imply that globalization favored some parts of
the poor periphery even more than it did the rich center, and to that extent it must have been a force for
more equal world incomes. That inference is probably false. Over the short run, positive and quasipermanent terms of trade shocks of foreign origin will always raise a nation’s purchasing power, and the
issue is only how much. Over the long run a positive terms-of-trade shock in primary-product-producing
countries should reinforce comparative advantage, pull resources into the export sector, thus causing deindustrialization. To the extent that industrialization is the prime carrier of capital-deepening and
technological change, then economists like Singer were right to caution that positive external price
shocks for primary producers might actually lower growth rates in the long run. Of course, small-scale,
rural cottage industry isn’t the same as large-scale, urban factories, so industry may not have been quite
the carrier of growth in the 1870 periphery that it might be in the Third World today. In any case, while
nobody has yet tried to decompose the short run and long run components of quasi-permanent terms of
trade shocks like these, there has been a recent effort to explore the possibility that positive terms of trade
shocks had a negative effect around the periphery (Hadass and Williamson 2002). Adding terms of trade
variables to a now-standard empirical growth model and estimating that model for a nineteen-country
sample between 1870 and 1940, confirms that an improving terms of trade augmented long-run growth in
the center. However, the same terms of trade improvement was growth-reducing in the periphery. It
appears that the short-run gain from an improving terms of trade was overwhelmed by a long-run loss

21

attributed to de-industrialization in the periphery; in contrast, the short-run gain was reinforced by a longrun gain attributed to industrialization in the center.
These results imply that globalization-induced (positive) terms of trade shocks before World War
I were serving to augment the growing gap between rich and poor nations. Did the same happen after
1950 when Prebisch, Singer and other critics of conventional policy were so vocal? Maybe. Is the same
true today, fifty years later? Probably not. After all, manufactures have been a rapidly rising share of
developing country output and exports over the past three decades. The share of manufactures in the total
commodity exports in developing countries rose spectacularly from around 30 percent in 1970 to more
than 75 percent in 2002 (Hertel, Hoekman and Martin 2002: Figure 2). To put it the other way around,
agricultural and mineral primary product exports as a share in total exports fell from 70 to 25 percent
over the past thirty years in the Third World.
Enough of the Third World is now sufficiently labor-abundant and natural-resource-scarce so
that their comparative advantage lies with (simple, labor-intensive) manufactures, implying that the
growth of trade has helped it industrialize. The classic image of Third World specialization in primary
products has almost evaporated.

Rising Inequality in the Primary Product Exporting Periphery
There were powerful global forces at work before 1913 and the Third World was very much a
part of it. There was commodity price convergence within and between Europe, the newly-settled nonLatin countries, Latin America and Asia, and the price convergence was bigger in the periphery than it
was in the core. The convergence was driven by a transport revolution that was more dramatic in the
Asian periphery where, in addition, it was not offset by tariff intervention. It also appears that relative
factor prices converged world-wide at the same time that average living standards and income per capita

22

diverged sharply between center and periphery.10 The relative factor price convergence was manifested
by falling wage-rental ratios in land-abundant and labor-scarce countries, and rising wage-rental ratios in
land-scarce and labor-abundant countries. The convergence took place everywhere around the globe.
These events set in motion powerful inequality forces in land and resource abundant areas,
especially around the pre-industrial periphery, as in Southeast Asia and the Southern Cone. Quite the
opposite forces were at work in land and resource scarce areas, like East Asia.
These distributional events in the periphery were ubiquitous and powerful (Williamson 2002).
They must have had important implications for political developments which probably persisted well in
to the late twentieth century, just as W. Arthur Lewis’ research agenda always implied.

North-North and South-South Mass Migrations, with Segmentation in Between
North-North migrations between Europe and the New World involved the movement of
something like 60 million individuals. We know a great deal about the determinants and impact of these
mass migrations. South-South migration within the periphery was probably even greater, but we know
very little about its impact on sending regions (like China and India), on receiving regions (like East
Africa, Manchuria and Southeast Asia), or on the incomes of the 60 million or so who moved. As Lewis
(1978) pointed out long ago, the South-North migrations were only a trickle: like today, poor migrants
from the periphery were kept out of the high-wage center by restrictive policy, by the high cost of the
move, and by their lack of education. World labor markets were segmented then just as they are now.
Real wages and living standards converged among the currently-industrialized countries between
1850 and World War I (Figure 6).11 The convergence was driven primarily by the erosion of the gap

10

These facts deserve stress. While there was income per capita and living standards divergence between center and
periphery in the first global century, there was powerful convergence in relative factor prices. One wonders whether
the same has been true in the second global century, and, if so, why economists haven't noticed it.
11
Figure 6 plots convergence in the Atlantic economy for sample sizes of 13, 15 and 17. The largest sample
includes: Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Canada, the United States; Belgium, Denmark, France, Germany, Great

23

between the New World and Europe. In addition, many poor European countries were catching up with
the industrial leaders. How much of this convergence in the Atlantic economy was due to North-North
mass migration?
The labor force impact of these migrations on each member of the Atlantic economy in 1910
varied greatly (Taylor and Williamson 1997). Among receiving countries, Argentina's labor force was
augmented most by immigration (86 percent), Brazil's the least (4 percent), with the United States in
between (24 percent). Among sending countries, Ireland's labor force was diminished most by emigration
(45 percent), France the least (1 percent), with Britain in between (11 percent). At the same time, the
economic gaps between rich and poor countries diminished: real wage dispersion in the Atlantic
economy declined between 1870 and 1910 by 28 percent, GDP per capita dispersion declined by 18
percent and GDP per worker dispersion declined by 29 percent (Taylor and Williamson 1997; Hatton and
Williamson 1998). What contribution did the mass migration make to that convergence?
Migration affects equilibrium output, wages and living standards by influencing aggregate labor
supply, and these effects have also been estimated. In the absence of the mass migrations, wages and
labor productivity would have been a lot higher in the New World and a lot lower in Europe. The biggest
impact, of course, was on those countries that experienced the biggest migrations. Emigration is
estimated to have raised Irish wages by 32 percent, Italian by 28 percent and Norwegian by 10 percent.
Immigration is estimated to have lowered Argentine wages by 22 percent, Australian by 15 percent,
Canadian by 16 percent and American by 8 percent.
This partial equilibrium assessment of migration’s impact is higher than a general equilibrium
assessment would be since it ignores trade and output mix adjustments, as well as domestic and global
capital market responses, all of which would have muted the impact of migration. In any case, the

Britain, Ireland, Italy, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden (Williamson 1996; O'Rourke and
Williamson 1999).

24

assessment certainly lends strong support to the hypothesis that mass migration made an important
contribution to late nineteenth century convergence in the 'North.' In the absence of the mass migrations,
real wage dispersion between members of the Atlantic economy would have increased by 7 percent,
rather than decrease by 28 percent, as it did in fact. In the absence of mass migration, wage gaps between
Europe and the New World would have risen from 108 to 128 percent when in fact they declined to 85
percent. These results have been used to conclude that migration was responsible for all of the real wage
convergence before World War I and about two-thirds of the GDP per worker convergence.
There was an additional and even more powerful effect of North-North mass migrations on
"northern" income distribution. So far I have only discussed the effect of migration on convergence in per
worker averages between countries; I have not discussed the impact of migration on income distribution
within the Atlantic economy as a whole. To do so, I would need to add on the large income gains
accruing to the 60 million (poor) Europeans who moved overseas. Typically, these migrants came from
countries whose average real wages and average GDP per worker were perhaps only half of those in the
receiving countries. These migrant gains were a very important part of the net equalizing effect on
"northern" incomes of the mass migrations.
North-North mass migrations had a strong leveling influence in the North up to 1913. They made
it possible for poor migrants to improve the living standards for themselves and their children. It also
lowered the scarcity of resident New World labor which competed with the immigrants, while it raised
the scarcity of the poor European labor that stayed home (whose incomes were augmented still further by
emigrant remittances). South-South and North-North migrations were about the same size. Until new
research tells us otherwise,12 I think it is safe to assume that South-South migrations put powerful
downward pressure on real wages and labor productivity in Ceylon, Burma, Malaysia, Thailand, East

12

Timothy J. Hatton and I are embarking on that South-South migration project, covering the years from about 1850
to the present.

25

Africa, Manchuria and other labor scarce regions that received so many Indian and Chinese immigrants.
Since the sending labor surplus areas were so huge, it seems less likely that the emigrations served to
raise labor scarcity there by much.

The Unimportance of Global Capital Markets
Using ceteris paribus assumptions, I have just concluded that mass migration accounted for all of
the real wage convergence observed in the Atlantic economy during the first global century. But ceteris
was not paribus since there were other powerful forces at work, capital accumulation responses being
one of them. Capital accumulation was rapid in the New World, so much so that the rate of capital
deepening was faster in the United States than in any of its European competitors, and the same was
probably true of other rich New World countries. Thus, the mass migrations may have been at least
partially offset by capital accumulation, and a large part of that accumulation was being financed by
international capital flows which reached magnitudes unsurpassed since. One study has made exactly this
kind of adjustment (Taylor and Williamson 1997) by implementing the zero-migration counterfactual in a
model where the labor supply shocks generate capital flow responses that maintain a constant rate of
return on capital (e.g. perfect global capital market integration).13 The assumed capital-chasing-labor
offsets are certainly large in this experiment, but mass migration still explains about 70 percent of the
convergence, leaving only about 30 percent to other forces.
Capital market responses were simply not big enough to deflate significantly the powerful
income-leveling effects of mass migration within what we now call the OECD. Indeed, while it is true
that global capital markets were at least as well integrated prior to World War I as they are today
(Obstfeld and Taylor 1998, 2002), capital flows were mainly an anti-convergence force. This statement

13

In a recent paper, Davis and Weinstein (2002) do the same for the US today, agreeing that all factor inflows,
capital and labor, should be looked at together.

26

is, of course, inconsistent with simple two-factor-theory prediction that capital should flow from rich to
poor countries. It never did. As Robert Lucas (1990) made famous, Table 2 shows that British capital
inflows and GDP per capita were positively, not negatively, correlated just before World War I and that
the same was true for all private capital inflows in the 1990s (Clemens and Williamson 2001b; see also
Obstfeld and Taylor 2002). The wealth bias that Lucas and others have noticed was just as powerful a
century ago, and it is explained by the fact that capital chased after abundant natural resources, youthful
populations, and human-capital abundance. It did not chase after cheap labor.
International capital flows were an anti-convergence force. They drifted towards rich, not poor,
countries; they raised wages and labor productivity in the labor-scarce and resource-abundant New
World, not the labor-abundant Third World. And what was true of the first global century has also been
true of the second. But this does not imply that the Third World has been losing capital by export.14
Rather, it implies that there has always been a churning of capital among richer countries outside of Asia
and Africa.

Trade Policy and International Income Gaps: Why the Big Regime Switch?
If free trade has been good for economic growth since World War II,15 why was it bad for growth
before? About thirty years ago, Paul Bairoch (1972) argued that protectionist countries grew faster in the
nineteenth century, not slower as every economist has found for the late twentieth century. Bairoch’s
sample was mainly from the European industrial core, it looked at pre-1914 experience only, and it
invoked unconditional analysis, controlling for no other factors. Like some modern studies (see Table 1),
Bairoch simply compared growth rates of major European countries in protectionist and free trade

14

Apparently, Africa has suffered significant capital flight in recent times. Indeed, as of 1990, Africans placed a
huge 39 percent of their wealth portfolios outside the region, a year when the figure was 3 percent for South Asia, 6
percent for East Asia and 10 percent for Latin America (Collier and Gunning 1999: p. 92). This is hardly surprising
given that the region has suffered negative terms of trade shocks, civil war and confiscation.
15
Or at least not harmful for growth: pace Rodriguez and Rodrik (2001).

27

episodes. More recently, Kevin O'Rourke (2000) got the Bairoch finding again, this time using macroeconometric conditional analysis on a ten country sample drawn from the pre-1914 Atlantic economy
(Australia, Canada, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Norway, Sweden, UK, US). In short, these two
scholars were not able to find any evidence before World War I supporting the openness-fosters-growth
hypothesis.16
These pioneering historical studies suggest that there was a fundamental tariff-growth regime
switch somewhere between the start of World War I and the end of World War II: before the switch,
protection fostered growth; after the switch, protection hindered growth. Michael Clemens and Jeffrey
Williamson (2001a) think the best explanation for the tariff-growth paradox is the fact that: During the
interwar, and led by the industrial powers, tariff barriers facing the average exporting countries rose to
very high levels; and since World War II, again led by the industrial powers, tariff barriers facing the
average exporting country fell to their lowest levels in a century and a half. A well-developed theoretical
literature on strategic trade policy17 predicts that nations have an incentive to inflate their own terms of
trade by tariffs, but thereby to lower global welfare — a classic prisoner’s dilemma. Inasmuch as
favorable terms of trade translate into better growth performance and tariffs are non-prohibitive, we
might expect the association between own tariffs and growth to depend at least in part on the external
tariff environment faced by the country in question. After accounting for changes in world policy
environment, Clemens and Williamson show that there is no incompatibility between the positive tariffgrowth correlation before 1914 and the negative tariff-growth correlation since 1970.
It has not always been true that open countries finish first, and it need not be true in the future
either. There is growing evidence suggesting that the benefits of openness are neither inherent nor

16

There are two additional studies worth mentioning here. Capie (1983) found support for the Bairoch
hypothesis using event analysis with a pre-1914 European sample of four (Germany, Italy, the UK and
Russia). Vamvakidis (2002) couldn’t find any interwar evidence supporting the openness-fosters-growth
hypothesis either, although it was (once again) based on a small, mostly OECD sample.
17
Exemplified by Dixit (1987) and recently surveyed in Bagwell and Staiger (2000).

28

irreversible but rather depend upon the state of the world. When considering the move to openness,
heads of state are facing a game, not an isolated decision. The low-level equilibrium of mutually high
tariffs is only as far away as some big world event that persuades influential leader-countries to switch
to anti-global policies. Feedback ensures that the rest must follow in order to survive. Thus, today's
low-tariff equilibrium was only as far away as OECD coordination in the early postwar years, and the
creation of trans-national public institutions whose express purpose was to impede a return to interwar
anti-global autarky.
But what sparks such shifts from one equilibrium to another? Why did it happen in the 1920s
and 1950s? Could it happen again?

Trade Policy and International Income Gaps: What About the Pre-1940 Periphery?
Were Latin America, Eastern Europe and the rest of the periphery part of this paradox, or was it
only an attribute of the industrial core? While the recent work cited above has shown that protection
fostered growth in the industrial core before World War II, it also shows that it did not do so in most of
the periphery (Clemens and Williamson 2001a; Coatsworth and Williamson 2002). Table 3 reports this
result, where the model estimated is of the convergence variety, but it is conditioned only by the
country’s own tariff rate and regional dummies. The tariff rate and GDP per capita level are both
measured at year t, while the subsequent GDP per capita growth rate is measured over the half decade
following.18 The two world wars are ignored.
The tariff-growth paradox is stunningly clear in Table 3. In columns (1) and (3), the estimated
coefficient on log of the tariff rate is 0.14 for 1875-1908 and 0.36 for 1924-1934. Thus, and in contrast
with late twentieth century evidence, tariffs were associated with fast growth before 1939. But was this

18

Thus, the last pre-World War II observation is 1934, which relates to growth between 1934 and 1939, and the last
pre-World War I observation is 1908, which relates to the growth between 1908 and 1913.

29

true for all regions, or was there instead an asymmetry between industrial economies in the core and
primary-producers in the periphery? Presumably, the protecting country has to have a big domestic
market, and has to be ready for industrialization, accumulation, and human capital deepening if the long
run tariff-induced dynamic effects are to offset the short run gains from trade given up. Table 3 tests for
asymmetry in columns (2) and (4), and the asymmetry hypothesis wins. That is, protection was associated
with faster growth in the European core and their English-speaking offshoots (the coefficient on own
tariff 1875-1908 is 0.56 and highly significant), but it was not associated with fast growth in the
European or Latin American periphery, nor was it associated with fast growth in interwar Asia (when
tariffs rose even in the colonies: see Figure 5). Indeed, before World War I protection in Latin America
was associated significantly and powerfully with slow growth.
The moral of the story is while policy makers in Latin America, eastern Europe and the
Mediterranean may, after the 1860s, have been very aware of the pro-protectionist infant-industry
argument19 offered for a newly-integrated (zollverein) Germany by Frederich List or for a newlyindependent (economically-federated) United States by Alexander Hamilton, there is absolutely no
evidence which would have supported those arguments in the periphery. We must look elsewhere for
plausible explanations for the exceptionally high tariffs in Latin America and the European periphery
during the first global century.

Lessons of History 1: Will There Be South-North Mass Migration in Our Future?

19

Late nineteenth century Latin American policy makers were certainly were so aware (Bulmer-Thomas 1994: 140).
However, it is important to stress “late” since the use of protection specifically and consciously to foster industry
does not occur until the 1870s or 1890s: e.g. Argentina with the 1876 tariff; Mexico by the early 1890s; Chile with
its new tariff in 1897; Brazil in the 1890s; and Colombia in early 1900s (influenced by Mexican experience). So, the
qualitative evidence suggests that domestic industry protection becomes a motivation for Latin American tariffs only
in the late nineteenth century.

30

It might be useful to repeat what we have learned about the mass European emigration: almost all
of the observed income convergence in the Atlantic economy, or what we are now calling the North, was
due to this North-North mass migration, and that same movement also generated more equal incomes in
the labor-abundant sending regions. It is important to remember this fact when dealing today with the
second global century.
Although the migrations were immense during the age of mass North-North and South-South
migration prior to World War I, there was hardly any South-North migration to speak of. Thus, while the
mass migration to labor scarce parts of the North played a big role in erasing poverty in the labor surplus
parts of the North, it did not help much to erase poverty in the South. The same is true today. Will this
world labor market segmentation break down in the near future? It all depends on policy. Certainly
demographic and educational forces are contributing to the breakdown of world labor market
segmentation along South-North lines. As young adult shares shrink in the elderly OECD, and while they
swell in the young Third World going through demographic transitions, perhaps the pressure will become
too great to resist the move to a more liberal OECD immigration policy, especially in Europe and Japan.
The educational revolution in the Third World (Easterlin 1981: Schultz 1987) has helped augment this
pressure, as potential emigrants from poor countries are better equipped to gain jobs in the OECD (Clark,
Hatton and Williamson 2002; Hatton and Williamson 2002).
The two underlying fundamentals that drove European emigration in the late nineteenth century
were the size of real wage gaps between sending and receiving regions -- a gap that gave migrants the
incentive to move, and demographic booms in the low-wage sending regions -- a force that served to
augment the supply of potential movers (Hatton and Williamson 1998). These two fundamentals are even
more prominent in Africa today, and recent work suggests that Africans seem to be just as responsive to
them as were Europeans a century ago (Hatton and Williamson 2001, 2002). Although this is no longer
an age of unrestricted intercontinental migration, new estimates of net migration for the countries of sub-

31

Saharan Africa suggest that exactly the same forces are at work driving African cross-border migration
today. Rapid growth in the cohort of young potential migrants, population pressure on the resource base,
and poor economic performance are the main forces driving African emigration. In Europe a century ago,
more modest demographic increases were accompanied by strong catching-up economic growth in lowwage emigrant regions. Furthermore, the sending regions of Europe eventually underwent a slowdown in
demographic growth serving to choke off some of the mass migration. Yet, migrations were still mass.
Africa today offers a contrast: economic growth has faltered, its economies have fallen further behind the
leaders, and there will be a demographic speed up in the near future. The pressure on African emigration
is likely to intensify, including a growing demand for entrance into high-wage labor markets of the
developed world. Indeed, if European doors were swung open, there is an excellent chance that by 2025
Africa would record far greater mass migrations than did nineteenth century Europe. The demographic
unknown in this equation is, of course, African success in controlling the spread of the HIV/AIDS. If it is
controlled early, then these emigration predictions are more likely to prevail.
This analysis for African emigation has been recently extended to US immigration by source
from 1971 to 1998 (Clark, Hatton and Williamson 2002; Hatton and Williamson 2002). Here again, the
economic and demographic fundamentals that determine immigration rates across source countries are
estimated -- income, education, demographic composition and inequality. The analysis also allows for
persistence in these patterns as they arise from the impact of the existing immigrant stock B big foreignborn stocks implying strong >friends and neighbors= effects. Most of these Third World fundamentals
will be serving to increase the demand for high-wage jobs in the OECD.
How will the OECD respond to this challenge? If it opens its doors wider, the mass
migrations would almost certainly have the same influence on leveling world incomes and eradicating
poverty that it did in the first global century. It would help erode between-country North-South income
gaps, and it would improve the lives of the millions of poor Asians and Africans allowed to make the

32

move. And it would help eradicate poverty among those who would not move, making their labor more
scarce at home and augmenting their incomes by remittances, forces that were powerful in pre-quota
Europe a century ago.
Inequality would rise in the OECD, of course, just as it did in the immigrant-absorbing New
World a century ago. Perhaps not as much, since the unskilled with whom the immigrants compete are a
much smaller share of the OECD labor force today, but inequality would rise just the same. Are we ready
to pay that price? Perhaps not. Indeed, we have seen how rising inequality created an anti-global backlash
a century ago, a backlash that included a retreat into immigrant restriction that still characterizes the
high-wage OECD today.

Lessons of History 2: Absolute or Relative Income? Nominal or Real Income?

The debate over the impact of globalization on world inequality almost always measures
performance in relative terms. The questions posed are: Have international income gaps between poor
and rich countries widened with globalization? Has inequality within countries widened with
globalization? Something is very wrong with these questions and the measures they imply. Here are
better questions: If gaps between rich and poor countries have widened, and if globalization is the cause,
is it because poor countries have not gained from going global, or is it because they have actually lost? If
the gaps between rich and poor within countries have widened, and if globalization is the cause, is it
because poor citizens have not gained by their country going global, or is it because they have actually
lost?
To the extent that policy is driven by the absolute losses to vocal citizens and/or vocal nations,
rather than relative losses, it is all the more amazing that so many contemporary economists insist on
using relative inequality measures. Economic historians know better. I offer two examples.

33

Example 1: During the great British political debates over a move to free trade in the decades
before the 1846 Repeal of the Corn Laws, predicted impact was always assessed both by reference to
nominal incomes on the employment side and to consumption goods prices on the expenditure side.
Indeed, free traders called the high duties on agricultural imports 'bread taxes' (Williamson 1990), and
thought that the relative price of this wage good (grain) was central to working class living standards.
And they were absolutely right! Since grain -- and its derivative bread -- made up such an enormous share
of working class budgets, the falling relative price of this importable made a fundamental contribution to
the rise in real wages and the living standards of the poor.
Example 2: During the great rise in European inequality between 1500 and 1800, when
Malthusian forces dominated the closed European economy (O'Rourke and Williamson 2002a, 2002c),
staple food and fuels became more expensive, while luxury goods, like imported exotics and domestic
servants, became cheaper (Hoffman et al. 2002). These relative price changes served to augment rising
nominal inequality and, indeed, to reduce living standards of the working poor. What happened in the
nineteenth century when Europe went open? The price of imported food fell, contributing to the absolute
real wage gains associated with the industrial revolution, and to an absolute decline in land rents. What
had been a pre-globalization inegalitarian price effect was converted into a post-globalization egalitarian
price effect. And since the poor devote such a large share of their budget to food, the poorest gained the
most.
Economic historians cannot take all the credit for asking the right questions, since one can also
find a few rare examples in the huge literature on the current globalization-inequality connection. David
Dollar and Aart Kraay (2000b) report from late twentieth century country cases and cross-country
analysis that globalization leads to poverty reduction in poor countries, and that (Dollar and Kraay

34

2000b) trade openness beneifts the poor as much as it benefits all others.20 Of course, it may not be the
poor who vote, and thus the impact of going open on their economic performance may unimportant to
policy formation in poor countries and thus to the survival of global liberialism there.
The two historical examples from the first global century suggest an agenda for the second global
century. If going global has had a real impact on participating economies over the past three decades,
then we should see its impact on relative commodity prices in home markets: the price of importables
should have fallen relative to the price of exportables and perhaps even relative to the price of nontradables. What do the rich and poor consume in these countries? What happened to the cost of their
consumption market baskets when their country went open? Did the price movements on the expenditure
side serve to reinforce or offset income movements on the employment side? The answers to these
questions are very hard to find in the literature on the second global century. True, some time ago
William Cline (1980) asked whether world commodity price shocks had much to do with within country
nominal income inequality, concluding "not much," while, as I pointed out above, Robertson (2001)
recently asked the same question of Mexico since NAFTA, concluding a "great deal."21 But do globalinduced relative commodity changes induce uneven real income changes on the expenditure side to the
extent that the poor consume a very different market basket than the rich? They certainly did for Vietnam
in the 1990s. According to Eric Edmonds and Nina Pavcnik (2002), during the liberal period between
1993 and 1998 the price of rice rose by 29 percent relative to the Vietnamese CPI, and this relative price
change must have had important inegalitarian effects on the expenditure side since the budget of the poor
in that country is so dominated by rice.

20

A more recent study by Sala-i-Matin (2002) is more descriptive, asking what happened from 1970 to 1998,
assigning no blame or applause to causes. He shows that while poverty rates have fallen since 1970, within-country
inequality has increased. See also Chen and Ravallion (2001).
21
To quote Robertson (2001: p. 3): "When Mexico joined the GATT, it opened its borders to trade with an arguably
labor-abundant world, which may explain why it protected less-skill-intensive industries. Joining NAFTA, however,
deepened integration with skill-abundant ... US and Canada. The relative price of skill-intensive goods reversed its
rise. As suggested by the Stolper-Samuelson theorem, relative wages also reversed their trend."

35

It seems to me that economists should be searching for contemporary cases where the
expenditure budgets of the rich and poor are very different, and where the rich consume in large
proportions skill and capital intensive importables plus the services of the poor, and where the poor
consume in large proportions land-intensive food and housing. They should also search for countries that
have a recent history of switching from anti-global to pro-global policies. The best places to find both
conditions satisfied are, of course, poor countries in Asia and Africa.

Lessons of History 3: Accommodating the Losers with Safety Nets and Suffrage

Any force that creates more within-country inequality is automatically blunted today -- at least in
the OECD, a point that is sometimes overlooked in the inequality debate. That is, any rise in the
inequality of households’ net disposable post-fisc income will always be less than the rise in gross prefisc income inequality. Any damage to the earnings of low-skilled workers is partially offset by their
lower tax payments and higher transfer receipts, like unemployment compensation or family assistance.
Broadening the income concept therefore serves to shrink any apparent impact of globalization on the
inequality of living standards. And by muting their losses, such safety nets also, presumably, mute
political backlash.
So far, so good. But does globalization destroy these automatic stabilizers by undermining taxes
and social transfer programs? In a world where businesses and skilled personnel can flee taxes they don’t
like, there is the well-known danger that governments might compete for internationally mobile factors
by cutting tax rates and thus social spending. As Jonas Agell (1999, 2000) and Dani Rodrik (1997, 1998)
have stressed, however, the relationship between a country’s vulnerability to international markets and
the size of its tax-based social programs is positive, not negative as a “race to the bottom” would imply.
Thus, countries with greater global market vulnerability have higher taxes, more social spending, and

36

broader safety nets. Furthermore, 'vulnerability' to global market changes is in part an endogenous policy
choice: there is a trade-off between going open and investing in safety nets. In any case, while there may
be other reasons for the positive correlation between openness and social programs, there is no apparent
tendency for globalization to undermine the safety nets.
While these stabilizers certainly prevail in the OECD today, one supposes they were not common
during the first global century when such safety nets were not yet in place. One also supposes that there
was no trade-off between going open and investing in safety nets at that time in what we now call the
OECD. If one was inclined to make those suppositions, one would be very wrong. Europe was globalized
by 1913, and the increased market vulnerability created greater wage and employment instability. In a
two recent papers, Michael Huberman by himself (2002) and with Wayne Lewchuk (2001) show that
authorities responded to workers' complaints by establishing labor market regulations and social
insurance programs, and by giving them the vote. Empirical analysis of seventeen European countries
shows that the legislation gave workers reason to support free trade. Thus, globalization was compatible
with government intervention before 1913 just as it has been since 1950. And, to repeat, the first global
century was also one during which the vote was extended increasingly to the previously disenfranchised
(Acemoglu and Robinson 2000; Huberman and Lewchuk 2001). It also appears that the two were related!
The interesting question is how long it will take poor nations today to put the same modern
safety nets in place and to empower all citizens in the debate over global policy choices.

Lessons of History 4: Why Do Countries Protect?

What better place to end this lecture than to ask: Why do countries protect? I am aware that the
recent decade or so has generated a flourishing theoretical literature on endogenous tariffs. That literature

37

is primarily motivated by recent OECD, and mainly US, experience, thus ignoring the enormous variance
over time and across regions with very different endowments, institutions and histories.
Look again at Figure 5, where the enormous variance in levels of protection are documented for
both the first global century and for the interwar years. Three big facts are revealed by Figure 5. First,
tariffs in the independent periphery (Latin America, the non-Latin European offshoots and the European
periphery) were vastly higher than they were in the European core. Second, globalization backlash in the
first global century was much stronger in the periphery than in the European core (the rise in average
tariff rates was much bigger up to World War I). Third, what made the interwar years so autarkic was not
a move towards protection in the periphery -- since tariffs in Latin America, the European periphery and
the non-Latin offshoots were just about as high in the 1930s as they were before World War I.22 What
made the interwar years so autarkic was the rise of protection in the European core and the United States.
Economists need to confront these facts and to offer explanations for them. When one does so for
Latin America from 1820 to 1950, one finds that the motivations for protection were very complex and
changed over time (Coatsworth and Williamson 2002). Those exceptionally high Latin American tariffs
were driven up by government revenue needs, strategic tariff reactions to trading partner policy (e. g.
very high tariffs in the United States), Stolper-Samuelson lobbying forces, and protection of the local
manufacturing industry. Before we can be confident about what causes globalization backlash today, we
need to know what caused it in the past. Over the century 1820-1913,23 only a (perhaps small) part of the
anti-global policy in Latin America was driven by development goals, by de-industrialization fears, or by
the complaints of the losers. Furthermore, these determinants changed over time: revenue goals
diminshed in importance as Latin America became better integrated with global capital markets, as pax

22

Figure 5 measures 'protection' by average tariff levels only, thus ignoring non-tariff barriers. NBTs were on the
rise in the interwar, so the indicator in Figure 5 understates the anti-global regime switch.
23
Chris Blattman, Michael Clemens and I (2002) expand the historical analysis from Latin America to the rest of the
world between 1870 and 1937.

38

americana latina diminished the need for and thus the financial burden of standing armies, and as these
young countries developed less-distorting internal tax revenue sources. Economists need to make the
same kind of assessment for the second global century if we are to understand the sources of
globalization backlash better.

39

References

Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson. 2000. "Why Did the West Extend the Franchise? Democracy,
Inequality, and Growth in Historical Perspective." Quarterly Journal of Economics 461
(November): 1167-1199.
Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson and James Robinson. 2002. "The Rise of Europe: Atlantic Trade,
Institutional Change and Economic Growth." Paper presented to the Economic History
Workshop, Harvard University (April 5).
Agell, Jonas. 1999. "On the Benfits from Rigid Labour Markets: Norms, Market Failures and Social
Insurance." Economic Journal 108 (February): F143-F164.
Agell, Jonas. 2000. "On the Determinants of Labour Market Institutions: Rent Sharing vs. Social
Insurance." CESifo Working Paper 384. University of Munich.
Allen, Robert C. 2001. “The Great Divergence: Wages and Prices from the Middle Ages to the First
World War.” Explorations in Economic History. 38 (October): 411-47.
Allen, Robert C. et al. 2002. "Preliminary Global Price Comparisons, 1500-1870." Paper presented to the
XIII Congress of the International Economic History Association, Buenos Aires (July 22-26).
Atinc, Tamar M. 1997. Sharing Rising Incomes: Disparities in China. Washington: The World Bank.
Bagwell, Kyle and Robert W. Staiger. 2000. “GATT-Think.” NBER Working Paper 8005. National
Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass.: NBER.
Baier, Scott J. and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand. 2001. “The Growth of World Trade: Tariffs, Transport Costs,
and Income Similarity.” Journal of International Economics 53 (February): 1-27.
Bairoch, Paul. 1972. “Free Trade and European Economic Development in the Nineteenth Century.”
European Economic Review 3 (November): 211-45.
Baldwin, Richard and Philippe Martin. 1999. “Two Waves of Globalization: Superficial Similarities,

40

Fundamental Differences.” NBER Working Paper 6904. National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, Mass. (January).
Berry, Albert, Francois Bourguignon, and Christian Morrisson. 1991. “Global Economic Inequality and
Its Trends since 1950.” In L. Osberg, ed., Economic Inequality and Poverty: International
Perspectives. Armonk, N.Y.: Sharpe.
Bhagwati, Jagdish and Anne O. Krueger, eds. 1973-1976. Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic
Development, multiple volumes with varying authorship. New York: Columbia University Press
for the NBER.
Blattman, Chris, Michael A. Clemens and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002. "Who Protected and Why?
Tariffs the World Around 1870-1937." Paper presented to the conference on The Political
Economy of Globalization. Dublin (August 29-31).
Boltho, Andrea and Gianni Toniolo. 1999. “The Assessment: The Twentieth Century -- Achievements,
Failures, Lessons.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy 15 (4): 1-17.
Bourguignon, François and Christian Morrisson. 2000. “The Size Distribution of Income among World
Citizens: 1820-1990.” Unpublished paper. Washington, D. C.: World Bank.
Bulmer-Thomas, Victor (1994). The Economic History of Latin America Since Independence.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Burniaux, Jean-Marc et al. 1998. “Income Distribution and Poverty in Selected OECD Countries.”
OECD Economics Department Working Paper 189. Paris (March).
Capie, Forrest. 1983. “Tariff Protection and Economic Performance in the Nineteenth Century.” In J.
Black and L. A. Winters (eds.), Policy and Performance in International Trade. London:
Macmillan.
Chen, Shaohua and Martin Ravallion. 2001. "How Did the World's Poorest Fare in the 1990s?" Review of
Income and Wealth 47 (September): 283-300.

41

Clark, Ximena, Timothy J. Hatton and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002. “Where Do US Immigrants Come
From, and Why?” NBER Working Paper 8998. National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, Mass. (June).
Clemens, Michael A. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2001a. “A Tariff-Growth Paradox? Protection’s Impact
the World Around 1875-1997.” NBER Working Paper 8459. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge, Mass. (September).
Clemens, Michael A. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2001b. “Wealth Bias in the First Global Capital Market
Boom, 1870-1913." Unpublished manuscript. (July).
Cline, William R. 1980. "Commodity Prices and the World Distribution of Income." Journal of Policy
Modeling 2 (1): 1-17.
Cline, William R. 1997. Trade and Income Distribution. Washington: Institute for International
Economics.
Coatsworth, John H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002. "The Roots of Latin American Protectionism:
Looking Before the Great Depression." NBER Working Paper 8999. National Bureau of
Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass. (June).
Collier, Paul and Jan W. Gunning. 1999. “Explaining African Economic Performance.” Journal of
Economic Literature 37 (March): 64-111.
Davis, Donald and David Weinstein. 2002. "Technological Superiority and the Losses from Migration."
Columbia University Department of Economics Discussion Paper 0102-60. Columbia University
(May).
Diakosavvas, Dimitris and Pasquale L. Scandizzo. 1991. “Trends in the Terms of Trade of Primary
Commodities, 1900-1982: The Controversy and Its Origin.” Economic Development and
Cultural Change 39 (January): 231-64.
Dixit, Avinash. 1987. “Strategic Aspects of Trade Policy.” In Truman F. Bewley (ed.), Advances in
Economic Theory: Fifth World Congress. New York: Cambridge University Press.

42

Dollar, David. 1992. “Outward-Oriented Developing Economies Really Do Grow More Rapidly:
Evidence from 95 LDCs, 1976-1985.” Economic Development and Cultural Change 40 (April):
523-44.
Dollar, David and Aart Kraay. 2000a. “Trade, Growth, and Poverty.” Unpublished paper. Washington, D.
C.: World Bank (October).
Dollar, David and Aart Kraay. 2000b. “Growth Is Good for the Poor.” Unpublished paper. Washington,
D. C.: World Bank (March).
Easterlin, Richard A. 1981. “Why Isn’t the Whole World Developed?” Journal of Economic History 41
(March): 1-19.
Edmonds, Eric and Nina Pavcnik. 2002. “Does Globalization Increase Child Labor? Evidence from
Vietnam.” NBER Working Paper 8760. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
Mass. (February).
Edwards, Sebastian. 1993. “Openness, Trade Liberalization, and Growth in Developing Countries.”
Journal of Economic Literature 31 (September): 1358-94.
Feenstra, Robert C. and Gordon H. Hanson. 1999. “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology
Capital on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 1979-1990.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
114 (August): 907-40.
Firebaugh, G. 1999. “Empirics of World Income Inequality.” American Journal of Sociology 104 (6):
1597-630.
Flam, Henry and M. June Flanders. 1991. Heckscher-Ohlin Trade Theory. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Flemming, John S. and John Micklewright. 2000. “Income Distribution, Economic Systems, and
Transition.” In A. Atkinson and F. Bourguignon, eds., Handbook of Income Distribution, volume
1. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Goldin, Claudia. 1994. "The Political Economy of Immigration Restriction in the United States, 1890 to
1921." In C. Goldin and G. D. Libecap, eds. The Regulated Economy: A Historical Approach to

43

Political Economy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence F. Katz. 1999. “The Returns to Skill in the United States across the 20th
Century.” NBER Working Paper 7126. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
Mass. (May).
Goldin, Claudia, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2000. “Decreasing (and Then Increasing) Inequality in America:
A Tale of Two Half Centuries.” In F. Welch, ed. Increasing Income Inequality in America.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Griffin, Keith and Zhao Renwei, eds. 1993. The Distribution of Income in China. New York: St. Martin’s
Press.
Hadass, Yael S. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002. “Terms of Trade Shocks and Economic Performance
1870-1940: Prebisch and Singer Revisited.” Economic Development and Cultural Change
(forthcoming).
Hanson, Gordon. 2002. "Globalization and Wages in Mexico." Paper presented to the IDB Conference on
Prospects for Integration in the Americas. Harvard University, Cambridge, Mass. (May 31 - June
1)
Hanson, Gordon and Ann Harrison. 1999. “Trade Liberalization and Wage Inequality in Mexico.”
Industrial and Labor Relations Review 52 (January): 271-88.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1998. The Age of Mass Migration. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2001. “Demographic and Economic Pressure on African
Emigration.” NBER Working Paper 8124. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge,
Mass. (March).
Hatton, Timothy J. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002. “What Fundamentals Drive World Migration?”
Paper to be presented at the WIDER Conference on Migration, Helsinki (September 27-28).
Hertel, Thomas, Bernard M. Hoekman and Will Martin. 2002. “Developing Countries and a New Round

44

of WTO Negotiations.” World Bank Research Observer 17 (Spring): 113-40.
Hirst, Paul Q. and Grahame Thompson. 1996. Globalization in Question: The International Economy
and the Possibilities of Governance. Cambridge: Polity Press.
Hoffman, Philip T., David S. Jacks, Patricia A. Levin and Peter H. Lindert. 2002. “Real Inequality in
Europe since 1500.” Journal of Economic History 62 (June): 322-55.
Huber, J. Richard 1971. “Effects on Prices of Japan’s Entry into World Commerce after 1858.” Journal
of Political Economy 79 (May/June): 614-28.
Huberman, Michael. 2002. "International Labor Standards and Market Integration Before 1913: A Race
to the Top?" Paper presented to the conference on the Political Economy of Globalization,
Dublin (August 29-31).
Huberman, Michael and Wayne Lewchuk. 2001. "The Labor Compact, Openness and Small and Large
States Before 1914." Unpublished paper. University of Montreal (August).
Irwin, Douglas A. 1988. “Welfare Effects of British Free Trade: Debate and Evidence from the 1840s.”
Journal of Political Economy 96 (December): 1142-64.
Krueger, Anne O. 1983. “The Effects of Trade Strategies on Growth.” Finance and Development 20
(June): 6-8.
Krueger, Anne O. 1984. “Trade Policies in Developing Countries.” In R. Jones and P. Kenan, eds.,
Handbook of International Economics, volume 1. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Lewis, W. Arthur. 1978. The Evolution of the International Economic Order. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton
University Press.
Lindert, Peter H. 2000. “Three Centuries of Inequality in Britain and America.” In A. B. Atkinson and F.
Bourguignon, eds., Handbook of Income Distribution, volume 1. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.
Lindert, Peter H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002a. “Does Globalization Make the World More
Unequal?” In M. Bordo, A. M. Taylor and J. G. Williamson (eds.), Globalization in Historical
Perspective. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

45

Lindert, Peter H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002b. “Globalisation et inegalitite: une longue histoire,”
Revue d’Economie du Developpement (forthcoming).
Lucas, Robert. 1990. “Why Doesn’t Capital Flow from Rich to Poor Countries?” American Economic
Review 80 (May): 92-6.
Maddison, Angus. 1995. Monitoring the World Economy, 1820-1992. Paris: OECD.
Melchior, Arne, Kjetil Telle and Henrik Wiig. 2000. “Globalisation and Inequality: World Income
Distribution and Living Standards, 1960-1998.” Studies on Foreign Policy Issues Report 6B:
2000. Royal Norwegian Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Oslo (October).
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. 1998. “The Great Depression as a Watershed: International
Capital Mobility over the Long Run.” In M. D. Bordo, C. Goldin and E. N. White, eds., The
Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the Twentieth Century.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Obstfeld, Maurice, and Alan M. Taylor. 2002. "Globalization and Capital Markets." In M. D. Bordo, A.
M. Taylor and J. G. Williamson, eds. Globalization in Historical Perspective. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press.
O'Rourke, Kevin H. 1997. "The European Grain Invasion, 1870-1913." Journal of Economic History. 57
(December): 775-801.
O’Rourke, Kevin H. 2000. “Tariffs and Growth in the Late 19th Century.” Economic Journal 110
(April): 456-83.
O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1999. Globalization and History. Cambridge, Mass.:
MIT Press.
O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002a. “After Columbus: Explaining Europe’s Overseas
Trade Boom, 1500-1800.” Journal of Economic History 62 (June 2002): 417-56.
O’Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002b. “When Did Globalization Begin?” European
Review of Economic History 6, Part 1 (April 2002): 23-50.

46

O'Rourke, Kevin H. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 2002c. "From Malthus to Ohlin: Trade, Growth and
Distribution Since 1500." NBER Working Paper 8955. National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, Mass. (May).
Pamuk, Sevket and Suleyman Ozmucur. 2002. "Real Wages and Standards of Living in the Ottoman
Empire, 1489-1914." Journal of Economic History 62 (June): 293-321.
Pomeranz, Kenneth. 2000. The Great Divergence: China, Europe, and the Making of the Modern World
Economy. Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Pritchett, Lant. 1997. “Divergence, Big Time.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 11 (Summer): 3-18.
Radetzki, M. and B. Jonsson. 2000. “The 20th Century -- the Century of Increasing Income Gaps. But
How Reliable Are the Numbers?” Ekonomisk Debatt 1: 43-58.
Robbins, Donald J. 1997. “Trade and Wages in Colombia.” Estudios de Economia 24 (June): 47-83.
Robbins, Donald J. and Tim H. Gindling. 1999. “Trade Liberalization and the Relative Wages for MoreSkilled Workers in Costa Rica.” Review of Development Economics 3 (June): 140-54.
Robertson, Raymond. 2001. "Relative Prices and Wage Inequality: Evidence from Mexico." Unpublished
paper. Macalester College (October).
Rodriguez, Francisco and Dani Rodrik. 2001. “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to
the Cross-National Evidence.” In B. S. Bernake and K. Rogoff (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 2000, volume 15. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Rodrik, Dani. 1997. Has Globalization Gone Too Far? Washington, D.C.: Institute for International
Economics.
Rodrik, Dani. 1998. "Why Do More Open Economies Have Bigger Governments?" Journal of Political
Economy 106 (October): 997-1033.
Sachs, Jeffrey D. and Andrew Warner. 1995. “Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration.”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, I. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.
Sala-i-Matin, Xavier. 2002. "The Disturbing 'Rise' of Global Income Inquality." NBER Working Paper

47

8904. National Bureau of Economic Research, Cambridge, Mass. (April).
Schultz, T. Paul. 1987. "School Expenditures and Enrollments, 1960-1980: The Effects of Income,
Prices, and Population Growth." In D. G. Johnson and R. D. Lee (eds.), Population Growth and
Economic Development: Issues and Evidence. Madison, Wisc.: University of Wisconsin Press.
Schultz, T. Paul. 1998. “Inequality in the Distribution of Personal Income in the World: How Is It
Changing and Why?” Journal of Population Economics 11 (August): 307-44.
Taylor, Alan M. and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1997. “Convergence in the Age of Mass Migration.”
European Review of Economic History 1 (April): 27-63.
Timmer, Ashley and Jeffrey G. Williamson. 1998. “Immigration Policy Prior to the 1930s: Labor
Markets, Policy Interactions, and Globalization Backlash.” Population and Development Review
24 (December): 739-71.
Vamvakidis, Athanasios.2002. “How Robust Is the Growth-Openness Connection? Historical Evidence.”
Journal of Economic Growth 7: 57-80.
van Zanden, Jan Luiten. 1999. “Wages and the Standard of Living in Europe, 1500-1800.” European
Review of Economic History 3 (August): 175-98.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1990. “The Impact of the Corn Laws Just Prior to Repeal.” Explorations in
Economic History 27 (April): 123-56.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1996. “Globalization, Convergence, and History.” Journal of Economic History
56 (June): 277-306.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1997. “Globalization and Inequality: Past and Present.” World Bank Research
Observer 12 (August): 117-35.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 1998. “Globalization, Labor Markets and Policy Backlash in the Past.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives 12 (Fall): 51-72.
Williamson, Jeffrey G. 2002. “Land, Labor, and Globalization in the Third World 1870-1940.” Journal
of Economic History 62 (March): 55-85.

48

Williamson, Jeffrey G. and Peter H. Lindert. 1980. American Inequality: A Macroeconomic History.
New York: Academic Press.
Wood, Adrian. 1994. North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Wood, Adrian. 1997. “Openness and Wage Inequality in Developing Countries: The Latin American
Challenge to East Asian Conventional Wisdom.” World Bank Economic Review 11 (January):
33-57.
Wood, Adrian. 1998. “Globalisation and the Rise in Labour Market Inequalities.” Economic Journal 108
(September): 1463-82.
Yasuba, Yasukichi. 1996. “Did Japan Ever Suffer from a Shortage of Natural Resources Before World
War II?” Journal of Economic History 56 (September): 543-60.

49

Table 1
Trade-Policy Orientation and Growth Rates in the Third World, 1963-1992

Trade policy orientation

Average annual rates growth of GDP per capita
(in percent)
1963-1973
1973-1985
1980-1992

Strongly open to trade
Moderately open
Moderately anti-trade
Strongly anti-trade

6.9
4.9
4.0
1.6

5.9
1.6
1.7
- 0.1

6.4
2.3
- 0.2
- 0.4

Sources and notes: Lindert and Williamson (2002a), Table 3 based on the World Bank data. In all
periods the three strongly open economies were Hong Kong, South Korea, and Singapore. The identities
of the strongly anti-trade countries changed over time. In 1963-1973, they were Argentina, Bangladesh,
Burundi, Chile, Dominican Republic, Ethiopia, Ghana, India, Pakistan, Peru, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tanzania,
Turkey, Uruguay, and Zambia. For the two overlapping later periods, the strongly anti-trade countries
were the previous sixteen, plus Bolivia, Madagascar, and Nigeria, minus Chile, Pakistan, Sri Lanka,
Turkey, and Uruguay.

Table 2
Wealth Bias During the Two Global Centuries
Time period

1907-1913

1992-1998

Annual average gross
British capital received
(flow, in 1990 US$)

Annual average change
in stock of
private capital liabilities
(flow, in 1990 US$)

GDP, 1990 US$

0.000208
(3.32)***
[0.534]

0.00467
(8.68)***
[0.624]

GDP per capita, 1990 US$

10,700
(2.43)**
[0.965]

97,900
(2.20)**
[0.410]

Constant

-11,100,000
(-1.06)

-44,700,000
(-0.11)

Estimator
N
R2

OLS
34
0.414

OLS
155
0.463

Dependent variable

t-statistics are in parentheses.
Elasticities (at average regressor values) are in bold square brackets.
*** Significant at the 1% level. ** Significant at the 5% level.
Source: Clemens and Williamson (2001b), Table 2.

