NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INTEGRATION
AND ECONOMIC GROWTH
Hali J. Edison
Ross Levine
Luca Ricci
Torsten Sløk
Working Paper 9164
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9164
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Hali J. Edison, Ross Levine, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sløk. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

International Financial Integration and Economic Growth
Hali J. Edison, Ross Levine, Luca Ricci and Torsten Sløk
NBER Working Paper No. 9164
September 2002
JEL No. F3, O4, O16
ABSTRACT
This paper uses new data and new econometric techniques to investigate the impact of
international financial integration on economic growth and also to assess whether this relationship
depends on the level of economic development, financial development, legal system development,
government corruption, and macroeconomic policies. Using a wide array of measures of international
financial integration on 57 countries and an assortment of statistical methodologies, we are unable
to reject the null hypothesis that international financial integration does not accelerate economic
growth even when controlling for particular economic, financial, institutional, and policy
characteristics.

Hali J. Edison
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431
hedison@imf.org

Ross Levine
Finance Department
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455

Luca Ricci
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431

Torsten Sløk
International Monetary Fund
Washington, DC 20431

I.

Introduction
Theory provides conflicting predictions about the growth effects of international financial

integration (IFI), i.e., the degree to which an economy does not restrict cross-border transactions.
According to some theories, IFI facilitates risk-sharing and thereby enhances production
specialization, capital allocation, and economic growth (Obstfeld, 1994; Acemoglu and Zilibotti,
1997). Further, in the standard neoclassical growth model, IFI eases the flow of capital to capitalscarce countries with positive output effects. Also, IFI may enhance the functioning of domestic
financial systems, through the intensification of competition and the importation of financial
services, with positive growth effects (Klein and Olivei, 2000; Levine, 2001). On the other hand,
IFI in the presence of pre-existing distortions can actually retard growth.1 Boyd and Smith (1992),
for instance, show that IFI in countries with weak institutions and policies – e.g., weak financial and
legal systems – may actually induce a capital outflow from capital-scarce countries to capitalabundant countries with better institutions. Thus, some theories predict that international financial
integration will promote growth only in countries with sound institutions and good policies.
Although theoretical disputes and the concomitant policy debate over the growth effects of
IFI have produced a burgeoning empirical literature, resolving this issue is complicated by the
difficulty in measuring IFI. Countries impose a complex array of price and quantity controls on a
broad assortment of financial transactions. Thus, researchers face enormous hurdles in measuring
cross-country differences in the nature, intensity, and effectiveness of barriers to international
capital flows (Eichengreen, 2001).
1

To paraphrase Eichengreen’s (2001, p.1) insightful literature review, there are innumerable
constellations of distortions for which liberalization of international capital controls will hurt
resource allocation and growth. For example, in the presence of trade distortions, capital account
liberalization may induce capital inflows to sectors in which the country has a comparative
disadvantage.

1

In practice, empirical analyses use either (i) proxies for government restrictions on capital
flows or (ii) measures of actual international capital flows. The International Monetary Fund’s
(IMF) IMF-restriction measure is the most commonly used proxy of government restrictions on
international financial transactions. It classifies countries on an annual basis by the presence or
absence of restrictions, i.e., it is a zero-one dummy variable. Quinn (1997) attempts to improve
upon the IMF-restriction measure by reading through the IMF’s narrative descriptions of capital
account restrictions and assigning scores of the intensity of capital restrictions. Unfortunately, the
Quinn (1997) measure is only available for intermittent years for most countries (1958, 1973, 1982,
and 1988). The advantage of the IMF-Restriction and Quinn (1997) measures is that they proxy
directly for government impediments. The disadvantage of both measures, as noted above, stems
from the difficulty in accurately gauging the magnitude and effectiveness of government
restrictions.
Empirical studies also use measures of actual international capital flows to proxy for
international financial openness. The assumption is that more capital flows as a share of Gross
Domestic Product (GDP) are a signal of greater IFI. The advantage of these measures is that they
are widely available and they are not subjective measures of capital restrictions. A disadvantage is
that many factors influence capital flows. Indeed, growth may influence capital flows and policy
changes may influence both growth and capital flows, producing a spurious, positive relationship
between growth and capital flows, and growth may affect capital flows. This highlights the need to
account for possible endogeneity in assessing the growth IFI-relationship.
Empirical evidence yields conflicting conclusions about the growth effects of IFI. Grilli and
Milesi-Ferretti (1995), Rodrik (1998), and Kraay (1998) find no link between economic growth and
the IMF-restriction measure. In contrast, Edwards (2001) finds that the IMF-restriction measure is

2

negatively associated with growth in rich countries but positively associated with growth in poor
countries. He thus argues that good institutions are necessary to enjoy the positive growth effects of
IFI. Arteta, Eichengreen, and Wyplosz (2001), however, argue that Edwards’s results are not robust
to small changes in the econometric specification. While Quinn (1997) finds that his measure of
capital account openness is positively linked with growth, Arteta, Eichengreen, and Wyplosz (2001)
and Kraay (1998) find these results are not robust. Finally, while some studies find that foreign
direct investment (FDI) inflows are positively associated with economic growth when countries are
sufficiently rich (Blomstrom, Lipsey, and Zejan, 1994), educated (Borenzstein, De Gregorio, and
Lee, 1998), or financially developed (Alfaro et al., 2001), Carkovic and Levine (2002) find that
these results are not robust to controlling for simultaneity bias.2
In light of the current state of the literature on the growth effects of IFI, we contribute to
existing empirical analyses in four ways.
First, we examine an extensive array of IFI indicators. We examine the IMF-restriction
measure and the Quinn measure of capital account restrictions. Furthermore, we examine various
measures of capital flows: FDI, portfolio, and total capital flows. Moreover, we consider measures
of just capital inflows as well as measures of total capital flows (inflows plus outflows) to proxy for
IFI because openness is defined both in terms of receiving foreign capital and in terms of domestic
residents having the ability to diversity their investments abroad. We examine a wide array of IFI
proxies because each indicator has advantages and disadvantages.
Second, we examine two new measures of IFI. Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2002) carefully
compute the accumulated stock of foreign assets and liabilities for an extensive sample of countries.
2

For more detailed literature reviews of cross-country studies of the causes and effects of IFI, see
Eichengreen (2001) and Edison, Klein, Ricci, and Sløk (2002). For a review of country-specific
experiences with IFI, see Cooper (1999).

3

Since we want to measure the average level of openness over an extended period of time, these
stock measures provide a useful additional indicator. Furthermore, these stock measures are less
sensitive to short-run fluctuations in capital flows associated with factors that are unrelated to IFI,
and may therefore provide a more accurate indicator of IFI than capital flow measures. As proxies
for IFI, we examine both the accumulated stock of liabilities (as a share of GDP) and the
accumulated stock of liabilities and assets (as a share of GDP). Also, we break down the
accumulated stocks of financial assets and liabilities into FDI, portfolio, and total financial claims in
assessing the links between economic growth and a wide assortment of IFI indicators. Thus, we
add these additional IFI indicators to the empirical examination of growth and international
financial integration.
Third, since theory and some past empirical evidence suggest that IFI will only have positive
growth effects under particular institutional and policy regimes, we examine an extensive array of
interaction terms. Specifically, we examine whether IFI is positively associated with growth when
countries have well-developed banks, well-developed stock markets, well functioning legal systems
that protect the rule of law, low levels of government corruption, sufficiently high levels of real per
capita GDP, high levels of educational attainment, prudent fiscal balances, and low inflation rates.
Thus, we search for economic, financial, institutional, and policy conditions under which IFI boosts
growth.
Fourth, we use newly developed panel techniques that control for (i) simultaneity bias, (ii)
the bias induced by the standard practice of including lagged dependent variables in growth
regressions, and (iii) the bias created by the omission of country-specific effects in empirical studies
of the IFI-growth relationship. Since each of these econometric biases is a serious concern in
assessing the growth-IFI nexus, applying panel techniques enhances the confidence we can have in

4

the empirical results. Furthermore, the panel approach allows us to exploit the time-series
dimension of the data instead of using purely cross-sectional estimators.
Before beginning the analyses, it is important to mention a related strand of the literature on
IFI. We examine the relationship between broad measures of IFI and growth. Other researchers
focus instead on a much narrower issue: restrictions on foreign participation in domestic equity
markets. Levine and Zervos (1998b) construct indicators of restrictions on equity transactions by
foreigners. They show that liberalizing restrictions boosts equity market liquidity. Henry (2000a,b)
extends these data and shows that liberalizing restrictions on foreign equity flows boosts domestic
stock prices and domestic investment. Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2001) go farther and show
that easing restrictions on foreign participation in domestic stock exchanges accelerates economic
growth. While it is valuable to examine the impact of liberalizing restrictions on foreign activity in
domestic stock markets, it is also valuable to study whether international financial integration in
general has an impact on economic growth under particular economic, financial, institutional, and
policy environments. This paper examine the relationship between economic growth and broad
measures of IFI for large cross-section of countries while recognizing the value of studies that focus
on specific barriers to particular categories of international financial transactions.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the data and
presents summary statistics. Section III describes the econometric methodology while Section IV
gives the results. Section V concludes.

II.

Data and Summary Statistics
This paper uses new data to examine the growth effects of international financial integration

(IFI) and to assess whether the growth-IFI relationship depends on the level of economic

5

development, financial development, institutional development, or macroeconomic policies. Given
existing barriers to measuring IFI confidently for a broad cross-section of countries, this paper seeks
to improve the analysis of IFI and growth by (i) assessing a broader array of IFI indicators than any
previous study and (ii) using a new type of financial openness indicator. The new indicators are
based on the Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2002) measures of the accumulated stock of foreign assets
and liabilities.
A. Data on International Financial Integration3
IMF-Restriction: The IMF-Restriction measure equals one in years where there are
restrictions on capital account transactions and zero in years where the are no restrictions on these
external transactions. The data are from the IMF’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and
Exchange Restrictions (AREAER) (line E.2). When conducting regressions averaged over, for
example, the 1980-2000 period, we follow the literature and average the IMF-Restriction measure
over the entire period and use this to measure the average level of openness during the period (e.g.,
see Grilli and Milesi-Ferretti, 1995; Rodrik, 1998; and Klein and Olivei, 2001).4 As emphasized
above, the IMF-Restriction measure may not accurately capture the magnitude and effectiveness of
restrictions on capital flows.
Quinn measure: Based on descriptive information in the in the AREAER, Quinn (1997)
assigns scores associated of the intensity of official restrictions on both capital inflows and
outflows. This measure attempts to improve upon the IMF-Restriction measure by providing
3

The Data Appendix Data provides more detailed information on the variables used in this paper.

4

In 1997, however, there was structural break in the AREAER documentation of capital controls.
No longer are countries categorized as having open or restricted capital accounts. Since 1997,
information is provided on thirteen separate categories of capital flows, including a distinction
between restrictions on inflows and outflows. Because of the structural break, we only use
information on IMF-Restriction through 1996.

6

information about the magnitude of restrictions, rather than simply designating countries as closed
or open. The Quinn measure, however, is a particularly subjective measure. Also, it is highly
correlated (0.9) with the IMF-Restriction measure (Edison, Klein, Ricci, and Sløk, 2002).
Moreover, for non-OECD countries, it is only available for two years (1982, 1988) over the sample
period that we examine. Thus, we cannot use the Quinn measure in our panel estimates. Since the
use of panel estimates to reduce statistical biases is an important contribution of this paper, we
confirm our pure cross-country, ordinary least squares (OLS) results using the Quinn measure but
do not report these results in the tables.
Stock of Capital Flows accumulates FDI and portfolio inflows and outflows as a share of
GDP. Thus, it is the stock of a nation’s foreign assets plus liabilities as a share of GDP (Lane and
Milesi-Ferretti, 2002). We examine assets plus liabilities because theoretical concepts of openness
include both (i) the ability of foreigners to invest in a country and (ii) the ability of residents to
invest abroad. We have also examined the components of the Stock of Capital Flows measures, i.e.,
the accumulated stock of FDI and portfolio flows respectively. Since we obtain the same results
with these components, we focus on the stock of total capital inflows and outflows. This is the first
time these stock measures of IFI have been used to study economic growth. The advantage of the
stock measure is that it accumulates flows over a long period. Thus, unlike standard capital flow
measures, the stock measure does not vary very much with short-run changes in the political and
policy climate.
Flow of Capital equals FDI and portfolio inflows and outflows as a share of GDP. Thus, it
is total capital inflows plus outflows divided by GDP. Kraay (1998) used this indicator to measure
capital account openness. As noted, it is important to measure both inflows and outflows in
creating an IFI proxy. As with the Stock of Capital Flows measure, we have examined the

7

individual components of the Flow of Capital indicator. Specifically, we examined FDI and
portfolio flows individually. Again, we obtain similar results with the sub-components, so we
simply report the results with total capital flows. While we recognize the problems associated with
using the Flow of Capital indicator, we include it to provide as comprehensive an empirical
assessment of IFI and growth as possible.
Stock of Capital Inflows accumulates FDI and portfolio inflows as a share of GDP. Thus, it
is the stock of a nation’s foreign liabilities as a share of GDP (Lane and Milesi-Ferretti, 2002).
Unlike the Stock of Capital Flows variable defined above, the Stock of Capital Inflows indicator
excludes capital outflows. We use the Stock of Capital Inflows measure since some consider
capital inflows to be particularly important for economic growth in developing countries. We have
also examined the components of the Stock of Capital Inflows measures, i.e., the stock of FDI and
portfolio liabilities respectively, but only report the results on the stock of total capital inflows
because we get similar results on the components. Thus, we add this new measure of capital
account openness to the study of growth and IFI.
Inflows of Capital equals FDI and portfolio inflows as a share of GDP. Unlike Flows of
Capital, Inflows of Capital exclude capital outflows. Again, we include this variable since some
discussions emphasize the growth effects of capital inflows. While none of these indicators may
fully capture the concept of international financial integration, we use a collection of indicators with
different pros and cons to assess the relationship between economic growth and financial openness.
B. Data on Other Variables
To assess the relationship between economic growth and IFI we control for other potential
growth determinants and also examine whether IFI influences growth only under particular
economic, financial, institutional, and policy environments (Levine and Renelt, 1992). Growth

8

equals real per capita GDP growth, which is computed over the period of analysis. Thus, in the
pure cross-country regressions and in the Table 1 summary statistics Growth is computed over the
1980-2000 period. As is common in cross-country growth regressions, we control for initial
conditions. Initial Income equals the logarithm of real per capita GDP in the initial year of the
period under consideration, and Initial Schooling equals the logarithm of the average years of
secondary schooling in the initial year of the period under consideration. We examine both
financial intermediary development and the liquidity of the domestic stock market. Private Credit
equals the logarithm of credit to the private sector by deposit money banks and other financial
institutions as a share of GDP, while Stock Activity equals the logarithm of the total value of
domestic stock transactions on domestic exchanges as a share of GDP. We use logarithms to reduce
the influence of large outliers of the finance variables. Including the finance variables in levels still
produces a positive relationship between financial development and growth (Levine and Zervos,
1998a). We also control for macroeconomic policies. Inflation equals the growth rate of the
consumer price index and Government Balance equals the governments fiscal balance divided by
GDP, with positive values signifying a surplus and negative values a fiscal deficit. Finally, we
examine the level of institutional development, as measured by the law and order tradition (Law and
Order Tradition) of the country and the level of government corruption (Corruption in
Government), where larger values signify better institutions, i.e., a better law and order tradition and
less corruption.
C. Summary Statistics
Table 1 provides summary statistics. Four key points are worth emphasizing before we
undertake a systematic examination of the IFI-growth relationship.

9

First, rich countries tend to be more open. As shown in Table 1, Panel B, there is a
significant positive correlation between Initial Income and Stock of Flows, Stock of Inflows, Flows
of Capital, and Inflows of Capital. Similarly, these measures of IFI are also positively associated
with Initial Schooling in 1980. The IMF-Restriction measure, however, is not significantly
correlated with income or schooling. Rich, well-educated countries tend to be more open to
international financial transactions, as measured by the stock and flow of capital flows, than poorer
countries and countries with less well-educated workers.
Second, countries with well-developed financial intermediaries, stock markets, legal
systems, and low levels of government corruption tend to have greater capital account openness.
Specifically, Private Credit, Stock Activity, Law and Order, and Corruption are all positively
associated with the measures of Stock of Capital Flows, Stock of Capital Inflows, Flows of Capital,
and Inflows of Capital and negatively associated with the IMF-Restriction measure. Thus, while
measures of IFI are generally unrelated to macroeconomic policies, as proxied by Inflation and the
Government Balance, IFI is strongly correlated with measures of institutional and financial
development.
Third, the IMF-Restriction measure is significantly, negatively correlated with the stock and
flow measures of capital account openness. Specifically, countries that have had a large number of
years over the post-1980 period with capital account restrictions (high values of the IMF-Restriction
measure) have, on average, lower values of Stock of Capital Flows, Stock of Capital Inflows, Flows
of Capital, and Inflows of Capital. Thus, measures of government restrictions on capital account
transactions are negatively linked with international capital flows and the accumulated stock of
those flows.

10

Fourth, the correlations between economic growth and the indicators of IFI are mixed. The
IMF-Restriction measure, Stock of Capital Flows, and Flows of Capital are not significantly
correlated with economic growth at the 0.05 level. However, growth is significantly positively
associated with Stock of Capital Inflows and Inflows of Capital. This suggests the value of
examining a range of indicators and studying IFI indicators that focus on capital inflows.

III.

Methodology
This section describes three econometric methods that we use to assess the relationship

between IFI and economic growth. We first use simple ordinary least squares (OLS) regressions
with one observation per country over the 1980-2000 period. Second, we use a two-stage least
squares instrumental variable estimator within the purely cross-country context, i.e., while using
one observation per country over the 1980-2000 period. Third, we use a generalized method of
moments (GMM), dynamic panel procedure to control for potential biases associated with the
purely cross-sectional estimators.
A. OLS framework
The pure cross-sectional, OLS analysis uses data averaged over 1980-2000, such that there
is one observation per country, and heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors. The basic
regression takes the form:
GROWTH = α + βIFI + γ‘X + εi,

(1)

where the dependent variable, GROWTH, equals real per capita GDP growth, IFI is one of the five
measures of international financial integration discussed above, and X represents a matrix of
control variables. We focus on the 1980-2000 period because we have complete data for the 57
countries over this period. When using data in 1960s and 1970s, some countries are missing data

11

over certain periods. Twenty years of data allows us to abstract from business-cycle fluctuations
and short-run political and financial shocks and focus on long-run growth. Thus, as discussed in the
Introduction, some theories suggest that greater international financial integration will be positively
associated with economic growth, i.e., these theories predict that β will be significantly greater than
zero.
We also use a slight variant of equation (1) to examine whether IFI influences growth only
under certain economic, institutional, and policy conditions. Specifically, we also examine the
following regression equation with interaction terms.

GROWTH = α + βIFI + δ[IFI*x] + γ‘X + εi,

(1’)

where x is a variable included in the matrix of control variables X. For example, if x is the Rule of
Law, equation (1’) permits us to assess whether international financial integration has a different
influence on growth in countries with high values of the Rule of Law than in countries with low
values of the Rule Law. Specifically, differentiate equation (1’) with respect to IFI to obtain,
∂GROWTH/∂IFI = β + δ*x
If δ>0, this would imply that greater international financial integration has a bigger, positive growth
effect in countries with high levels of x. Thus, for example, the theoretical model developed by
Boyd and Smith (1992) predicts that IFI will positively influence economic performance only in
countries with high levels of the Rule of Law and well-developed financial systems. This model,
therefore, predicts that when x is the Rule of Law or a measure of financial development that δ will
be greater than zero. We examine many “x”’s, i.e., we examine many possible economic,
institutional, and policy conditions that may influence the IFI-growth relationship.

12

B. Two-Stage Least Squares
We also use a two-stage least squares instrumental variable estimator to control for
simultaneity bias while allowing for heteroskedasticity-consistent errors. It uses the same countries,
estimation period, and equation specification as the OLS estimator. With the two-stage least
squares estimator, we also examine whether IFI’s influence on growth depends on other economic,
institutional, and policy conditions. That is, we use also interaction terms in the instrumental
variable regressions.
We use two sets of instrumental variables. First, we use exogenous indicators that past
studies have shown are good predictors of “policy openness” (broadly defined). Specifically, La
Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999) show that legal traditions differ in terms of the
priority they attach to private property rights relative to the power of the state and that legal systems
that emphasize the power of the state tend to be less open to competition. According to this view,
the English common law evolved to protect private property owners against the crown. This
facilitated the ability of private property owners to transact confidently, with positive repercussions
on free, competitive markets. In contrast the French and German civil codes in the 19th century
were constructed to solidify State power. Over time, State dominance produced legal traditions that
focus more on the power of the State and less on the rights of individual investors. Countries with a
socialist legal tradition further reflect these differences. As documented by La Porta et al. (1999),
socialist legal origin countries tend to restrict open, competitive markets. According to the La Porta
et al (1999) theory, these legal traditions spread throughout the world through conquest,
colonization, and imitation, so differences in legal origin can be treated as relatively exogenous.
There are five possible legal origins: English Common Law, French Civil Law, German Civil Law,
Scandinavian Civil Code, and Socialist/Communist law. Thus, we include dummy variables for

13

each country’s legal origin (except the Scandinavian law countries) as instrumental variables.
Second, leading economists, historians, and bio-geographers emphasize the impact of geography on
economic institutions and policies (e.g., Engerman and Sokoloff, 1997). Lands with high rates of
disease and poor agricultural yields – such as the tropics – tend to create political institutions that
are closed to competition and free markets so that the elite can exploit the rest of the population
(See, Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson, 2001; Easterly and Levine, 2002). In contrast, countries
with better geographical endowments tend to create political institutions that place greater emphasis
on private property rights and competitive markets in part because the elite benefit more from free
markets than from limiting competition and exploiting domestic labor. We use the absolute value
of latitudinal distance from the equator as an additional instrument in the two-stage least squares
regressions.
C. Motivation for the Dynamic Panel Model
The dynamic panel approach offers advantages to OLS and also improves on previous
efforts to examine the IFI-growth link using panel procedures. First, estimation using panel data -that is pooled cross-section and time-series data – allows us to exploit the time-series nature of the
relationship between IFI and growth. Second, in a pure cross-country instrumental variable
regression, any unobserved country-specific effect becomes part of the error term, which may bias
the coefficient estimates as we explain in detail below. Our panel procedures control for countryspecific effects. Third, unlike existing cross-country studies, our panel estimator (a) controls for the
potential endogeneity of all explanatory variables and (b) accounts explicitly for the biases induced
by including initial real per capita GDP in the growth regression. Thus, the dynamic panel
estimator is free from some of the biases plaguing past studies of IFI and growth.

14

D. Detailed Presentation of the Econometric Methodology
We use the Generalized-Method-of-Moments (GMM) estimators developed for dynamic
panel data that were introduced by Holtz-Eakin, Newey, and Rosen (1990), Arellano and Bond
(1991), and Arellano and Bover (1995). Our panel consists of data for a maximum of 57 countries
over the period 1976-2000. We average data over non-overlapping, five-year periods, so that data
permitting there are five observations per country (1976-1980, 1981-1985, ..., 1996-2000).5 The
subscript “t” designates one of these five-year averages. Consider the following regression
equation,
y i ,t − y i ,t −1 = (α − 1) y i ,t −1 + β ' X i ,t + ηi + ε i ,t

(2)

where y is the logarithm of real per capita GDP, X represents the set of explanatory variables (other
than lagged per capita GDP), η is an unobserved country-specific effect, ε is the error term, and the
subscripts i and t represent country and time period, respectively. Specifically, X includes an IFI
indicator as well as other possible growth determinants. We also use time dummies to account for
period-specific effects, though these are omitted from the equations in the text. We can rewrite
equation (2).
y i , t = α y i , t − 1 + β ' X i , t + ηi + ε i , t

(3)

To eliminate the country-specific effect, take first-differences of equation (3).

(

)

(

) (

y i , t − y i , t − 1 = α y i , t −1 − y i , t − 2 + β ' X i , t − X i , t −1 + ε i , t − ε i , t −1

5

)

For each five-year period, we require that a country has three years of non-missing data for that
variable or the variable is set to missing. We include the early period in the panel estimation, 19761980, which is excluded from the pure cross-section results, because we need as many time periods
as possible to have confidence in the dynamic panel estimation. For this initial period, about 25
percent of the countries have missing data.

15

The use of instruments is required to deal with (1) the endogeneity of the explanatory variables,
and, (2) the problem that by construction the new error term ε i ,t − ε i ,t − 1 is correlated with the
lagged dependent variable, yi ,t − 1 − yi ,t − 2 . Under the assumptions that (a) the error term is not
serially correlated, and (b) the explanatory variables are weakly exogenous (i.e., the explanatory
variables are uncorrelated with future realizations of the error term), the GMM dynamic panel
estimator uses the following moment conditions:

[ (
E[ X
⋅ (ε

E y i , t − s ⋅ ε i , t − ε i , t −1
i ,t − s

i ,t

)] = 0
)] = 0

− ε i , t −1

for s ≥ 2; t = 3, ..., T

(4)

for s ≥ 2; t = 3, ..., T

(5)

We refer to the GMM estimator based on these conditions as the difference estimator.
There are, however, conceptual and statistical shortcomings with this difference estimator.
Conceptually, we would also like to study the cross-country relationship between financial
development and per capita GDP growth, which is eliminated in the difference estimator.
Statistically, Alonso-Borrego and Arellano (1996) and Blundell and Bond (1997) show that when
the explanatory variables are persistent over time, lagged levels make weak instruments for the
regression equation in differences. Instrument weakness influences the asymptotic and smallsample performance of the difference estimator. Asymptotically, the variance of the coefficients
rises. In small samples, weak instruments can bias the coefficients.
To reduce the potential biases and imprecision associated with the usual estimator, we use a
new estimator that combines in a system the regression in differences with the regression in levels
[Arellano and Bover’s 1995 and Blundell and Bond 1997]. The instruments for the regression in
differences are the same as above. The instruments for the regression in levels are the lagged
differences of the corresponding variables. These are appropriate instruments under the following
additional assumption: although there may be correlation between the levels of the right-hand side

16

variables and the country-specific effect in equation (3), there is no correlation between the
differences of these variables and the country-specific effect, i.e.,

[

] [

E y i , t + p ⋅ η i = E y i ,t + q ⋅ η i

[

] [

]

and E X i ,t + p ⋅ η i = E X i ,t + q ⋅ η i

]

for all p and q

(6)

The additional moment conditions for the second part of the system (the regression in levels) are:

[
]
E[( X i ,t − s − X i ,t − s − 1 ) ⋅ (η i + ε i ,t )] =

E ( yi ,t − s − yi ,t − s − 1 ) ⋅ (η i + ε i ,t ) = 0

for s = 1
0

for s = 1

(7)
(8)

Thus, we use the moment conditions presented in equations (4), (5), (7), and (8), use instruments
lagged two period (t-2), and employ a GMM procedure to generate consistent and efficient
parameter estimates.6,7
Consistency of the GMM estimator depends on the validity of the instruments. To address
this issue we consider two specification tests suggested by Arellano and Bond (1991), Arellano and
Bover (1995), and Blundell and Bond (1997). The first is a Sargan test of over-identifying
6

We use a variant of the standard two-step system estimator that controls for heteroskedasticity.
Typically, the system estimator treats the moment conditions as applying to a particular time period.
This provides for a more flexible variance-covariance structure of the moment conditions because
the variance for a given moment condition is not assumed to be the same across time. This
approach has the drawback that the number of overidentifying conditions increases dramatically as
the number of time periods increases. Consequently, this typical two-step estimator tends to induce
over-fitting and potentially biased standard errors, which is particularly important for this paper
because of data limitations. To limit the number of overidentifying conditions, we follow Calderon,
Chong and Loayza (2000) and apply each moment condition to all available periods. This reduces
the over-fitting bias of the two-step estimator. However, applying this modified estimator reduces
the number of periods by one. While in the standard estimator time dummies and the constant are
used as instruments for the second period, this modified estimator does not allow the use of the first
and second period. We confirm the results using the standard system estimator.

7

Recall that we assume that the explanatory variables are “weakly exogenous.” This means they
can be affected by current and past realizations of the growth rate but not future realizations of the
error term. Weak exogeneity does not mean that agents do not take into account expected future
growth in their decision to undertake IFI; it just means that unanticipated shocks to future growth do
not influence current IFI. We statistically assess the validity of this assumption.

17

restrictions, which tests the overall validity of the instruments by analyzing the sample analog of the
moment conditions used in the estimation process. The second test examines the hypothesis that the
error term ε i ,t is not serially correlated. In both the difference regression and the system
difference-level regression we test whether the differenced error term is second-order serially
correlated (by construction, the differenced error term is probably first-order serially correlated even
if the original error term is not).

IV.

Results

A. International Financial Integration and Economic Growth
Using the econometric methods outlined above, this section presents regression results
concerning the relationship between economic growth and various measures of IFI and also assesses
whether the growth-IFI relationship depends on economic, financial, institutional, and policy factors
as suggested by some theories.
Table 2 presents the benchmark regression without any IFI proxies. Specifically, the
regressions simply include the logarithm of initial real per capita GDP, the logarithm of initial
schooling, the average government fiscal balance over the period, and the average inflation rate
over the period. We present the OLS, instrumental variables (one observation per country) and the
GMM system panel estimator (five observations per country) regressions.
The Table 2 OLS results are consistent with previous cross-country growth regressions. The
logarithm of initial income enters significantly and negatively, which is evidence of conditional
convergence. We also find that the logarithm of initial schooling is significant and positive,
suggesting a positive relationship between educational attainment of the workforce and future
economic growth. The macroeconomic policy indicators, the government balance and inflation

18

enter with the expected signs. While fiscal surplus and inflation enter the growth equation jointly
significantly, neither enters individually significantly in the OLS regression; it is difficult to identify
the independent impact of the fiscal surplus and the rate of inflation on economic growth.
The benchmark regression results are broadly consistent across the three econometric
methodologies. The two-stage least squares regression results produce the same sign as the OLS
regressions. While the logarithm of initial income and the logarithm of initial schooling do not
enter with t-statistics greater than two, inflation is negatively and significantly related to growth in
the two-stage least squares regression.
The system panel estimates further confirm the OLS regressions. The logarithm of initial
income and schooling enter significantly and with the same sign as the OLS regressions. The panel
estimates also suggest a significant, negative relationship between inflation and economic growth.
Unfortunately, when we move to the panel estimator, we lose country observations because some of
the countries do not have sufficient data continuously over the entire 1976-2000 period. We have
40 countries in the Table 2 regression. Importantly, however, the panel estimates pass the
specifications tests defined above. The Sargan test has a p-value of 0.17, which means we do not
reject the econometric specification and the validity of the instruments. Similarly, the serial
correlation test has a p-value of 0.56, which means we do not reject econometric model due to serial
correlation.
Table 3 examines the relationship between economic growth and IFI controlling for the
same benchmark regressors presented in Table 2. We present results on five measures: IMFRestriction, the Stock of Capital Flows, Flow of Capital, Stock of Capital Inflows, and Inflow of
Capital. As discussed above, we examined the components of these indicators and obtain similar
results. Thus, Table 3 summarizes the results of 14 regressions, five regressions each for the OLS

19

and two-stage least squares specifications and four regressions for the panel methodology. The
reasons there is one less regression for the panel is that we are unable to use the system panel
estimator for the IMF-Restriction measure because there is too little cross-time variation in this
variable, on average, across the countries and because the IMF-Restriction variable is not available
in the last 5-year period, 1996-2000, as discussed above.
Table 3’s regressions do not suggest a strong relationship between IFI and economic growth.
The IMF-Restriction measure, the Stock of Capital Flows, and the Stock of Capital Inflows are not
significantly related to economic growth in any of the regressions. In the OLS regression, the Flow
of Capital and Inflow of Capital measures are positively associated with growth. In the two-stage
least square regression that controls for the endogeneity of capital flows, however, none of the IFI
measures are significantly associated with growth. This suggests that OLS results may be driven by
reverse causality. Importantly, the instrumental variables do a good job of explaining cross-country
variation in the IFI measures. We reject the null hypothesis that the instruments do not explain the
IFI measures at the 0.01 level in all of the two-stage least squares regressions in Table 3.
The panel estimates in Table 3 suggest that there is a not a robust relationship between IFI
and economic growth.8 There is only one case in which the IFI indicator is significantly associated
with growth, i.e., for the indicator of total capital inflows and outflows as a share of GDP. For
those that have particularly strong priors that the Flows of Capital indicator is better than the other
IFI indicators, these results suggest the IFI exerts a positive influence on economic growth.
However, since the IFI-growth relationship is consistent neither across IFI indicators nor across the

8

The four panel regressions in Table 3 pass the standard specifications tests. Specifically, none
reject the Sargan test, i.e., they do not reject the econometric specification and the validity of the
instruments. Also, the regressions do not exhibit significant serial correlation, i.e., they do not
reject the null hypothesis of no serial correlation as discussed in the methodology section.
20

different estimation procedures, we interpret the econometric results as not strongly rejecting the
null hypothesis of no statistical relationship between IFI and economic growth.
B. IFI Under Different Economic, Financial, Institutional, and Policy Environments
Next, we examine interaction terms to assess whether IFI exerts a positive influence on
growth under certain economic, financial, institutional, and policy environment. Specifically, we
first examine whether the growth effects of IFI depend on the level of GDP per capita or the level of
educational attainment. Second, we examine whether the growth-IFI relationship depends on the
level of financial development, as proxied by banking sector development and stock market
development respectively. Third, we test whether IFI’s growth impact varies with level of
institutional development, as measured by the law and order tradition of the country and the degree
of government corruption. Finally, we study the growth-IFI link under different macroeconomic
policies, as proxied by inflation and the government fiscal surplus. Thus, as discussed above, we
examine the following specification,
GROWTH = α + βIFI + δ[IFI*x] + γx + [the benchmark control variables] + εi,
where x is a variable included in the matrix of control variables X, and is either income per capita,
educational attainment, bank development, stock market development, the Rule of Law,
government corruption, inflation, or the fiscal balance. In Tables 4-7, we report the estimated
coefficients on IFI, the interaction term, and x, i.e., we report statistics on β, δ, and γ. For brevity,
we simply present the OLS result because the two-stage least squares and panel regression results
are very similar.
Contrary to some theories and past empirical evidence, Table 4 indicates that international
financial integration does not exert a positive influence on growth in countries with suitably high
levels of GDP per capita or sufficiently high levels of educational attainment. Out of the ten

21

regressions in Table 4, only in the regression where we interact Initial Income with the Stock of
Capital Flows do we find that IFI and the interaction term enter significantly. However, the results
run counter to theory and past findings. In that regression, the results suggest that IFI only
promotes growth in sufficiently poor countries, i.e. the growth effect becomes negative as countries
become sufficiently rich. In sum, we interpret the Table 4 findings as not rejecting the view that IFI
is unrelated to economic growth even when allowing this relationship to vary under different
economic conditions, as measured by GDP per capita and educational attainment.
Similarly, Table 5 shows that international financial integration does not exert a positive
influence on growth in countries with high levels of bank or stock market development. While
banking sector development enters all of the growth regressions positively and significantly
(Levine, Loayza, and Beck, 2000), the IFI indicator and the interaction terms between IFI and the
financial development indicators never enter significantly. Again, these findings do not show that
IFI is unimportant for growth. Rather, the results do not reject the null hypothesis that IFI is
unrelated to economic growth even when allowing this relationship to vary with financial
development.
We do not find statistical support for the view that the growth effects of international
financial integration increase with greater institutional development (Table 6). We examine the
Rule of Law and Corruption, where higher values imply greater adherence to the rule of law and
less government corruption. In three out of the ten regressions, we find that IFI is positively related
to growth when controlling for institutional development and including interaction terms. However,
those regressions the interaction term enters with a sign that runs counter to theoretical predictions.
Specifically, the regressions suggest that while IFI is positively related with growth, the positive
growth-effects diminish as adherence to the rule of law and the integrity of the government

22

increase. Given the infrequency with which the IFI terms enter significantly and the counterintuitive results on the interaction terms in those three regressions, we interpret the results as not
rejecting the view that IFI is unrelated to economic growth even when allowing this relationship to
vary with institutional development.
Finally, we examine whether the growth-IFI relationship varies with macroeconomic
policies. We use inflation and the government fiscal surplus as measures of macroeconomic
policies. Again, we do not find strong evidence for the view that IFI has a positive growth effect
only in countries with sound macroeconomic policies. IFI enters significantly and positively in only
three out of the ten regressions in Table 7 and in these three regressions, the interaction term does
not enter significantly. Since we control for macroeconomic policies in the Table 3 regressions
(which do not include interaction terms), the Table 7 results do not support the view the IFI boosts
growth in general. Turning to the interaction term, the IFI-fiscal balance interaction term does not
enter significantly in any of the equations (Table 7). In the inflation regressions, the IFI-inflation
term enters significantly in two out of the five regressions. For these equations, the results suggest
that IFI in high inflation regimes has a negative growth effect, i.e., IFI is particularly conducive to
growth in low inflation countries. While these regressions offer some support to the view that the
positive growth effects of IFI depend on macroeconomic stability, these findings are not robust
across the different measures of IFI.

V.

Conclusions

This paper uses new data and new econometric techniques to investigate the impact of
international financial integration on economic growth and to assess whether the IFI-growth
relationship depends on the level of economic development, educational attainment, financial

23

development, legal system development, government corruption, and macroeconomic policies. We
contribute to the existing literature by (i) using new measures of international financial integration,
(ii) examining an extensive array of IFI indicators, (iii) employing econometric methods that cope
with statistical biases plaguing past studies of the IFI-growth relationship, and (iv) investigating, as
suggested by some theories, whether IFI only has positive growth effects under particular economic,
financial, institutional, and policy regimes. In studying the IFI-growth relationship, the paper
examines up to 57 countries over the last 20-25 years using an assortment of statistical
methodologies.
The data do not support the view that international financial integration per se accelerates
economic growth even when controlling for particular economic, financial, institutional, and policy
characteristics. Note, however, these results do not imply that openness is unassociated with
economic success. Indeed, IFI is positively associated with real per capita GDP, educational
attainment, banking sector development, stock market development, the law and order tradition of
the country, and government integrity (low levels of government corruption). Thus, successful
countries are generally open economies. Rather, this paper finds that IFI is not robustly linked with
economic growth when using a variety of IFI measures and an assortment of econometric
approaches. Similarly, although there are isolated exceptions, we do not reject the null hypothesis
that IFI is unrelated to economic growth even when allowing this relationship to vary with
economic, financial, institutional, and macroeconomic characteristics.
This paper’s findings must be interpreted cautiously. As emphasized in the Introduction,
there are extreme barriers to measuring openness to international financial transactions. There are
many different types of financial transactions, countries impose a complex array of barriers, and the
effectiveness of these barriers varies across countries, time, and type of financial transaction.

24

Although we use new measures of IFI that improve upon past measures and although we use a more
extensive list of IFI measures than past studies, each of these measures may be criticized for not
fully distinguishing international differences in barriers to financial transactions. Given these
qualifications, this paper finds that although international financial integration is associated with
economic success (high levels of GDP per capita and strong institutions), the data do not lend much
support to the view that international financial integration stimulates economic growth.

25

Acknowledgements
The authors wish to thank Tamim Bayoumi, Michael Klein, Phillip Lane, Gian Maria MilesiFerreti, and David Robinson for data and helpful comments and Yutong Li and Bennett Sutton for
efficient research assistance. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent those of the IMF or IMF policy. This research was originally conducted as a
background paper for Chapter 4 of the October 2001 IMF World Economic Outlook.

26

References
Acemoglu, D., S. Johnson, and J. Robinson, 2001. “The colonial origins of comparative
development: an empirical investigation,” American Economic Review, 91,1369-1401.
Acemoglu, D., F. Zilibotti, 1997, “Was Prometheus Unbound by chance? Risk Diversification, and
Growth,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 709-51.
Alfaro, L., A. Chanda, S. Kalemli-Ozcan, and S.n Sayek. "FDI and Economic Growth: The Role of
Local Financial Markets." Harvard Business School, Working Paper, 2001, Number 83.
Alonso-Borrego, C. and M.Arellano. “Symmetrically Normalised Instrumental Variable Estimation
Using Panel Data,” CEMFI Working Paper No. 9612, September 1996.
Arellano, M. and S. Bond. “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte Carlo Evidence and
an Application to Employment Equations,” Review of Economic Studies 1991, 58, pp. 277297.
Arellano, M., and O. Bover. “Another Look at the Instrumental-Variable Estimation of ErrorComponents Models,” Journal of Econometrics 1995, 68, pp. 29-52.
Arteta, C., B. Eichengreen, and C. Wyplosz, 2001, “On the Growth Effects of Capital Account
Liberalization,” (unpublished; Berkeley: University of California)
Barro, R. J. and J. Lee. “International Measures of Schooling Years and Schooling Quality”, AER
Papers and Proceedings 1996, 86, pp. 218-223.
Beck, T., and R. Levine, 2002, “Stock Market, Banks, and Economic Growth: Cross-Country and
Panel Evidence,” University of Minnesota, mimeo.
Bekaert, G., C. R. Harvey, and C. Lundblad, 2001, “Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?”
NBER Working Paper No. 8245 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic
Research).
Blomstrom, M., Lipsey, R. and M. Zejan, 1994, “What Explains Growth in Developing
Countries?,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, No. 5057.
Blundell, R. and S. Bond. “Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions in Dynamic Panel Data
Models,” Journal of Econometrics, 1998, 87, pp. 115-43.
Borensztein, E., De Gregorio, J., and J.W. Lee, 1998, How Does Foreign Investment Affect
Growth? Journal of International Economics, 45.
Boyd, J. H., and B. D. Smith, 1992, “Intermediation and the Equilibrium Allocation of Investment
Capital: Implications for Economic Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 30,
409-432.

27

Calderon, C.; A. Chong, and N. Loayza. “Determinants of Current Account Deficits in Developing
Countries,” World Bank Research Policy Working Paper 2398, July 2000.
Carkovic, M. and R. Levine, 2002, Does Foreign Direct Investment Accelerate Economic Growth?”
University of Minnesota Carlson School of Management), mimeo.
Cooper, R., 1999, “Should Capital Controls Be Banished?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
1, 89-141.
Easterly, W. and R. Levine, 2002, Tropics, germs, and crops. University of Minnesota, mimeo.
Edison, H., M. Klein., L. Ricci, and T. Sløk, 2002, “Capital Account Liberalization and Economic
Performance: Survey and Synthesis,” IMF Working Paper No 02/120, (Washington:
International Monetary Fund).
Edwards, S., 2001, “Capital Mobility and Economic Performance: Are Emerging Economies
Different?” NBER Working Paper No. 8076 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of
Economic Research).
Eichengreen, B., 2001, “Capital Account Liberalization: What do Cross-Country Studies Tell Us?”
(unpublished; Berkeley: University of California).
Engerman, S. and K. Sokoloff, 1997, “Factor endowments, institutions, and differential paths of
growth among new world economies,” In Haber, Stephen (Ed.), How Latin America Fell
Behind, Stanford University Press, Stanford CA, pp. 260-304.
Grilli, V. and G. Maria Milesi-Ferreti, 1995, “Economic Effects and Structural Determinants of
Capital Controls,” Staff Papers, Vol. 42 (September), pp. 517–51.
Henry, P., 2000a, “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market Equity
Prices,” Journal of Finance, Vol. 55 (April), pp. 529–64.
Henry, P., 2000b, “Do Stock Market Liberalizations Cause Investment Booms?” Journal of
Financial Economics, 58, 301-334.
Holtz-Eakin, D.; Newey, W, and Rosen, H. “Estimating Vector Autoregressions with Panel Data, “
Econometrica, 1990, 56(6), pp. 1371-1395.
Klein, M., and G. Olivei, 2000, “Capital Account Liberalization, Financial Depth, and Economic
Growth,” (unpublished; Somerville, Mass.: Tufts University.
Kraay, A., 1998, “In Search of the Macroeconomic Effects of Capital Account Liberalization,”
(unpublished; Washington: World Bank).

28

Lane, P., and G. Maria Milesi-Ferretti, forthcoming, “The External Wealth of Nations,” Journal of
International Economics.
La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny, 1999, “The Quality of Government,”
Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 15, 222-279.
Levine, R., 2001, “International Financial Liberalization and Economic Growth,” Review of
International Economic, 9, 688-702.
Levine, R., and S. Zervos, 1998a, “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,” American
Economic Review, Vol. 88 (June), 537–58.
Levine, R., and S. Zervos, 1998b, “Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market Development,”
World Development, 26, 1169-84.
Levine, R., N. Loayza, and T. Beck, 2000, “Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and
Causes,” Journal of Financial Economics, 46, 31-77.
Levine, R., and D. Renelt, 1992, “A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth Regressions,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 82 (September), pp. 942–63.
Obstfeld, M., 1994, “Risk-taking, Global Diversification, and Growth,” American Economic Review
84, 1310-1329.
Quinn, D., 1997, “The Correlates of Change in International Financial Regulation,” American
Political Science Review, Vol. 91, (September), pp. 531–51.
Rodrik, D., 1998, “Who Needs Capital-Account Convertibility,” (unpublished; Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University).

29

Variable
.02
7.96
3.81
-.03
.15
-1.00
-3.50
4.05
4.84
.74
.53
.05
.35
.03

Mean
.02
.99
.65
.03
.22
.82
1.81
1.36
1.20
.37
.60
.05
.30
.02

Std.
Dev.

Notes to table:
1. Real per capita GDP growth rate (calculated in logarithmic terms)
2. Logarithm of Initial real per capital GDP in 1980.
3. Logarithm of average years of schooling in 1980.
4. Fiscal Balance (Revenues – Expenditures) as a ratio of GDP.
5. Inflation using consumer price index (calculated in logarithmic first difference terms).
6. Logarithm of private credit by deposit money banks and other financial institutions as a ratio to GDP
7. Logarithm of stock market total value traded as a ratio GDP
8. ICRG – Law and Order
9. ICRG – Corruption in Government
10. Capital Account Restrictions from the IMF Annual Report AREAER, average 1980-1996.
11. Stock of Capital Assets and Liabilities divided by GDP (average: 1996 – 1998, FDI and Portfolio).
12. FDI plus Portfolio inflows and outflows divided by GDP (average: 1980-2000).
13. Stock of Capital Liabilities divided by GDP (average: 1996 – 1998, FDI and Portfolio).
14. FDI and Portfolio inflows divided by GDP (average: 1980-2000).

Growth 1
Initial Income 2
Initial Schooling3
Government Balance 4
Inflation rate5
Private Credit6
Stock Activity7
Law and Order8
Corruption9
IMF Restriction10
Stock of Capital Flows 11
Flow of Capital 12
Stock of Capital Inflows 13
Inflow of Capital 14

Panel A. Summary Statistics

Table 1. Data Description

-.03
5.97
2.04
-.10
.02
-3.21
-8.09
1.70
2.48
0
.01
-.01
.01
-.00

Min.
Value
.08
9.47
4.65
.10
1.29
.57
-.02
6
6.89
1
2.77
.22
1.13
.12

Max.
Value

1.00
-0.10
0.24
0.22
-0.26*
-0.03
0.07
0.04
0.25*
0.29*
0.26*
0.21
0.26*
0.10

1.00
0.76*
0.05
-0.00
-0.55
0.60*
0.54*
0.55*
0.42*
0.66*
0.46*
0.76*
0.82*

Initial
Income

1.00
-0.02
-0.07
-0.42
0.48*
0.41*
0.42*
0.32*
0.64*
0.46*
0.59*
0.67*

Initial
Schooling

1.00
-0.16
-0.22
0.22
0.21
0.24
0.29*
-0.00
0.23
0.22
0.06

Governme
nt Balance

1.00
0.14
-0.25*
-0.22
-0.23
-0.17
-0.37*
-0.18
-0.25
-0.19

Inflation

Note: Significant coefficients (at 5 percent significance level) are denoted by a *

Initial Income
Schooling
Government Balance
Inflation
IMF Restriction
Stock of Capital Flows
Flow of Capital
Stock of Capital Inflows
Inflows of Capital
Private Credit
Stock Activity
Law and Order
Corruption

Growth

Growth

Panel B. Correlation Matrix

1.00
-0.62*
-0.53*
-0.47*
-0.36*
-0.48*
-0.41*
-0.56*
-0.48*

IMF
Restriction

- 31 -

1.00
0.93*
0.77*
0.62*
0.60*
0.56*
0.69*
0.69*

Stock of
Capital
Flows

1.00
0.72*
0.69*
0.49*
0.49*
0.72*
0.70*

Flow of
Capital

1.00
0.92*
0.54*
0.57*
0.66*
0.65*

Stock of
Capital
Inflows

1.00
0.40*
0.51*
0.59*
0.54*

Inflows of
Capital

1.00
0.71*
0.67*
0.68*

Private
Credit

1.00
0.54*
0.49*

Stock
Activity

1.00
0.87*

Law and
Order

1.00

Corruption

0.29

R2
NA

0.083
(0.68)
-0.031
(2.13)

NA

-0.056
(0.013)
-0.024
(1.94)

(2.20)
0.046
(2.98)

-0.015

Panel

4. Initial Schooling equals the logarithm of initial level of educational attainment.
5. Government Balance equals the fiscal balance (Revenues – Expenditures) as a ratio of GDP.
6. Inflation equals the logarithmic difference of the consumer price index.
7. The Ordinary Least Squares and Instrumental Variables regressions use one observation per country with data over the 1980-2000 period, so that
Initial Income and Initial Schooling are computed in 1980 and the Government Balance and Inflation are averaged over the 1980-2000 period The Panel
regressions use data averaged over five year period from 1976-2000, so data permitting there are five observations per country (1976-1980, 1981-1985,
1986-1990, 1991-1995, 1996-2000). For the Panel regression, Initial Income and Initial Schooling are computed in the initial year of each five-year period
and the Government Balance and Inflation are averaged over each period.
8. Sample of Countries: United States, United Kingdom, Austria, Denmark, France, Germany, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Canada, Japan,
Finland, Greece, Ireland, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, Australia, New Zealand, Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Dominican republic, Ecuador,
El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, Israel, Jordan, Syrian Arab Republic, Egypt, Sri Lanka, India, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Nepal,
Pakistan, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand, Botswana, Kenya, Lesotho, Mauritius, Morocco, Zimbabwe, Swaziland, Tunisia, Papua New Guinea, and
China.

3. Initial Income equals the logarithm of initial real per capital GDP.

Notes:
1. The coefficient is reported, with t-values in parenthesis.
2. Number of observations: 57 countries

Inflation

0.122
(1.85)
-0.015
(1.63)

Initial Schooling

Government Balance

-0.006
(1.56)
0.010
(1.55)

-0.010

Instrumental Variables

(2.25)
0.016
(2.28)

Ordinary Least Squares

Initial Income

Table 2: Benchmark Growth Regression
Dependent Variable: Real Per Capita GDP Growth

- 32 -

0.002 (0.29)
0.003 (0.72)
0.101 (2.46)*
0.002 (0.25)
0.183 (2.24)*

Ordinary Least
Squares
-0.011 (0.91)
0.008 (0.85)
0.056 (0.79)
-0.007 (0.63)
0.078 (0.62)

Instrumental Variables
NA
0.002 (0.35)
0.077 (2.08)
0.001 (0.033)
0.132 (1.23)

Panel

Notes:
1. Numbers in parenthesis are t-statistics; and * indicates significant at the 5 percent level
2. The regression also include Initial Income, Initial Schooling, the Government Balance, and Inflation.
3. Column 2 present OLS regression results using heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors.
4. Column 3 presents Two-Stage Least Squares results, with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors, where the instruments are the latitudinal
distance from the equator, and a dummy variable for the legal origin of the country (Common, French Civil, German Civil, Scandinavian, Socialist).
5. Column 4 presents dynamic system panel regression results with robust standard errors. Note, we are unable to use the system panel estimator for the
IMF-Restriction measure because there is too little cross-time variation in this variable, on average, across the countries and because the IMF-Restriction
variable is not available in the last 5-year period, 1996-2000, as discussed in the text.
6. The Ordinary Least Squares and Instrumental Variables regressions use one observation per country with data over the 1980-2000 period, so that
Initial Income and Initial Schooling are computed in 1980 and the Government Balance and Inflation are averaged over the 1980-2000 period The Panel
regressions use data averaged over five year period from 1976-2000, so data permitting there are five observations per country (1976-1980, 1981-1985,
1986-1990, 1991-1995, 1996-2000). For the Panel regression, Initial Income and Initial Schooling are computed in the initial year of each five-year period
and the Government Balance and Inflation are averaged over each period. 5. The table summarizes the findings from 15 separate regressions.
7. IMF Restriction: Capital Account Restrictions from the IMF.
8. Stock of Capital Flows: Stock of Capital Assets and Liabilities (FDI and Portfolio) divided by GDP.
9. Flow of Capital: FDI plus Portfolio inflows and outflows divided by GDP.
10. Stock of Capital Inflows: Capital Liabilities(FDI and Portfolio) divided by GDP.
11. Inflow of Capital: FDI and Portfolio inflows divided by GDP.

IMF Restriction
Stock of Capital Flows
Flow of Capital
Stock of Capital Inflows
Inflow of Capital

International Financial Integration
Measure

Table 3: Economic Growth and International Financial Integration
Dependent Variable: Real Per Capita GDP Growth

- 33 -

IFI
-0.010 (0.25)
0.030 (0.75)
0.008 (0.04)
0.013 (0.38)
-0.140 (0.46)

IFI
-0.002 (0.05)
0.410 (2.56)*
0.079 (0.16)
0.011 (0.27)
-0.340 (0.55)

IFI*(Initial Schooling)
0.003 (0.30)
-0.006 (0.71)
0.023 (0.43)
-0.003 (0.34)
0.087 (1.13)

IFI*(Initial Income)
0.000 (0.09)
-0.040 (2.46)*
0.002 (0.04)
-0.001 (0.24)
0.066 (0.88)

Initial Schooling
0.013 (1.16)
0.017 (2.26)*
0.014 (1.89)
0.016 (2.14)*
0.013 (1.77)

Initial Income
-0.01 (2.15)*
-0.01 (2.04)*
-0.01 (3.02)*
-0.01 (2.18)*
-0.01 (3.34)*

Notes:
1. Numbers in parenthesis are t-statistics; and * indicates significant at the 5 percent level
2. The regression also include: the logarithm of GDP per capita in 1980, the logarithm of the secondary school enrollment rate in 1980, the average
annual CPI inflation rate between 1980-2000, and the average annual government budget balance from 1980-2000.
3. The table presents OLS regression results using heteroskedasticity consistent errors.
4. The table summarizes the findings from 10 separate regressions.
5. IMF Restriction: Capital Account Restrictions from the IMF.
6. Stock of Capital Flows: Stock of Capital Assets and Liabilities (FDI and Portfolio) divided by GDP.
7. Flow of Capital: FDI plus Portfolio inflows and outflows divided by GDP.
8. Stock of Capital Inflows: Capital Liabilities(FDI and Portfolio) divided by GDP.
9. Inflow of Capital: FDI and Portfolio inflows divided by GDP.
10. Initial Income: Logarithm of Initial real per capital GDP in 1980.
11. Initial Schooling: Logarithm of average years of secondary schooling in 1980.

IMF Restriction
Stock of Capital Flows
Flow of Capital
Stock of Capital Inflows
Inflow of Capital

International Financial Integration Measure

Panel B. Initial Schooling
Dependent Variable: Real Per Capita GDP Growth, 1980-2000
Estimated by OLS, Sample Period 1980-2000

IMF Restriction
Stock of Capital Flows
Flow of Capital
Stock of Capital Inflows
Inflow of Capital

International Financial Integration Measure

Panel A. Initial Income Level
Dependent Variable: Real Per Capita GDP Growth, 1980-2000)
Estimated by OLS, Sample Period 1980-2000

Table 4: Economic Growth and International Financial Integration: Initial Economic Conditions

- 34 -

IFI

0.010 (0.99)
-0.006 (0.98)
-0.009 (0.10)
-0.016 (1.10)
0.064 (0.354)

IFI

0.005 (0.80)
-0.001 (0.36)
0.070 (1.12)
-0.001 (0.11)
0.212 (1.84)

0.030 (1.38)
-0.005 (1.24)
-0.056 (1.61)
-0.008 (1.32)
-0.090 (1.51)

IFI*(Stock Activity)

-0.002 (-0.27)
-0.001 (0.29)
0.008 (0.14)
0.002 (0.28)
0.100 (1.10)

IFI*(Private Credit)

0.001 (1.31)
0.005 (0.00)
0.004 (2.13)*
0.005 (2.12)*
0.004 (1.90)

Stock Activity

0.015 (3.49)*
0.014 (2.89)*
0.012 (2.42)*
0.013 (2.75)*
0.010 (2.03)*

Private Credit

Notes:
1. Numbers in parenthesis are t-statistics; and * indicates significant at the 5 percent level
2. The regression also include: the logarithm of GDP per capita in 1980, the logarithm of the secondary school enrollment rate in 1980, the average
annual CPI inflation rate between 1980-2000, and the average annual government budget balance from 1980-2000.
3. The table presents OLS regression results using heteroskedasticity consistent errors.
4. The table summarizes the findings from 10 separate regressions.
5. IMF Restriction: Capital Account Restrictions from the IMF.
6. Stock of Capital Flows: Stock of Capital Assets and Liabilities (FDI and Portfolio) divided by GDP.
7. Flow of Capital: FDI plus Portfolio inflows and outflows divided by GDP.
8. Stock of Capital Inflows: Capital Liabilities(FDI and Portfolio) divided by GDP.
9. Inflow of Capital: FDI and Portfolio inflows divided by GDP.
10. Private Credit: Logarithm of credit to private enterprises by deposit money banks and other financial institutions as a ratio to GDP
11. Stock Activity: Logarithm of stock market total value traded as a ratio GDP.

IMF Restriction
Stock of Capital Flows
Flow of Capital
Stock of Capital Inflows
Inflow of Capital

International Financial Integration Measure

Panel B. Stock Financial Development
Dependent Variable: Real Per Capita GDP Growth, 1980-2000
Estimated by OLS, Sample Period 1980-2000

IMF Restriction
Stock of Capital Flows
Flow of Capital
Stock of Capital Inflows
Inflow of Capital

International Financial Integration Measure

Panel A. Bank Financial Development
Dependent Variable: Real Per Capita GDP Growth, 1980-2000
Estimated by OLS, Sample Period 1980-2000

Table 5. Economic Growth and International Financial Integration: Financial Development

- 35 -

IFI

-0.027 (1.36)
0.093 (3.62)*
0.550 (1.28)
0.118 (2.27)*
0.723 (0.98)

IFI

-0.015 (0.89)
0.083 (2.85)*
0.391 (1.10)
0.077 (1.72)
0.474 (0.80)

0.006 (1.56)
-0.015 (3.61)*
-0.080 (1.17)
-0.020 (2.51)*
-0.100 (0.78)

IFI*(Corruption)

0.004 (1.21)
-0.015 (3.01)*
-0.064 (0.96)
-0.016 (2.03)*
-0.063 (0.54)

IFI*(Rule of Law)

0.004 (1.22)
0.014 (3.17)*
0.009 (1.93)
0.015 (2.97)*
0.008 (1.64)

Corruption

0.007 (2.13)*
0.014 (4.30)*
0.010 (2.90)*
0.014 (3.74)*
0.010 (2.41)*

Rule of Law

Notes:
1. Numbers in parenthesis are t-statistics; and * indicates significant at the 5 percent level
2. The regression also include: the logarithm of GDP per capita in 1980, the logarithm of the secondary school enrollment rate in 1980, the average
annual CPI inflation rate between 1980-2000, and the average annual government budget balance from 1980-2000.
3. The table presents OLS regression results using heteroskedasticity consistent errors.
4. The table summarizes the findings from 10 separate regressions.
5. IMF Restriction: Capital Account Restrictions from the IMF.
6. Stock of Capital Flows: Stock of Capital Assets and Liabilities (FDI and Portfolio) divided by GDP.
7. Flow of Capital: FDI plus Portfolio inflows and outflows divided by GDP.
8. Stock of Capital Inflows: Capital Liabilities(FDI and Portfolio) divided by GDP.
9. Inflow of Capital: FDI and Portfolio inflows divided by GDP.
10. Law and Order: ICRG – Law and Order. Larger values imply more of a law and order tradition.
11. Corruption: ICRG – Corruption in Government. Larger values imply less corruption.

IMF Restriction
Stock of Capital Flows
Flow of Capital
Stock of Capital Inflows
Inflow of Capital

International Financial Integration Measure

Panel B. Corruption
Dependent Variable: Real Per Capita GDP Growth, 1980-2000
Estimated by OLS, Sample Period 1980-2000

IMF Restriction
Stock of Capital Flows
Flow of Capital
Stock of Capital Inflows
Inflow of Capital

International Financial Integration Measure

Panel A. Rule of Law
Dependent Variable: Real Per Capita GDP Growth, 1980-2000
Estimated by OLS, Sample Period 1980-2000

Table 6: Economic Growth and International Financial Integration: Institutional Factors

- 36 -

Inflation
-0.080 (3.61)*
0.009 (0.47)
-0.014 (0.64)
0.025 (1.33)
-0.004 (0.17)

0.150 (1.11)
0.090 (0.93)
0.078 (0.80)
0.092 (0.88)
0.054 (0.55)

Government Balance

IFI*(Inflation)
0.081 (3.06)*
-0.100 (1.36)
0.110 (0.17)
-0.180 (2.56)*
-0.350 (0.43)

IFI*(Government
Balance)
-0.034 (0.21)
0.058 (0.91)
0.373 (0.64)
0.110 (0.63)
0.940 (0.97)

Notes:
1. Numbers in parenthesis are t-statistics; and * indicates significant at the 5 percent level
2. The regression also include: the logarithm of GDP per capita in 1980, the logarithm of the secondary school enrollment rate in 1980, the average
annual CPI inflation rate between 1980-2000, and the average annual government budget balance from 1980-2000.
3. The table presents OLS regression results using heteroskedasticity consistent errors.
4. The table summarizes the findings from 10 separate regressions.
5. IMF Restriction: Capital Account Restrictions from the IMF.
6. Stock of Capital Flows: Stock of Capital Assets and Liabilities (FDI and Portfolio) divided by GDP.
7. Flow of Capital: FDI plus Portfolio inflows and outflows divided by GDP.
8. Stock of Capital Inflows: Capital Liabilities (FDI and Portfolio) divided by GDP.
9. Inflow of Capital: FDI and Portfolio inflows divided by GDP.
10. Government Balance: Fiscal Balance (Revenues – Expenditures) as a ratio of GDP.
11. Inflation: Inflation using consumer price index.

IMF Restriction
Stock of Capital Flows
Flow of Capital
Stock of Capital Inflows
Inflow of Capital

International Financial Integration Measure

IFI
-0.007 (1.37)
0.008 (1.48)
0.090 (1.80)
0.016 (1.75)
0.210 (2.28)*

0.001 (0.14)
0.004 (0.93)
0.108 (2.51)*
0.004 (0.49)
0.202 (2.47)*

IMF Restriction
Stock of Capital Flows
Flow of Capital
Stock of Capital Inflows
Inflow of Capital

Panel B. Monetary Policy
Dependent Variable: Real Per Capita GDP Growth, 1980-2000
Estimated by OLS, Sample Period 1980-2000

IFI

International Financial Integration Measure

Panel A. Fiscal Policy
Dependent Variable: Real Per Capita GDP Growth, 1980-2000
Estimated by OLS, Sample Period 1980-2000

Table 7: Economic Growth and International Financial Integration: Macroeconomic Policies

- 37 -

Logarithm of real per capita GDP for initial year
of period
Logarithm of average years of secondary
schooling in the population over the age of 15
for the initial year of the period
Fiscal Balance (Revenues – Expenditures)
divided by GDP
Logarithmic difference of Consumer Price Index
Credit by banks and other financial
intermediaries to private enterprises as a share of
GDP
Total Value of Trades of Domestic Stock on
Domestic Exchanges as a share of GDP
Measure of Law and order tradition of a country,
ranging from 10 for strong law and order
tradition to 1 for weak law and order tradition.
Measure of Corruption, with 0 meaning high
level of corruption to 10 low level
Capital Account Restriction measure (0 = no
restriction, 1 = restrictions)
Stock of accumulated capital flows (sum of asset
and liabilities of foreign direct investment and
portfolio flows) divided by GDP
Capital inflows and outflows (foreign direct
investment and portfolio flows) divided by GDP
Stock of accumulated capital inflows (sum of
liabilities of foreign direct investment and
portfolio flows) divided by GDP
Capital inflows (sum of foreign direct
investment and portfolio inflows) divided by
GDP

Initial Income

Inflows of Capital

Stock of Capital Inflows)

Flows of Capital

Stock of Capital Flows

IMF Restriction

Corruption in Government

Law and Order tradition

Stock Activity

Inflation
Private Credit

Government Balance

Initial Schooling

Growth

Definition
Real per capita GDP Growth

Variable

Data Appendix

International Financial Statistics (IFS), lines
78bed+78bgd

IMF Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and
Exchange Restrictions
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001),
CFDIAH+CFDILH+CEQAR+CEQLR+IPPDA+IPP
DL
International Financial Statistics (IFS), lines
78bdd+78bed+78bfd+78bgd
Lane and Milesi-Ferretti (2001),
CFDILH+CEQLR+IPPDL

International Country Risk Guide (ICRG)

International Country Risk Guide (ICRG)

Beck and Levine (2002)

International Financial Statistics (IFS), line 64
Beck and Levine (2002)

International Financial Statistics (IFS), line 80

Barro and Lee (1996)

Penn World Tables

International Financial Statistics (IFS), line 99b.r

Source

- 38 -

