                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  ARE POLITICIANS REALLY PAID LIKE BUREAUCRATS?


                                            Rafael Di Tella
                                           Raymond Fisman


                                          Working Paper 9165
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9165


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Rafael Di Tella and Raymond Fisman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Are Politicians Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?
Rafael Di Tella and Raymond Fisman
NBER Working Paper No. 9165
September 2002
JEL No. J3, H7

                                             ABSTRACT

        We provide the first empirical analysis of gubernatorial pay. Using US data for 1950-90 we
document, contrary to widespread assumptions, substantial variation in the wages of politicians, both
across states and over time. Gubernatorial wages respond to changes in state income per capita and
taxes, after controlling for state and time fixed effects. The economic effects seem large: governors
receive a 1 percent pay cut for each ten percent increase in per capita tax payments and a 4.5 percent
increase in pay for each ten percent increase in income per capita in their states. There is strong
evidence that the tax elasticity reflects a form of "reward-for-performance". The evidence on the
income elasticity of pay is less conclusive, but is suggestive of "rent extraction" motives. Lastly, we
find that democratic institutions seem to play an important role in shaping pay. For example, voter-
initiatives and the presence of significant political opposition lead to large reductions in the income
elasticity of pay, and to large increases (at least double) in the tax elasticities of pay, relative to the
elasticities that are observed when these democratic institutions are weaker.


Rafael Di Tella                                                  Raymond Fisman
Harvard Business School                                          Columbia Business School
Morgan Hall 283                                                  614 Uris Hall
Boston, MA 02163                                                 New York, NY 10027
rditella@hbs.edu                                                 and NBER
                                                                 rf250@columbia.edu
       In 2000, Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong of Singapore gave himself a pay
increase of 14 percent, raising his already high salary to US$1.1 million. This prompted
some uncharacteristic murmurs of protest among Singaporeans regarding their leaders’
pay. Nonetheless, Prime Minister Goh received his raise, and encouraged Singaporeans
to judge his government on its record for promoting economic competitiveness and its
effectiveness in setting government policy (Webb, 2000). Thus, he was effectively
claiming that he deserved increased pay in reward for strong past performance.
Singapore, however, is not a democracy, so its citizens had little recourse to prevent the
pay increase from taking place. Hence, in this case, it is unclear whether this is an
example of rent extraction by a leader insulated from democratic pressures, or reward for
good performance. More generally, the question arises, are politicians paid for strong
performance, or do they extract whatever salary and benefits are permitted by their
circumstances. In this paper, we take advantage of variation in economic performance
and democratic institutions across states and over time in the United States to address this
important question in more general terms.
       A traditional starting point in analyzing politicians’ behaviors is that they are
socially motivated. That is, in contrast to private sector managers, politicians are altruistic
and do not care about monetary income. In this naïve view, one can ignore politician pay,
as it is irrelevant: as long as politicians are able to subsist at a reasonable level, pay
should not affect their actions. However, over the past few decades, economists and
political scientists have considered more realistic formal models of political economy that
incorporate considerations such as those described in the opening paragraph. In these
models, politicians no longer set out exclusively to maximize social welfare, but instead
seek to also increase their chances of re-election, try to expand the sizes of the
organizations they manage, and even accept bribes. However, once politicians have some
pecuniary motivation, a natural starting point in trying to understand their conduct is to
study politician pay. The primary purpose of this paper is to take a first step in analyzing
the officially sanctioned financial compensation of politicians.
       Economists often assume that non-private sector workers face flat pay schedules




                                              2
and low powered incentive schemes. A case in point is bureaucratic compensation.1 Two
explanations have been proposed, one based on the implication of multiple objectives of
government bureaucracies and the other based on the idea that only informal incentives,
i.e., career concerns, matter (see, for example, Tirole (1994)). Although we know of no
fully-fledged model of politician pay, a reasonable first approach to these issues suggests
that, as in theories of pay in bureaucracies, monetary payments would play a minor role
and that we should expect to see little variation in the remuneration of politicians.2 Yet, in
any particular year, there are large cross-state differences in the pay of political leaders in
the United States. For example, in 1996, the most recent year for which we have data, the
governor of the state of New York earned $130,000, while the governor of Montana
earned about $55,000, and cross-sectional dispersion only increases as we look back in
time. Furthermore, there are also large differences in gubernatorial pay, in real terms,
over time. Average pay for governors (in 1982 dollars) increased from $48,090 in 1950 to
$80,037 in 1968; by 1994 it was down to $58,738. Thus, contrary to popular belief, there
is considerable variation in political compensation, both over time and across states. One
of the contributions of the paper is to document these basic patterns that are present in the
data.
        We go on to analyze the relationship between the governor's wage and measures
of state performance, using data for 48 states over the period 1950-90. Reports in the
media suggest that politicians’ pay is heavily influenced by economic conditions. For
example, in the late 1980s, with the American economy in a recession, newspaper
accounts described considerable opposition to politicians’ attempts to increase their own
wages. Thus, when Texas lawmakers announced their intentions to vote a wage increase
in 1989, the Houston Chronicle responded with an editorial arguing that, “[w]hen the
state's economy is still struggling and thousands of Texans are unemployed, lawmakers
shouldn't expect much public sympathy over how little they are paid". 3 We examine this
possibility empirically, following the approach developed in the executive compensation
literature and applying it to politician pay. We find that, after controlling for state and


1
  The title of a recent paper on executive compensation is "Are CEO's really paid like Bureaucrats?” (Hall
and Liebman, 1998). This paper takes as given that bureaucrats have low-powered incentives.
2
  The arguments presented in Tirole (1994), for example, justify this statement.
3
  Similar stories were reported in California during this period.


                                                    3
year fixed effects, there is a strong and robust positive association between gubernatorial
pay and state per capita income. The elasticity is large, in excess of 0.4.
        An alternative performance metric is state taxes. Peltzman (1992) presents theory
and evidence consistent with the idea that taxes are set at a level that is higher than the
level preferred by the median voter. Peltzman’s theory of voters as fiscal conservatives
also finds empirical support in the work of Matsusaka (1995), who shows that states that
allow voter initiatives have lower taxes than “pure representation” states. This suggests
that taxes may be used as a second measure of performance. There is ample anecdotal
evidence suggesting that fiscal dynamics affect gubernatorial pay. For example, when
California announced that its legislators and senior elected officials would receive pay
increases in 1990, the Los Angeles Times published an article reporting that “[t]he action
was expected to generate political fallout, coming in the wake of reports that the state is
facing an estimated $5 billion-plus budget shortfall in the current and coming fiscal
years. The commission Friday sat through several hours of mostly hostile testimony from
the public objecting to the increases”.4 Our empirical results are consistent with this idea:
there is a strong and robust negative effect of taxes on the pay of state political leaders.
Governors suffer a one percent pay cut for each ten percent increase in taxes per capita,
or equivalently, a one standard deviation increase in per capita tax payments brings about
a decline of ten percent of a standard deviation in gubernatorial pay. Thus, governors get
a similar pay increase if the income per capita of their voters increases by 1 percent or if
they reduce per capita tax payments by approximately 4 percent.
        Three alternative theories can explain the positive relationship between wages and
income. First, we consider the simple possibility that voters increase gubernatorial pay
when income increases in order to keep the governor's position constant in the state’s
distribution of income. A second hypothesis is that the public implicitly provides rewards
for politicians to induce high effort in the design and implementation of good policies,
just like in a principal agent model. Since good policies are more likely to have been
chosen when performance is good, the public rewards the governor with higher wages

4
  Similarly, in Virginia in 1981, the Washington Post reported that the Virginia Senate was nearly
successful in blocking a moderate wage increase for that state’s governor, on the grounds that, “the pay
raise would be unwise when the assembly already has voted down tax relief measures for the people.”
By far the most common element to newspaper reports complaining about governors’ wage increases is that
such increases are inappropriate at times when the state is struggling with a fiscal crisis.


                                                   4
when they experience higher incomes. This can be called "reward-for-performance".
Finally, an alternative theory maintains that politicians are rent-seekers. In good times
they take as much in wages as they can, constrained by the public's patience and the
cultural stigma attached to greedy public servants. This may be called "rent-extraction".
In contrast, the negative tax elasticity of pay can only reflect “reward for performance”
motives.
       Further insight into the properties of the income elasticity of pay can be gained by
examining the impact of forces that are beyond the governor's discretion that affect state
income. Optimal incentive schemes should not incorporate such measures into
compensation: they increase noise (for which the agent must be compensated) and do not
improve effort. The most obvious example is shocks to income originating in observable
movements in aggregate income. The evidence we present suggests that governors
receive higher wages as a result of increases in income that originate in the aggregate
economy, so we can reject “reward-for-performance” motives behind the income
elasticity of gubernatorial pay.
       In contrast, and supporting the view that the tax elasticity of pay is influenced by
reward-based considerations, we find evidence that forces beyond the governor’s control
that affect the revenue-raising requirements of the state government have no effect on
gubernatorial pay. Furthermore, the strong correlation between taxes and gubernatorial
wages derives primarily from wage increases of governors that have been in office for
more than a year. Collectively, this evidence suggests that voters (and legislatures) may,
in fact, be rewarding governors for fiscal discipline (or, symmetrically, punishing
governors for fiscal irresponsibility).
       In a firm, managers’ wages are set, at least in theory, by the shareholders of the
firm. Analogously, voters may be seen as ultimately setting the wages of politicians, and
may have some scope to do so through various political institutions. Accordingly, we
investigate whether "democracy" plays a role in controlling the rent-extraction activities
of politicians. Theoretically, the literature considers three different methods of controlling
politicians: elections, separation of powers and "direct" democracy. On the use of
elections, Barro (1973) and Ferejohn (1986), amongst others, have made the point that
accountability will be lower for politicians that do not expect to run again for office. On



                                              5
the separation of powers, Persson, Roland, and Tabellini (1997), amongst others, argued
that opposing branches of government work by creating a conflict of interests between
the executive and the legislature, thereby disciplining rent-seeking behavior by either
party. Finally, on the role of "direct democracy", Frey (1994) and Matsusaka (1992,
1995) argue that institutions that allow for direct influence of voters within electoral
periods introduce accountability.
         We examine each of the preceding three hypotheses empirically. First, similar to
Besley and Case (1995), we exploit variations in gubernatorial term limits and re-election
opportunities to provide some general evidence on the hypothesis that elections promote
government accountability. Second, we study the hypothesis that the separation of
powers makes governors more accountable by examining how opposition in the state
Senate affects the determination of gubernatorial pay. Finally, we examine the hypothesis
that gubernatorial pay is more closely tied to performance where citizens may directly
control politicians, by looking at the properties of gubernatorial pay in voter initiative
states, where voters do not have to rely on either of the mechanisms described above to
control politicians.5 The data are strongly supportive of the latter two hypotheses while
they are inconclusive with regard to the first. One potential interpretation of these results
is that citizens’ initiatives and split government are more effective means of controlling
politicians than re-election incentives.6
         The results on democracy also help us rule out the hypothesis that the income
elasticity can be explained by a desire to keep the governor at a constant position in the
state income distribution. Under this hypothesis we would expect the positive income
elasticity of pay to be stronger, not weaker, in states where democracy is working well to
achieve desired policy outcomes, i.e., in states with voter initiatives and/or a strong
opposition. Our results do not support this view.
         To our knowledge, there is no previous published work on the empirical

5
  These results are of relevance that is completely independent of the question of gubernatorial pay. If one
accepts the baseline results on the relationship between taxation, income, and gubernatorial pay, one can
use the results to evaluate the effectiveness of various democratic institutions in controlling pay, with the
hope that they reflect the effectiveness of these institutions in controlling other areas of gubernatorial
discretion that are less readily observable.
6
  One potential concern with this conclusion may be that governors late in their terms have little incentive
to push up their salaries, since they will only receive it for a very limited period. But most governors’
pension benefits are tied to their salaries during their last year in office, so this is unlikely to be important.


                                                        6
determinants of a politician's legal monetary income. There is a considerable body of
research looking at a related margin: the impact of economic variables on the election
probabilities of incumbent political leaders. An important literature has looked at the
impact of economic events on political popularity, based both on actual votes and on
popularity functions (see Fair (1978), Frey and Schneider (1978a), Alesina, Roubini, and
Cohen (1997), Niemi, Stanley, and Vogel (1995), inter alia). In Frey (1978b) it is
explicitly argued that politicians may "consume" the pursuit of partisan objectives when
they have a comfortable lead in popularity, i.e. when there are electoral rents. Closer to
our paper is Besley and Case (1996), which examines the effect of state economic
performance (relative to neighboring states) on the re-election probabilities of US
governors. They find evidence in favor of the hypothesis that voters take into account
information from neighboring states in what can be called a nexus of yardstick
competition. In a related contribution, Wolfers (2002) looks at the electoral performance
of governors and finds that they are rewarded for luck, in the sense that exogenous
positive shocks to state income increase the likelihood of re-election. More generally, we
share with Besley and Case (1996) and Wolfers (2002) an interest in studying data
generated in political markets using the techniques and ideas of the recent executive
compensation literature. Finally, our work also ties into the literature on executive
compensation (e.g., Jensen and Murphy (1990)). This literature has similarly tried to
distinguish between rent-seeking and pay-for-performance (i.e., reward-based pay) for
corporate executives.
       The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section I outlines a simple model to
capture the intuition described in our introduction. Section II describes the paper's
empirical strategy, while section III describes the data and its sources. Section IV
presents our empirical results and section V concludes.


I. Gubernatorial Pay: Background and Model


Ia. Institutional Background
Until recently, governors' salaries were determined almost exclusively by legislative
statute, thereby requiring approval of the legislature (See Book of the States, various



                                            7
years, for further details). Increases were generally not automatically adjusted for
inflation, so that any salary increase required the consideration of state's legislative
bodies. Several states have recently shifted to salary-setting by independent salary
commissions, but only after our sample period ended. Moreover, the effect of this shift is
unclear: while it was intended to create bodies that would objectively evaluate the
governor's pay, this has not always been the case. For example, in California, where the
governor's salary is now set by an ‘independent’ commission, the governor appoints all
members of the salary commission. Recently, this has brought about concerns about the
true independence of the commission, and has led to calls for a return to salary setting by
legislative statute.
         There is one notable exception to salary-setting by legislative statute that is
particularly important for our paper: on a number of occasions, citizens' initiatives have
been used to directly control the salaries of legislators. For example, a 1966 voter
initiative in California set a limit on the salary increases that public officials could
approve for themselves. In Oregon, a 1962 initiative gave legislators the power to
increase their own salaries, while a very recent initiative in that state has been put
forward to repeal the 1962 amendment (Law, 2001).7 Note, however, that citizens'
initiatives need not directly impact salaries to act as a restraining force: to the extent that
it gives voters greater bargaining power vis a vis politicians, it may indirectly affect the
outcome of the salary bargaining game.


I.b. Theoretical Background
According to the previous section, while a state’s citizens could not directly control the
governor through the setting of his salary during the period under consideration, they
were able to do so indirectly through their control over the legislature. We may therefore
model the setting of the governor's salary as the outcome of two factors: the governor's



7
  A case played itself out in Massachusetts recently that is of particular interest for our paper. In 1995,
voters petitioned to have included on the ballot an initiative that would have reduced legislative salaries,
but the Massachusetts Supreme Court disallowed the initiative. Political activists several years later tried to
resurrect the movement, prompting an opinion piece in the Boston Herald, suggesting that the activists
concentrate on getting the state legislature to pass a tax reduction bill (Anderson, 1999); this is explicitly
the type of tradeoff that we try to model in the theory section below.


                                                      8
ability to co-opt the legislature, and the electorate's ability to compel the legislature to set
the governor's salary appropriately, based on its preferences.
        Hence, we model gubernatorial wages as being determined by the following
process:


wit= φ Rit + (1-φ) Pit + ηi + λt + εit


where R denotes the wage obtained by the governor through his/her efforts lobbying the
legislature (typically the Senate), while P denotes the wage chosen by the public; φ is the
weight of lobbying by the governor in the final wage, ηi is an effect specific to the state,
λt is a shock common to all states that may affect pay, and εit is an idiosyncratic shock.
The main difference between the two parts of gubernatorial compensation is that the
governor acts as Stackelberg leader on R while the public acts as leader on P.


Rent-Extraction: The Politician as a Hunter
The rents obtained by the governor are assumed to depend on the effort exerted by the
governor in this endeavor and by the availability of funds to meet the governor's wage
demands. We will refer to this as the ‘rent-seeking’ hypothesis. The setup is one where
holding the office of governor gives one access to a pool of funds; the salary that the
governor is able to extract depends on the effort he exerts in lobbying the legislature, and
the level of funds available, just as a hunter's catch depends on the effort exerted in
hunting and the amount of game in the area. So, the governor exerts effort to maximize
R(e,s)-e where e is the governor's lobbying effort and s is the availability of funds.
Assume that s=ty-x where t is the tax rate, y is taxable income and x is the level of
expenditures. The wage is fully characterized by the following first order condition


                                           Re − 1 = 0
where subscripts denote derivatives. It is reasonable to assume that there are decreasing
returns to the governor's efforts and that the availability of funds makes lobbying efforts
more productive. It is then direct to argue that the part of the wage determined by rent




                                               9
extraction is positively related to income and the tax rate because


            dR  Res                                   dR  Res       
              =  − + Rs t > 0            ,            =  − + Rs  y > 0
            dy  Ree                                   dt  Ree       




Position and Reward: The Public in Charge
The second part of the governor's wage is determined by the public in its attempt to
control and reward the governor (indirectly through the legislature). We divide this into
two components. In the first, the public is not attempting to provide incentives, but would
still like to keep the governor's wage in line with income in the state. This may be due to
a desire to have the governor not suffer relative to the rest of society, or to continue to be
able to attract the same pool of individuals into politics. If wages were not increased with
income, the governor's wage would not keep its position in the distribution of state
income. We refer to this as the ‘position’ hypothesis; it plays a similar role to a
participation constraint in a standard principal agent model. According to the position
hypothesis, the public component of the governor’s wage, P, is simply indexed to state
income, so that:


                        dP                              dP
                           =1> 0             ,             =0
                        dy                              dt
       The second component captures the idea that the public wants to reward good
performance. Both a standard principal agent model and a simple "fair" compensation
game give similar results. We focus on the latter as it is simpler and more closely follows
the intuition outlined in the introduction. We refer to this as the ‘reward’ hypothesis.
       The public's objective is to give the governor a fair wage in order to compensate
him for his effort (denoted E) in providing for the public's welfare. This target "fair"
wage, P*, depends positively on the probability that the governor has exerted high effort,
q. Gubernatorial effort affects performance; income is therefore given by yi(E, y-i, ε1)
where y-i is an observable shock to income and ε1 is an unobservable shock. The tax rate




                                             10
is given by ti(E, t-i, ε2) where t-i is an observable shock to taxes and ε2 is an unobservable
shock.
         The problem of the public is now to set wages P, to minimize a loss function over
the difference to the public’s fair wage, given by:


                                          MinP      (P (q) − P )
                                                       *          2



such that


                                         q (Y = y − yˆ , T = t − tˆ )

where ŷ and tˆ are the best predictors of income and taxation given all available
information, and Y and T are the income and tax surprises respectively. The probability
that the governor exerted effort above normal levels is positively correlated with positive
income surprises. By contrast, q falls when taxes are unexpectedly high. Thus, we have8:


         dP                                   dP                                   dP dP
            = Pq* qY > 0            ,             = − Pq* qY < 0         ,           +    =0
         dy                                   dyˆ                                  dy dyˆ


         dP                                 dP                                     dP dP
            = Pq* qT < 0            ,           = − Pq* qT > 0           ,            +     =0
         dt                                 dtˆ                                    dt   dtˆ


where the third expression in each line shows that changes in performance that are fully
expected should result in no changes in pay.




8
  Similar results obtain if a principal-agent model is used. In general, the principal will not want to make
compensation depend on shocks that can be observed over which the agent does not have control. This
would include noise (for which the risk averse agent must be compensated) and it does not improve the
incentives for the agent.


                                                     11
         In summary, the three separate competing models on pay-setting that we have
outlined, have different empirical predictions. These predictions are summarized below,
to emphasize the distinctions:


                                Predicted Elasticities of Governor's Wage
                                               Low Democracy                    High Democracy
                                                Rent-Seeking                Position            Reward
                            Expected                    +                       +                   0
     Higher Income
                           Unexpected                   +                       +                   +
                            Expected                    +                       0                   0
      Higher Taxes
                           Unexpected                   +                       0                   -


         We highlight, in particular, that the ‘reward’ hypothesis is the only one that
predicts a negative relationship between higher taxes and gubernatorial wages.
Furthermore, the ‘reward’ hypothesis distinguishes between expected and unexpected
changes, while the others do not. Finally, while both the rent-seeking and position
hypotheses predict a positive relation between state income and gubernatorial wage, we
note that increasing ‘democracy’, i.e., decreasing φ , will shift the emphasis towards pay
dynamics governed by the public pay setting models (Position and Reward). This will
provide us with another opportunity to differentiate among the competing theories when
shocks to income are expected: if the ‘position’ hypothesis dominates, then increased
democracy should lead to an increased income elasticity of pay. By contrast, the
‘rewards’ hypothesis predicts that greater democracy will bring the expected-income-
elasticity of pay towards zero.


II. Empirical Strategy




9
  The first paper to exploit this distinction is Hart (1983), who studies managerial contracts under different
degrees of competition (see also Schmidt (1997)). Ades and Di Tella (1999) study a similar set of issues in
a model that studies the relationship between competition and corruption.


                                                     12
Our empirical strategy proceeds in three stages. First we estimate the performance
elasticity of governor's pay. We then evaluate whether this evidence favors our reward,
position, or rent-seeking models. Lastly, we check whether democracy limits the amount
of rent-extraction; this further allows us to differentiate among the various models.
        The basic regression takes the form:


Wageit = α Performit + β Controlsit + ηi + λt + ε it


where Wageit is the log of the governor's wage in year t and state i, Performit is a measure
of performance such as the Log of Income per Capita or the Log of Tax Payments per
Capita, Controlsit is a set of controls that include the governor's age and the state's total
population, η is a state fixed effect, λ is a year fixed effect and ε is an i.i.d. error term..
This coefficient can then be compared to those obtained in similar regressions in the
literature on executive compensation, as well as comparable regressions that use
bureaucratic wages as the dependent variable.
        Conditional on finding α≠0, we investigate whether this is evidence of rent-
seeking, the public keeping the governor’s relative income constant, a reward for
performance through gubernatorial pay. A first, simple test is provided by examining
regressions of the determinants of the state Health Commissioners’ pay. The strategy is to
examine the pay of the member of the executive branch whose effort is least likely to
affect our performance outcomes, income and taxation. Accordingly, a rewards model for
this individual would predict that his/her pay should not be based on these factors.
        Our second approach is to investigate whether the governor's pay is correlated
with the component of state per capita income that is beyond the control of the governor.
The rewards model predicts that this element of income should be uncorrelated with
compensation, while both the rent-seeking and position models predict a positive
correlation. Recent empirical work in executive compensation has focused on this feature
of principal agent models that parallel the one we describe in Section I (see, for example,
Aggarwal and Samwick (1999); see Wolfers (2002) for an application of the same
techniques to gubernatorial elections). Since we are interested in a similar set of questions
related to politician pay, we closely follow their approach. This consists of re-estimating


                                               13
regression (1) with two-stage-least-squares techniques using the log of average personal
income for the state’s geographic neighbors (Log of Neighbors’ Income). Since Log of
Neighbors’ Income is observable, and presumably reflects a regional shock that cannot be
attributed to the governor’s performance, it should not affect pay, under a rewards model.
Including it would increase the risk faced by the politician (and hence average pay) and
would not improve his/her incentives to provide effort. In other words, the hypothesis is
that, once instrumented, this part of the state's income should not affect politician pay.10
Both rent extraction and position models predict a positive correlation.
         An exactly analogous approach may be followed in looking at shifts in taxation
that are beyond the control of the governor: we use tax payments of adjacent states (Log
of Neighbors’ Taxes) as a summary statistic for regional shocks to demographics,
economic circumstances, and region-specific policies that would impact the revenue-
raising requirements of a state. As in the two-stage-least-squares regressions for income,
if governor compensation is governed by the rewards model, once instrumented, tax
levels should have no impact on pay.
         In the final section of the paper we test whether democracy, broadly conceived,
limits the rent-extraction activities of politicians and intensifies the elements of public
pay-setting.11 First, we study the disciplining role of elections. Similar to Besley and
Case (1995), we check for different behavioral responses of our basic model when
governors can seek re-election and choose to do so, versus situations when they are
unable or uninterested in running. In particular, governors facing re-election may be less
inclined to seek wage increases, lest it become an election issue.
         Second, we check if the income and tax sensitivity of gubernatorial pay is affected
when the opposition party controls the state Senate. The idea is that the public makes pay
decisions through its elected officials, and that opposition parties will be more effective

10
   Another possible source of exogenous variation, utilized by Wolfers (2002), is the interaction of the price
of oil with industry shares in each state (see Wolfers (2002) for a rationale of their use as instruments).
Using this set of instruments yields even larger coefficients from state income than those reported in Table
3(B). Results available upon request. We thank Justin Wolfers for kindly providing us with the oil price
and industry share data.
11
   There already exists a very substantial literature on the role of democratic institutions in shaping
politicians’ behaviors, particularly in the area of fiscal performance. In addition to the citations discussed
in the main body of the text, some recent contributions include: on the role of re-election incentives,
Rothenberg and Sanders (2000) and Lowry, Alt, and Ferree (1998); on divided government, Poterba (1994)
and Alt and Lowry (1994); and on voter referenda, Feld and Matsusaka (2001).


                                                     14
in their control functions than same-party officials. Since the state Senate is the final
arbiter on matters of gubernatorial pay decisions, we focus on the role of this section of
the legislature. Our reasoning here is precisely analogous to the idea of the co-opting of a
board of directors by a CEO: if the board is filled with allies, there will be fewer
constraints on the CEO’s ability to set his own wage (see, for example, Newman and
Moses, 1999).
         Finally, we look at the effect of voter initiatives on the performance elasticity of
pay. Our hypothesis is that in voter initiatives states, where policy is more directly shaped
by voters, we should observe a greater weight on the public pay-setting components of
our model.      This perspective on voter initiatives is outlined in Frey (1994), which
describes the process by which voter initiatives facilitate the flow of information to the
electorate, and prevent the formation of political coalitions to extract rents from the
public. Empirically, Frey and Stutzer (2000) presents evidence that suggests that the
electorate is happier in Swiss cantons that allow for direct democracy.12


III. Basic Description of the Data and our Sources


Our basic outcome variable, the level of pay of state governors, is taken from the Book of
the States, a publication of the Council of State Governments.13 Since this is only a
biannual publication, our regressions are limited to observations from even years. This
publication has comprehensive coverage of the wages of senior elected officials and
bureaucrats from each state, and was also the source of our wage data for the Health
Commissioner for each state. To put these data into real terms, we deflated using the
Bureau of Labor Statistics’ consumer price index for urban consumers (1982 = 100). We



12
   We also examined the effect of various aspects of gubernatorial decision-making power on governor’s
pay sensitivity. In particular, we examined the effect of line item veto power, control over the budget
process, and appointment powers. We did not find any consistent effect of these powers, and a composite
measure of gubernatorial powers did not produce any significant effect. This may be a reflection of the fact
that the power vested in the governor’s office is more a function of personal factors, such as charisma, than
official powers. This is a point emphasized by Beyle (1999).
13
   Governors do receive other forms of compensation as well, such as the use of the governors’ mansion in
most states. We focus on salary since this is what is most readily observable and comparable across states,
and we assume that it constitutes the bulk of gubernatorial compensation. Analogous difficulties exist in
looking at CEO compensation; see, for example, Hall (2000).


                                                    15
also collected data on the average wage of a bureaucrat in each state, taken from the
Statistical Abstract of the U.S.14
     We use two ‘performance’ measures.               The first is the log of state personal income
per capita (again, in 1982 dollars), taken also from the Statistical Abstract of the U.S. Our
second measure of performance is taxation, which we measure using the log of total state
taxes per capita (income + sales + corporate).15                  Since these data are all available
annually, we are able to use tax and income data from odd years, between the two pay
observations, which should better reflect pay reactions to ‘performance’, rather than
contemporaneous relationships.16
     A number of covariates will also be important in the specifications below. In
particular, a common finding from the CEO pay literature is that compensation is highly
correlated with organizational size, presumably because of the greater skills required to
manage a larger and more complex firm. A parallel argument also applies in the case of
governors: the cross-sectional correlation between state population and governor’s wage
is very high (equal to 0.63 for 1990). Since population also tends to be correlated with
income and wealth, it will be important to include state population as a control.17 Life-
cycle considerations might also be important for the governor in seeking pay increases;
hence, we also collected data on governors’ ages, taken from the Book of the States. To
further probe the issue of whether compensation comes from rent-seeking or reward for
performance, we also define a variable, In Power≥ 2, that takes on a value of one in year
y if the governor had been in office in year y-2, i.e., the previous observation in our
biannual data set.
     Our section on the role of democracy in controlling the rent-seeking of politicians
will require additional data on the political situation in each state. To examine the
alignment of the governor with other politicians in the state, we define Opposition as a

14
   Unless specified, all data below are taken from the Statistical Abstract of the U.S.
15
   Using log of taxes allows for a readier interpretation of the coefficient on the tax term. Using tax rates,
or detrended tax payments, yields similar results. Also, note that all of our results are somewhat stronger if
corporate taxes are excluded; we include corporate taxes in order to be consistent with previous work.
16
   The results are similar, though slightly weaker, if we include contemporaneous values. When both
contemporaneous and lagged values are included simultaneously, the lagged effects from both variables
dominate.
17
   One could equally well argue that organizational size would be better reflected by the size of the
government bureaucracy, as measured by expenditures or employees. Using these alternatives does not
change any of the results reported below.


                                                     16
dummy variable that takes on a value of one if the governor’s political party holds less
than a majority (i.e., 50 percent) of seats in the state Senate.18 A related hypothesis looks
at the disciplining effect of elections; for this, we define the variable Upcoming Election,
which takes on a value of one if there is an election before the next observation at t=y+2
in which the current governor was able to run, and chose to do so. So, following Besley
and Case (1995), we coded upcoming elections where the governor chose not to run, or
was a lame duck, as zero.
        Finally, to examine differences in pay sensitivity in states with and without voter
initiatives, we define the dummy variable Voter Initiative, to take on a value of 1 if
legislation could be made through voter referenda in that state-year (See Matsusaka
(1995) for details). Only 3 states approved voter initiative legislation between 1950 and
1990, so there is very little within-state variation.
        In order to maintain a consistent sample over time, and to be consistent with
previous work, we limit our coverage to the 48 states that were already in existence in
1950 (i.e., we exclude Alaska and Hawaii). In order to utilize the tax data of Besley and
Case (1996), our series ends in 1990. Since, as mentioned above, we only have biannual
observations for our wage data, we are limited to looking at even years.
        Before proceeding to our regressions, it will be instructive to examine the basic
patterns present in our data, since so little quantitative work has looked at politician pay.
Table 1 shows gubernatorial wages, by state, for 1950 and 1990, in 1982 dollars. The
median wage over this period shows an increase of only about 26 percent, from 48,090 to
60,436, while real average bureaucratic wages increased by 112 percent over the same
time period.19 It is also striking to note that, while the average increased during 1950-90,
the variance across states actually declined by almost half (from $21,108 to $12,850),
indicating a very strong convergence of wages during the period.
        Figure 1A shows the median level of annual wages of our three types of
government officials for each year during 1950-1990, in 1982 dollars. Perhaps not
surprisingly, there is considerable co-movement in the wages of the governor and the

18
   This variable is not defined for Nebraska, and for some observations for Minnesota, because of the lack
of a bicameral legislature.
19
   Other top state officials experienced pay increases that, while somewhat lower than the average
bureaucratic rate of increase, were far higher than that of the governor. For example, average treasurer
wages increased by 64 percent, and average Health Commissioner wages increased by 68 percent.


                                                   17
Health Commissioner.20 However, note that these results reflect only medians; as we will
see below, there turn out to be important differences between the compensation of
governors and other public officials. Furthermore, changes in wages are not as highly
correlated: the correlation between changes in gubernatorial wages and changes in the
wages of Health Commissioners is only about 0.15. Similarly, detrended wage data are
only weakly correlated. It is also worth noting that there is much greater smoothness in
average bureaucratic wages over time. This is not surprising, since it reflects a pooling of
all individuals in state governments, and also might reflect less stickiness in wages.
        There are surprisingly frequent changes in gubernatorial salaries, with nominal
changes occurring in nearly half of the sample. However, it is also interesting to observe
that there are periods over which governors' wages decline in real terms: There are almost
no nominal declines in wages (only 6 of any magnitude in our data, one of which is
accounted for by the Massachusetts governor donating a third of his wage to charity), but
there were many periods during which wages remained constant or increased at a rate
lower than inflation. This is illustrated in Figure 1B, which shows the median level of
government officials' wages in nominal terms.
        We further investigate the timing of gubernatorial wage increases in Figures 2A-
D. In Figure 2A, which shows the average percent change in governors’ real wages over
the preceding two years, it is apparent that wages in the latter part of the period under
study increased, for the most part, every four years, thereby yielding the sawtooth pattern
illustrated in this figure. The peaks in the figure coincide with years in which there had
been recent gubernatorial elections in most states. Thus, when the sample is split into
governors approaching the ends of their terms, versus governors that were recently
elected to office, the sawtooth pattern disappears (see Figures 2B and 2C). Moreover,
when we look at the difference between these two groups, we find that wage increases are
uniformly much higher for governors not facing imminent elections. While these results
are suggestive of certain political economy explanations described above, we will defer
further interpretations to the results section below, where we may examine these patterns



20
  More generally, we find that the wages of constitutional officers and senior bureaucrats in each state
move together.


                                                  18
while appropriately controlling for other factors. Finally, we list the summary statistics
for our data in Appendix B.


IV. Empirical Results


IV.a. Basic Estimates of the Performance-Elasticity of Pay
In this section we estimate the basic relationship between gubernatorial pay and two
measures of performance. The first is the (log of) personal income per capita. Regression
(1) in Table 2A, shows the simplest specification. The coefficient on income per capita is
positive and comfortably significant. A ten percent increase in income per capita is
associated with a 4.5 percent increase in the governor's wage. This is a large elasticity: to
a first approximation it is almost twice as large as estimates obtained in the CEO
compensation literature (see, for example Murphy (1999) and Table 4 in Hall and
Liebman (1998)), in looking at the sensitivity of pay to share price.21 Regression (2)
includes the log of the governor's age and the log of population to control for the
possibility that the governor's wage is adjusted for seniority and to control for the size of
the state. This latter effect is analogous to the positive correlation between revenues and
CEO compensation that is reported among both for profit and non-profit organizations.
        As noted in the introduction, focusing solely on income as a performance measure
may be clouded by alternative interpretations. Regression (3) in Table 2A uses the Log
of Taxes per Capita in the state as a measure of performance. The coefficient is negative
and well defined. It shows that if the state's tax payments per capita increase by ten
percent, the governor's wage falls by one percent. In contrast to the income sensitivity
regressions, only the rewards model predicts this relationship. Note that, while we might
be concerned that per capita tax payments would be highly correlated with business
cycles and state income, the coefficient on tax payments is largely unchanged by the




21
   Note, however, that this elasticity is dependent on the time period chosen as pay elasticities have
increased over the past few decades. Also note that the dependent variable in Hall and Liebman (1998) is
changes in wealth, which is analogous to levels in income.


                                                  19
inclusion/exclusion of income per capita (see regression (5)). Hence, it appears that taxes
exercise an effect on wages that is independent of income.22
         As a benchmark, Table 2B estimates similar regressions for average bureaucratic
wages in the state. Regression (6) shows that the basic income elasticity of pay is about
0.28, or a little more than half the gubernatorial pay elasticity.23 Regression (7) shows
that this holds after including the log of state population to control for size effects. More
interesting are regressions (8) and (9) which show that the coefficient on state taxes has a
positive and significant effect on average bureaucratic wages. Hence, in contrast to the
results reported in the gubernatorial regressions, an increase in state taxes is associated
with higher average bureaucratic wages. This suggests that pay to top political officials
is governed by a different set of dynamics than average bureaucratic wages.


IV.b. Further Evidence using the Pay of Other Politicians and Observable Shocks
Table 3A presents the results of regressions where the dependent variable is the log of the
wage received by the Health Commissioner in the state. Regression (10) shows that there
is also a large income elasticity of pay for these officials. Since the Health Commissioner
is possibly one of the members of the executive branch that is least likely to receive
incentive pay based on state income per capita, this result is in itself suggestive that at
least some component of wage-setting is independent of performance. It could still be
argued that politicians are part of teams and that the Health Commissioner is rewarded on
state income, as is the rest of the team. Regression (11) shows that the Health
Commissioner’s wage is insensitive to the proportion of the state's population that is over
65 years of age, a variable that should be correlated with his workload. Note that the
Health Commissioner's wage is uncorrelated with per capita taxes, once again
highlighting taxation as a potential means of evaluating and awarding governors for fiscal
discipline (regressions (12) and (13)), and making the "team" interpretation suggested
above less plausible.
22
   As stressed by Wooldridge (2000), autocorrelation of errors can have different implications for the
suitability of fixed-effects in levels approaches, as described above, versus first differencing. He suggests
that, unless one has strong priors regarding the choice of model, that both be utilized, to insure robustness.
We report the log specification with fixed effects in order to be consistent with previous work on CEO
compensation. When we repeat our analyses using first differences, we obtain very similar results. These
are available from the authors upon request.
23
   But note that a standard deviation in bureaucrats’ wages is about 30 percent lower than that of governors.


                                                     20
          Table 3B studies the effect of observable changes in state income on gubernatorial
pay. Reward models suggest that agents’ pay should not be affected by changes in
performance that are due to observable factors (that are outside the agent's influence), as
this simply introduces noise. Regression (14) shows the simplest two-stage least squares
specification using the log of average per capita personal income of the state's
geographical neighbors (i.e., all adjacent states) as an instrument for the element of
income that is unaffected by gubernatorial actions.24 The coefficient on Log of income
per capita is positive, significant and marginally larger than the OLS estimate. This is
further suggestive on non-incentive based pay. The identifying assumption is that a
state's per capita personal income is affected by regional shocks that can be observed by
following the evolution of neighbors’ incomes. The first stage regression is


     Log of Inc per Capita       =    0.89     Log Neighbors’ Inc per Capita
                                     (0.03)                                              Adj R2=0.97
                                                                                         No Obs=960

where Log Neighbors’ Inc per Capita denotes the log of average personal income per
capita in the state’s geographical neighbors, and the regression includes both year and
state fixed effects.
          Regression (15) explores a potential weakness in our identifying assumption. It is
possible that neighbor's income might affect a governor's pay by other channels, namely
by providing some benchmark for relative performance evaluation. This argument
suggests that neighbor's performance belongs directly in the gubernatorial pay equation.
If this were the case, then after controlling for the state's performance, good performance
of neighbors should have a negative impact on gubernatorial pay. The point estimate,
however, is positive, though not statistically significant.
          We repeat the same exercise to further explore the structure of the tax elasticity of
pay. Again the hypothesis is that there exist observable factors that are not influenced by
any of the governor's actions that affect the state's level of taxation. An example could be
an unexpected weather disruption in the region, such as a storm or a natural disaster. The

24
   Note that we are not suggesting that, in our original wage regression, Perform is correlated with ε.
Rather, we are instrumenting for state income to look at only the component of income that is independent
of governors’ behaviors.


                                                   21
first stage regression, listed below, shows that there appear to be region-specific shocks
to taxation, as a state’s level of taxation is highly correlated with that of its neighbors
(this relationship is unaffected by the inclusion of neighbors’ income):


Log of Taxes per Capita        =    0.25 Log Neighbors’ Taxes per Capita
                                   (0.06)                                       Adj R2=0.93
                                                                                No Obs=960

where Log Neighbors’ Taxes per Capita denotes the log of the average taxes per capita in
the state’s geographical neighbors, and the regression includes both year and state fixed
effects.
           In contrast to the results on per capita income, once instrumented, we do not find
any effect of taxation on the governor’s income, as illustrated by the results in regression
(16). Thus, the data suggest that governors may in fact be rewarded for fiscal
responsibility rather than ‘lucky’ tax reductions. As in the instrumented income
regression above, it may be argued that neighbors’ taxes are a useful benchmark for
voters in judging the performance of their elected officials, and should therefore be
included directly in the performance equation. We examine this possibility in regression
(17), and do not find any evidence that this is the case.
           Taken together, these results beg the question of why only one performance
metric should be governed by reward for performance considerations. One explanation
for choosing taxation rather than income as a performance measure is that taxes are more
readily affected by the governor, and are also more easily tied to a governor’s actions.
Since taxation is a parameter that is much more within the governor’s control than overall
economic activity, this seems plausible.


IV.c. The Role of Democratic Institutions
Examining the role of democratic institutions provides an opportunity to further probe the
validity of our results on rewards for tax cuts, and will allow us to further distinguish
between the position and rent-seeking models that are both consistent with the positive
correlation between state income and gubernatorial wages. Following the results
summarized in the theory section, a decrease in the income elasticity would be consistent



                                               22
with our rent-seeking model, while an increase in this elasticity would be supportive of
the ‘position’ model. We may now investigate these possibilities by looking at the effect
of three factors that might improve democratic accountability.


Elections
In an attempt to further examine the role of financial rewards in governors’ pay, we make
the observation that an important tenet of reward for performance is that agents are
rewarded for performance that is correlated with the actions they take, not the actions
taken by their predecessors. So, if the income sensitivity of pay reflects reward for
performance we expect the point estimate of Log of income per capita to be bigger for
governors who have been in power for more than one year.25 Thus we create a variable
that takes the value 1 if the governor has been in power for at least 2 years (In Power≥2).
The same is true for the tax elasticity of pay. If governors were punished for delivering
tax increases, we would expect to see bigger effects for governors with longer tenure, as
they are presumably responsible for those increases. In this context, identifying rent-
extraction motives versus rewards is feasible. While a positive interaction effect
(Performance * In Power≥2) is consistent with both extraction and reward for
performance when performance is measured using income per capita, a negative
coefficient when taxes are used is evidence of reward-based pay. This is so because a
governor could use his experience in office to entrench himself. With taxes as a measure
of performance, a negative interaction shows that voters punish (reward) governors more
who are more likely to have been responsible for such increases (reductions). An
entrenched governor would be able to avoid pay cuts in such circumstances. Regressions
(18), (19) in Table 4A show that tenure has little effect on the income elasticity of pay,
but that it has a significant negative effect on the tax elasticity of pay. The coefficient on
taxes increases by almost 100 percent when we are dealing with governors that have been
in power for at least two years. Again, this is consistent with voters using rewards for
performance when performance is defined as tax payments.

25
  A key motivation for examining this issue comes from the observation that, shortly after Pete Wilson
took over as governor of California, he received an 18 percent increase in wage as a result of legislative
action that took place before he took office. Obviously, this wage increase could not be related to his
performance as governor.


                                                   23
         Another approach, which follows Besley and Case, looks at the role of term limits
and elections in constraining rent-seeking. Such a role for elections is suggested by the
patterns illustrated in Figure 2; we examine this issue more carefully in regressions (20)
and (21) of Table 4A. The level effect of facing re-election is significant and negative,
i.e., governors are less inclined to push for wage increases immediately prior to an
election. However, somewhat surprisingly, we do not observe any significant coefficients
on the interaction of Upcoming Election with our measures of performance: that is, we do
not observe re-election possibilities intensifying the effect of taxation, as a reward for
performance, or attenuating the rent-extracting effects from economic growth.


Separation of Powers
We also look at the effect of political opposition on the sensitivity of reward-based pay.26
Our reasoning here is precisely analogous to the idea of the co-opting of a board of
directors by a CEO: if the board is filled with allies, there will be fewer constraints on the
CEO’s ability to set his own wage. Persson, Roland and Tabellini (1997) develop this
idea in the context of indirect democracy and show that conflict of interest between
politicians in different branches of government may attenuate the rent extraction
activities of politicians. The regressions in Table 4B evaluate the hypothesis that
governors who face significant political opposition will have their pay respond more to
performance. Here, we do find significant effects that may be interpreted as increased
monitoring. The first of these regressions shows that the income elasticity of
gubernatorial pay falls by about 0.14, or approximately 25 percent, when the governor’s
party does not have a majority in the State Senate (Opposition).27 The second regression
looks at the effect of the opposition on the sensitivity of pay to taxation. We find that the
tax elasticity of the governor's wage is more than doubled when the governor’s party does


26
    For a more general discussion of gubernatorial performance when there is divided partisan control of
government, see Van Assendelft (1997).
27
   We report results using the definition of Opposition based on the presence of opposition in the Senate, as
it is the final arbiter on matters of gubernatorial pay. It also might be appropriate to account for the role of
the Lower House in setting wages, but we then get into complications of aggregating the extent of
opposition in the two Houses. If we use a standard definition of gubernatorial opposition from the political
science literature (Beyle, 1999), the evidence suggests an even stronger role of political opposition in
promoting accountability. For a comprehensive analysis of the relationship between governors and
legislatures across fifty states, see Rosenthal (1988).


                                                      24
not control the Senate.28 Thus, we find the results on tax-setting to be consistent with the
idea that controlled and monitored governors must perform well (i.e., lower taxes) in
order to increase their own wages. In contrast, the relationship between state income and
gubernatorial compensation is attenuated by the existence of a solid opposition. This is
consistent with a rent-seeking view of the state income-wage relationship. Overall, it
appears that political/democratic institutions may indeed serve an important role in
imposing discipline on gubernatorial wage-setting.


Direct Democracy
Finally, in Table 4C, we look at the effect of voter initiatives on the performance
elasticity of pay. Our hypothesis is that in voter initiatives states, where policy is more
directly shaped by voters, we should observe a greater weight on the public component of
our model, i.e., φ is lower in voter initiative states.29 In terms of taxation, the interaction
of voter initiative and log of taxes per capita implies that the tax elasticity of pay is
significantly (at the 1 percent level) larger in states that allow for voter initiatives. The
size of the coefficient implies that the tax elasticity is nearly three times greater in voter
initiative states, relative to those that do not allow voter initiatives. The results in (25) are
consistent with reduced rent-extraction relative to rewards in voter initiative states: the
interaction term on voter initiatives and log per capita income is –0.14 and significant at
the 5 percent level, implying that the elasticity of pay with respect to income is about 30
percent lower in voter initiative states relative to states without voter initiatives. This is
again in contrast to the ‘position’ model, which predicts an increased sensitivity of pay to
state income, if democracy increases.


V. Conclusion


An important tenet of modern political economy is that politicians are self-interested.
Rather than maximize social welfare, it is claimed, they seek power, ego-rents and even
bribes. Once this is recognized, a natural question arises concerning the possibility that

28
  We observe even stronger effects when we set a lower threshold for Opposition of 40 percent.
29
   This hypothesis has a precedent in the work of Matsusaka (1992), who finds that direct legislation
through voter initiatives is particularly common when representatives were unresponsive to the electorate.


                                                   25
pay may be used to motivate politicians through standard (monetary) incentive contracts.
Thus, the purpose of this paper is to study politician pay through the lens of the recent
literature on executive compensation. We focus on the pay received by state governors in
the United States, between 1950 and 1990.
       Since, to our knowledge, there is no previous published work on the topic, our
first task in the paper is to document the basic patterns in the data. This provides us with
a useful starting point. We find that governors' wage data exhibits a substantial amount of
variation, both across time and across states. It seems that the view that politicians are
paid like bureaucrats can be rejected, at least if, by the latter, we mean that politician pay
does not exhibit much variation.
       We then investigate whether these variations can be matched with state
performance indicators. We find that gubernatorial wages respond to changes in the level
of income per capita in the state and also to levels of tax payments per capita, even after
controlling for state and time fixed effects. The economic effects seem large: governors
receive a 4.5 percent increase in pay for each ten percent increase in income per capita in
their states and a 1 percent pay cut for each ten percent increase in per capita tax
payments. The income elasticity of pay is large, both in comparison to the basic elasticity
of pay of bureaucratic wages in the state (about twice as large) and compared to the basic
estimates in the CEO pay literature.
       We then investigate the forces shaping these elasticities. The income elasticity of
gubernatorial pay could be explained by three alternative stories. The first is simply that
voters attempt to keep governors at a constant position in the income distribution of the
state. The second is a variant of a principal agent model where the public rewards the
governor for good performance. The third is that the governor is simply extracting rents
when the state has more resources available. The tax elasticity of pay, on the other hand,
is inconsistent with the first and third views, and is suggestive of the second view when
voters are seen as fiscal conservatives.
       As a preliminary step in investigating the alternative hypotheses concerning the
income elasticity, we propose a simple illustrative test exploiting the fact that including
observable noise into a contract reduces the payoff to the principal (as it introduces risk
for which the agent must be compensated) and does not improve the governor's



                                             26
incentives. Since the income elasticity is still large and significant after instrumenting
income with observable shocks, it appears that this elasticity is not driven by reward for
performance (it could be rent extraction or a desire to keep the governor on a constant
position). In contrast, the tax elasticity is insignificant when it is instrumented with
similarly observable shocks, consistent with the view that it is governed by a reward-
based pay model.
       Finally, we report evidence implying that "democracy" plays an important role in
shaping gubernatorial pay. The particular form this evidence takes suggests that the
income elasticity is driven by rent extraction motives, and rejects the notion that a desire
to keep the governor in a constant position in the distribution of income plays an
important role. The evidence on the role of democratic institutions is again confirmatory
of the hypothesis that the tax elasticity is driven by a rewards model. We find that having
the state Senate dominated by the opposition party doubles the tax elasticity of
gubernatorial pay and reduces the income elasticity of pay by about one third, a result
that is consistent with the model of separation of powers and political accountability
proposed by Persson, Roland and Tabellini (1997). Furthermore, states with ‘direct’
democracy, in the form of voter initiatives, have higher tax elasticities and lower income
elasticities of gubernatorial pay than states that do not allow such initiatives.
       Overall, these results are the following:
   1. Gubernatorial pay is correlated with economic performance. The elasticities are
       large.
   2. There is strong evidence that the tax elasticity reflects reward for performance
       motives. There is suggestive evidence that the income elasticity of pay is
       governed by rent extraction motives.
   3. Democratic institutions play a quantitatively large role shaping gubernatorial pay.


   Collectively, the evidence suggests that examining the nature of politicians’ pay
maybe an empirically fruitful approach to understanding the behavior of politicians.




                                              27
                    Figure 1: Median Wages of Government Officers and Bureaucrats, 1950-1990
                                               (in 1982 dollars)

                   90000
                   80000
                   70000
Salary (nominal)




                   60000
                   50000
                   40000
                   30000
                   20000
                   10000
                       0
                           1950              1960                1970         1980               1990
                                                                 Year
                              Governor         Average State Bureaucrat    Health Commissioner



                   80000

                   70000

                   60000
 Salary (1982$)




                   50000

                   40000

                   30000

                   20000

                   10000

                       0
                           1950              1960                1970         1980               1990
                                                                 Year

                                  Governor      Average State Bureaucrat   Health Commissioner




                                                        28
29
                                                              Figure 2A: Average Biannual Salary Increases, all Governors

                              0.4
 Percentage Change in Real




                              0.3
       ($1982) Salary




                              0.2

                              0.1

                                0
                                    1950                         1960                          1970                         1980               1990
                             -0.1
                                                                                               Year


                                                             Figure 2B: Average Biannual Salary Increases, Governors not
                                                                                   Facing Election

                             0.4
Percentage Change in
 Real ($1982) Salary




                             0.3

                             0.2

                             0.1

                               0
                                    1950                         1960                          1970                         1980               1990
                             -0.1
                                                                                               Year


                                                             Figure 2C: Average Biannual Salary Increases, Governors with
                                                                                Election within 2 years

                             0.4
Percentage Change in
 Real ($1982) Salary




                             0.3

                             0.2

                             0.1

                               0
                                    1950                         1960                          1970                         1980               1990
                             -0.1
                                                                                               Year


                                           Figure 2D: Difference in percentage change in governor salaries: Those not facing elections minus
                                                                                 those facing elections

                             0.4
Difference in percentage




                             0.3

                             0.2
         change




                             0.1

                               0
                                    1950                         1960                          1970                         1980               1990
                             -0.1
                                                                                               Year




                                                                                          30
                Table 1: Governors’ Wages in 1950 and 1990 (1982 dollars)


        State            1950      1990                  State        1950     1990

Alabama                 24,928    53,744        Nebraska             41,547    44,390
Arizona                41,547     57,400        Nevada               31,576    54,229
Arkansas               41,547     26,787        New Hampshire        24,928    57,977
California             103,867    65,054        New Jersey           83,094    65,054
Colorado               41,547     53,574        New Mexico           41,547    68,880
Connecticut            49,856     59,696        New York             103,867   99,494
Delaware               31,160     61,227        North Carolina       62,320    94,136
Florida                49,856     77,209        North Dakota         24,928    49,897
Georgia                49,856     68,017        Ohio                 54,011    49,747
Idaho                  31,160     42,093        Oklahoma             27,005    53,574
Illinois               49,856     71,380        Oregon               41,547    59,314
Indiana                33,237     59,079        Pennsylvania         103,867   65,054
Iowa                    49,856    55,487        Rhode Island         62,320    52,808
Kansas                 33,237     55,974        South Carolina       31,160    64,975
Kentucky                41,547    53,368        South Dakota         35,315    46,547
Louisiana              49,856     50,586        Tennessee            49,856    65,054
Maine                  41,547     53,574        Texas                49,856    71,507
Maryland               16,619     65,054        Utah                 31,160    53,567
Massachusetts          83,094     57,400        Vermont              35,315    58,012
Michigan               93,480     81,654        Virginia             62,320    65,054
Minnesota              49,856     79,488        Washington           62,320    74,008
Mississippi            41,547     57,859        West Virginia        41,547    55,104
Missouri               41,547     67,764        Wisconsin            51,934    65,933
Montana                31,160     39,578        Wyoming              33,237    53,574
                                                Average              48,090    60,436
                                                Standard Deviation   21,108    12,850




                                           31
            Table 2A: Gubernatorial Pay Regressions, 48 US States, 1950-90


                             (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)

Log Inc per Capita          0.458        0.507                                   0.527
                           (0.117)      (0.113)                                 (0.114)

Log Age                                  0.031                      0.033        0.036
                                        (0.042)                    (0.049)      (0.042)

Log Population                           0.199                      0.147        0.173
                                        (0.047)                    (0.049)      (0.050)

Log Taxes per Capita                                  -0.106       -0.083       -0.099
                                                      (0.037)      (0.038)      (0.039)



Year Fixed effects           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes
State Fixed Effects          Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes

No of Observations          960           960          960          960           960
Adj. R2                     0.93          0.93         0.93         0.93          0.93

Note: Dependent Variable: Log of Governor’s Wage. Robust standard errors in parentheses.
            Table 2B: Bureaucratic Wage Regressions, 48 US States, 1950-90


                                   (6)              (7)           (8)            (9)

Log Inc per Capita                0.272            0.282                        0.274
                                 (0.026)          (0.025)                      (0.025)

Log Population                                     0.044        0.041           0.054
                                                  (0.011)      (0.012)         (0.011)

Log Taxes per Capita                                            0.047           0.038
                                                               (0.009)         (0.008)



Year Fixed effects                Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes
State Fixed Effects               Yes              Yes           Yes            Yes

No of Observations                960              960           960            960
Adj. R2                           0.99             0.99          0.99           0.99

Note: Dependent Variable: Log of Governor’s Wage. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                             33
     Table 3A: Health Commissioner’s Pay Regressions, 48 US States, 1950-90


                                (10)            (11)           (12)            (13)

Log Inc per Capita             0.527                                          0.564
                              (0.115)                                        (0.117)

Proportion Age >65                              -0.240                        -1.027
                                               (0.823)                       (0.872)

Log Taxes per Capita                                          -0.000          -0.022
                                                             (0.039)         (0.041)

Log Population                                                                -0.001
                                                                             (0.061)



Year Fixed effects              Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes
State Fixed Effects             Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes

No of Observations              960             960            960             960
Adj. R2                         0.95            0.95           0.93            0.94

Note: Dependent Variable: Log of Health Commissioner’s Wage. Robust standard errors in
parentheses.




                                          34
         Table 3B: Noise Elasticity of Gubernatorial Pay, 48 US States, 1950-90


                                    (14)           (15)            (16)           (17)
                                   2SLS            OLS            2SLS            OLS

Instrument                          Neighbors’ Income              Neighbors’ Taxes

Log Inc per Capita                  0.573          0.349
                                   (0.149)        (0.172)

Neighbors Inc. per Capita                          0.200
                                                  (0.199)

Log Taxes per Capita                                              -0.033         -0.109
                                                                 (0.285)         (0.365)

Neighbors Taxes per Capita                                                        0.018
                                                                                 (0.088)



Year Fixed effects                  Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes
State Fixed Effects                 Yes             Yes            Yes            Yes

No of Observations                  960            960             960            960
Adj. R2                             0.93           0.93            0.92           0.93

Note: Dependent Variable: Log of Governor’s Wage. Robust standard errors in parentheses.




                                             35
        Table 4A: Accountability and the Electoral Cycle, 48 US States, 1950-90


                                      (18)            (19)            (20)            (21)

Log Inc per Capita                   0.532                           0.525
                                    (0.117)                         (0.115)

Log of Taxes per Capita                              -0.049                         -0.079
                                                    (0.043)                         (0.038)

Log of Population                    0.201           0.153           0.198           0.145
                                    (0.047)         (0.049)         (0.047)         (0.049)

In Power ≥2                         -0.027          -0.026
                                    (0.013)         (0.013)

Upcoming Election                                                   -0.033          -0.030
                                                                    (0.014)         (0.014)

In Power ≥ 2 * Log Inc              -0.044
               per Capita           (0.042)

In Power ≥ 2 * Log Taxes                            -0.046
               per Capita                           (0.024)

Upcoming Election *                                                 -0.030
Log Inc per Capita                                                  (0.046)

Upcoming Election *                                                                 -0.010
Log Taxes per Capita                                                                (0.025)



Year Fixed effects                    Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes
State Fixed Effects                   Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

No of Observations                    960             960             960             960
Adj. R2                               0.93            0.93            0.93            0.93

Note: Dependent Variable: Log of Governor’s Wage. Robust standard errors in parentheses. Both
income and tax data are demeaned, to allow for the interpretation of coefficients on Upcoming
Election and Opposition as the effect on an observation with an average level of income or taxes.




                                               36
          Table 4B: The Role of the Opposition, 48 US States, 1950-90


                                                (22)                      (23)

Log Inc per Capita                              0.442
                                               (0.121)

Log of Taxes per Capita                                                  -0.082
                                                                        (0.041)

Log of Population                               0.213                    0.153
                                               (0.046)                  (0.048)

Opposition                                      0.006                    0.504
                                               (0.015)                  (0.171)

Opposition *                                   -0.141
Log Inc per Capita                             (0.052)

Opposition *                                                            -0.084
Log Taxes per Capita                                                    (0.041)

Year Fixed effects                              Yes                       Yes
State Fixed Effects                             Yes                       Yes

No of Observations                              929                      929
Adj. R2                                         0.93                     0.93

Note: Dependent Variable: Log of Governor’s Wage. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. Both income and tax data are demeaned, to allow for the interpretation of
coefficients on Upcoming Election and Opposition as the effect on an observation
with an average level of income or taxes.




                                          37
          Table 4C: The Role of Voter Initiatives, 48 US States, 1950-90


                                                (24)                     (25)

  Log Inc per Capita                           0.469
                                              (0.109)

  Log of Taxes per Capita                                               -0.058
                                                                       (0.041)

  Log of Population                            0.228                    0.188
                                              (0.049)                  (0.052)

  Voter Initiative                            -0.053                   -0.093
                                              (0.040)                  (0.039)

  Voter Initiative *                          -0.143
  Log Inc per Capita                          (0.052)

  Voter Initiative *                                                   -0.094
  Log Taxes per Capita                                                 (0.027)



  Year Fixed effects                            Yes                      Yes
  State Fixed Effects                           Yes                      Yes

  No of Observations                            929                      929
  Adj. R2                                       0.93                     0.93

Note: Dependent Variable: Log of Governor’s Wage. Robust standard errors in
parentheses. Both income and tax data are demeaned, to allow for the interpretation of
coefficients on Voter Initiative as the effect on an observation with an average level of
income or taxes.




                                           38
Appendix A: Definition of Variables

Log of Governor's Wage: The logarithm of the governor’s wage (benefits not included),
in 1982 dollars. Source: Book of the States

Log Inc per Capita: The logarithm of state income per capita, in 1982 dollars. Source:
Statistical Abstract of the United States

Log Taxes per Capita: Log of total state taxes per capita. This includes income, sales,
and corporate taxes. Derived from Statistical Abstract of the United States

Log Age: The logarithm of the governor’s age in the current year. Source: Book of the
States

Log Population: The logarithm of total state population. Source: Statistical Abstract of
the United States

Log of Health Commissioner’s Wage: The logarithm of the Health Commissioner’s
wage (benefits not included), in 1982 dollars. Source: Book of the States

Proportion Age>65: Percentage of the population that is greater than 65 years of age.
Source: Statistical Abstract of the U.S.

Log of Bureaucratic Wages: The logarithm of the average annual wage of state and local
bureaucrats, in 1982 dollars. Source: Statistical Abstract of the U.S.

Log of Neighbors Inc per Capita: Log of the average level of State income per capita of
the states that are geographically adjacent.

Log of Neighbors Taxes per Capita: Log of the average level of Taxes per Capita of the
states that are geographically adjacent.

In Power ≥2: Dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the governor was in power in the
previous observed time period, i.e., two years prior.

Opposition: Dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if the governor’s party has below a
certain threshold in the state Senate (cutoffs of 30, 40, and 50 percent).

Upcoming Election: Dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if there is an election within
2 years, in which the governor was able to run, and chose to do so.

Voter Initiative: Dummy variable taking on a value of 1 if policy may be set through
direct voter initiative.
Appendix B: Summary Statistics


                                               Std.
                                      Mean     Dev.     Min.      Max      Obs.


Governor's Wage                       65,346   23,713   16,619   203,275   960

Log of Governor's Wage                11.03     0.35     9.72     12.22    960

Age of Governor                       51.53     7.72     34        73      960

State Income Per Capita               8,785    2,642    2,917    18,808    960

Log(State Income Per Capita)           9.03     0.32     7.98     9.84     960

State Population (1000’s)             4,131    4,281     163     28,100    960

Log(State Population)                 14.76     1.01    12.00     17.15    960

State Taxes Per Capita                435.58   215.72    70.44   1157.23   960

Log(State Taxes Per Capita)            5.94     0.55     4.25     7.05     960

Health Commissioner's Wage            55,904   15,614   18,835   108,751   960

Log(Health Commissioner's Wage)       10.89     0.30     9.84     11.60    960

Average Bureaucrats' Wage             17,202   4,067    7,129    28,279    960

Log(Avg Bureaucrats' Wage)             9.72     0.25     8.87     10.25    960

Log of Neighbors’ Income per Capita   10.74     0.49     8.95     11.76    960

Log of Neighbors’ Taxes per Capita     7.28     0.68     4.61     8.50     960

Opposition                             0.36     0.47      0        1       929

In Power ≥ 2                           0.64     0.48      0        1       960

Upcoming Election                      0.37     0.49      0        1       960




                                        40
References
Ades, A. and R. Di Tella (1999) "Rents, Competition and Corruption", American
       Economic Review, 89 (4), 982-94.
Aggarwal, Rajesh and Andrew Samwick (1999) "The Other Side of the Trade-Off: The
       Impact of Risk on Executive Compensation", Journal of Political Economy,
       107(1), 65-105.
Alesina, A., N. Roubini and G. Cohen (1997) Political Cycles and Macroeconomics, The
       MIT Press.
Alt, James, and Robert Lowry (1994) "Divided Government and Budget Deficits:
       Evidence from the state,” American Political Science Review, 88, 811-28.
Anderson, Barbara (1999). “Raise our pay by cutting taxes.” Boston Herald, November
       11.
Barro,Robert (1973). “The Control of Politicians: An Economic Model.” Public Choice,
       14: 19-42.
Besley, Tim and Anne Case (1995) "Does Electoral Accountability Affect Economic
       Policy Choices? Evidence from Gubernatorial Term Limits, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, 110(3), 769-99.
Besley, Tim and Anne Case (1996) "Incumbent Behavior: Vote Seeking, Tax Setting and
       Yardstick Competition, American Economic Review, 85(1), 24-45.
Beyle, Thad (1992) "Term Limits in the State Executive Branch", In Limiting Legislative
       Terms, eds. Gerald Benjamin, and Michael Malbin, Washington, D.C.: CQ Press.
Beyle, Thad L. (1999) “The Governors,” in Politics in the American States 7th ed., eds.
       Virginia Gray, Russel Hanson, and Herbert Jacobs, Congressional Quarterly
       Press, 191-231.
Fair, Ray (1978) "The Effect of Economic Events on Votes for President", Review of
       Economics and Statistics, 6 (2), 159-73.
Feld, Lars and John Matsusaka (2001) “Budget Referendums and Government Spending:
       Evidence from Swiss Cantons," manuscript, USC.
Ferejohn, John (1986). "Incumbent Performance and Electoral Control," Public Choice
       50: 5-25.
Frey, Bruno (1994) “'Direct Democracy: Politico-Economic Lessons from Swiss
       Experience”. American Economic Review, Vo. 84 (2), pp. 339-42.
Frey, Bruno and Friedrich Schneider (1978a) "An Empirical Study of Politico-Economic
       Interaction in the United States", Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 6 (2),
       174-83.
Frey, Bruno and Friedrich Schneider, (1978b) "A Politico-Economic Model of the United
       Kingdom", Economic Journal, Vol. 88 (350), pp. 243-53.
Frey, Bruno and Alois Stutzer (2000). “Happiness, Economy and Institutions”. Economic
       Journal, vol. 110 (466), pp. 918-938.
Hall, Brian and Kevin Murphy (2000). "Optimal Exercise Prices for Executive Stock
       Options." American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 90 (2) 209-214.
Hall, Brian and Jeffrey Liebman (1998) "Are CEO's Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?",
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, pp. 653-691.
Hart, Oliver (1983) "The Market Mechanism as an Incentive Scheme", The Bell Journal
       of Economics, 14, 366-382.



                                           41
Holmstrom, Bengt (1979). "Moral Hazard and Observability," The Bell Journal of
        Economics 10, Spring, 74-91.
Jensen, Michael , and Kevin Murphy (1990). ‘‘Performance Pay and Top Management
        Incentives.’’ Journal of Political Economy, XCVIII, 225–264.
Law, Steve (2001). “State constitutional changes challenged.” Statesman Journal, July
        25.
Lowry, Robert, James Alt and Karen Ferree (1998). “Fiscal Policy Outcomes and
        Electoral Accountability in American States,” American Political Science Review,
        92, 759-74.
Matsusaka, John (1992) "Economics of Direct Legislation," Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 108: 541-571.
Matsusaka, John (1995) "Fiscal Effects of the Voter Initiative: Evidence from the Last 30
        Years," Journal of Political Economy, 103: 587-623.
Murphy, Kevin J. (1999), “Executive Compensation,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David
        Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, North Holland.
NGA (National Governors' Association) (1987) "The Institutional Powers of the
        Governorship, 1965-85", State Management Notes, Washington D.C.
Newman, Harry, and Haim Moses (1999) “Does the Composition of the Compensation
        Committee Influence CEO Compensation Practices?” Financial Management,
        28(3), Autumn 1999.
Niemi, Richard, Harold Stanley, and Ronald Vogel (1995). “State Economies and State
        Taxes: Do Voters Hold Governors Responsible?” American Political Science
        Review 77: 675-89.
Peltzman, Sam (1992) "Voters as Fiscal Conservatives" Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        107 (2), 327-61.
Persson, Torsten; Gerard Roland and Guido Tabellini (1997). “Separation of Powers and
        Political Accountability”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, 1163-1202.
Poterba, James (1994). “State Responses to Fiscal Crises: The Effects of Budgetary
        Institutions and Politics, Journal of Political Economy,” 102(4), 799-821.
Rosenthal, Alan (1988). The Governor and the Legislature, Washington, D.C.: CQ Press.
Lawrence S. Rothenberg, Mitchell S. Sanders (2000). “Severing the Electoral
        Connection: Shirking in the Contemporary Congress,” American Journal of
        Political Science, Vol. 44(2), 316-325.
Schmidt, Klaus (1997) "Managerial Incentives and Product Market Competition", Review
        of Economic Studies, Vol. 64, 191-214.
Tirole, Jean (1994) "The Internal Organization of Government", Oxford Economic
        Papers, 46: 1-29.
Van Assendelft, Laura (1997) Governors, Agenda Setting and Divided Government,
        Lanham, MD:University Press of America.
Webb, Sara (2000) "Singaporeans protest pay increases granted to government officials,"
        Singaporeans for Democracy Website, August.
Wittman, Donald (1989) “Why Democracies Produce Efficient Results”, Journal of
        Political Economy, 97: 1395-1427.
Wolfers, Justin (2002). “Are Voters Rational? Evidence from Gubernatorial Elections.”
        Stanford University, mimeo.




                                           42
Wooldridge, Jeffrey (2000) Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach, Cincinatti,
      OH: South-Western College.




                                        43
