                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     SURVIVAL OF THE BEST FIT: COMPETITION FROM LOW WAGE COUNTRIES
         AND THE (UNEVEN) GROWTH OF US MANUFACTURING PLANTS


                                          Andrew B. Bernard
                                          J. Bradford Jensen
                                            Peter K. Schott


                                          Working Paper 9170
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9170


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




We thank Rob Feenstra, Gordon Hanson, and Bruce Blonigen for helpful suggestions. The research in this
paper was conducted at the Center for Economic Studies. Research results and conclusions expressed are
those of the authors and do not necessarily indicate concurrence by the Bureau of the Census or by the
National Bureau of Economic Research. The paper has not undergone the review the Census Bureau gives
its official publications. It has been screened to insure that no confidential data are revealed. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2002 by Andrew B. Bernard, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Survival of the Best Fit: Competition from Low Wage Countries and the (Uneven)
Growth of US Manufacturing Plants
Andrew B. Bernard, J. Bradford Jensen, and Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 9170
September 2002
JEL No. F11, F14, L25, L60
                                          ABSTRACT

   We examine the relationship between import competition from low wage countries and the
reallocation of US manufacturing from 1977 to 1997. Both employment and output growth are slower
for plants that face higher levels of low wage import competition in their industry. As a result, US
manufacturing is reallocated over time towards industries that are more capital and skill intensive.
Differential growth is driven by a combination of increased plant failure rates and slower growth of
surviving plants. Within industries, low wage import competition has the strongest effects on the least
capital and skill intensive plants. Surviving plants that switch industries move into more capital and
skill intensive sectors when they face low wage competition.



Andrew B. Bernard                                                 J. Bradford Jensen

Tuck School of Business                                           Center for Economic Studies

Dartmouth College                                                 Bureau of the Census

100 Tuck Hall                                                     8905 Presidential Parkway

Hanover, NH 03755                                                 Suite 206

andrew.b.bernard@dartmouth.edu                                    Upper Marlboro, MD 20772

and NBER                                                          and University of Maryland
                                                                  John.Bradford.Jensen@census.gov



Peter K. Schott
Yale School of Management
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
peter.schott@yale.edu
                        Survival of the Best Fit                            2


1.   Introduction

    This paper is about the eﬀect of international trade on the reallocation
of activity within US manufacturing. Two trends have dominated this
sector over the past 30 years. First, the manufacturing share of employment
has fallen sharply while the manufacturing share of real output has fallen far
less. Second, the composition of industries within manufacturing has tilted
towards the production of capital and skill intensive sectors: T-shirts and
televisions are out, peripherals and pharmaceuticals are in. International
trade is a prime suspect in these trends. Indeed, as the US has dropped
its trade barriers, low wage countries like China and India have begun
exporting to the US many of the more labor-intensive products it formerly
produced at home. This sort of product cycling — where the US moves out
of televisions as developing countries gain the know-how and market access
needed to move in — is a key feature of standard trade models. Given their
cost disadvantages, it is virtually impossible for US firms in the most labor
intensive industries to survive head-to-head competition with firms from
the world’s most labor abundant economies.
    In this paper we address three simple questions. First, is employment
and output growth disproportionately lower for US manufacturing plants
that face increasing import competition from the poorest countries? Sec-
ond, in the face of such competition, do plants grow more quickly if they are
more capital and skill intensive? Finally, is there evidence that US firms
change their product mix in response to low wage competition? Thus,
rather than focusing on whether overall imports result in job loss or output
declines, we seek evidence of a reallocation of manufacturing away from
plants and industries which are theoretically most at risk from low wage
imports.
    Our analysis of a comprehensive set of US manufacturing plants from
1977 to 1997 yields results that are both strong and intuitive. First, we
find that employment and output grow more slowly for plants in industries
facing higher levels of low wage competition. Second, we find that higher
plant capital and skill intensity mitigate the eﬀect of low wage industry
competition. These findings are a combination of two trends. The first is
diﬀerential growth across surviving plants. The second is a positive cor-
relation between plant death and the level of competition in its associated
industry.
                        Survival of the Best Fit                             3


    We also examine plants that switch industries over time to gauge the
extent to which plants alter their product mix in response to low wage
competition. Consistent with the hypotheses of standard trade theory, we
find that the average capital and skill intensity of destination industries
exceeds the capital and skill intensity of the industries left behind. In
addition, plants leaving industries which face higher levels of low wage
import competition are more likely to move into sectors with higher capital
and skill intensities. Both results are consistent with the idea that plants
attempt to upgrade their product mix as low wage competition intensifies.
    Our investigation into the reallocation of manufacturing industries is
unique in two respects. First, we gauge the degree of low wage competition
in an industry via the share of total import value and the share of industry
products originating in countries with less than 5% of US per capita GDP.
These measures have several advantages over traditional measures of import
competition. Most important, they focus on where imports originate rather
than their magnitude. In addition, they measure competition in terms of
both product value and within-industry product diversity, an important
consideration given the coarseness of industry aggregates.
    We focus on import competition from the poorest countries precisely
because imports from these countries represent the cleanest test of the pre-
dictions of endowment-based trade theory. These countries also represent
the fastest growing component of total imports to the US, increasing their
share of the US market more than 6-fold from 1972-1992.
    Our analysis is also unique in that it focuses on plants rather than indus-
tries, an important advantage given the significant heterogeneity of plants
within the same industry. This variation can aﬀect a plant’s susceptibil-
ity to industry-level competition. Variation in factor input intensity, for
example, can signal variation in product mix: if the most capital and skill
intensive plants in Optical Instruments produce microscopes rather than
magnifying glasses, they may compete less directly with Optical Instru-
ment firms from labor abundant countries. By considering both plant and
industry characteristics, we provide a more complete analysis of the link
between employment, output and international trade.
    This paper is related to research in international trade and labor eco-
nomics that studies the eﬀects of imports on employment. The earliest
of these eﬀorts, which are generally restricted to just one or a few indus-
                       Survival of the Best Fit                           4


tries over a relatively short period of time, find little or no association
between international competition and employment growth (e.g. Krueger
1980; Grossman 1987; Mann 1988). More recent eﬀorts, examining larger
sets of industries, however, have found relatively strong links between em-
ployment growth and either import penetration or changes in import price
indexes. Freeman and Katz (1991), for example, find that a 10% increase
in import penetration coincides with a 5% decline in employment in their
study of 428 four-digit Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) industries
during 1958 to 1984. Revenga (1992), on the other hand, uses an instru-
mental variables approach to mitigate endogeneity concerns and reports
employment declines of roughly 3% in response to a 10% drop in import
prices. Research by Sachs and Shatz (1994) on the factor content of 131
out of 140 three digit SIC manufacturing industries suggests that roughly
6% of the decline in manufacturing employment between 1978 and 1990
is due to imports from a large set of developing countries. We find that
an increase of 10 percentage points in the share of industry imports from
low wage countries lowers employment growth at the average plant by 1.3
percentage points per year.
    Our research also relates to various studies of the attributes and post-
employment experience of workers who lose their jobs in mass layoﬀs and
plant closures (Kletzer 2000). Consistent with our findings, these workers
tend to be less skilled than the average worker, and disproportionately
drawn from manufacturing industries.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. The next section
summarizes the theoretical framework guiding our analysis and outlines
testable hypotheses. Sections 3 and 4 describe how we construct our low
wage import competition measures and summarize our dataset. Section
5 presents the main results on manufacturing reallocation and industry
switching. Section 6 concludes.

2.   Theory

   A key implication of standard trade models is that a country’s product
mix is a function of its level of development. In the factor proportions
framework, development is measured via relative endowments: relatively
capital and skill abundant countries like the US are expected to produce a
                        Survival of the Best Fit                              5


more capital and skill intensive mix of goods than relatively labor abundant
countries like China. The standard diagram for depicting this equilibrium
is displayed in the left panel of Figure 1, which illustrates the relative
development of two countries — the US and China — in a world of two factors
and multiple goods. Each good is represented by a Leontief-technology
unit value isoquant; goods prices identify relative wages, which anchor
negatively sloped isocost lines.
    In the figure, the US oﬀers high wages relative to capital costs (wUS /rUS )
due to its capital abundance. As a result, US production of labor inten-
sive Apparel and Textiles is unprofitable. The negative profits that would
be earned by firms in those sectors can be seen by comparing the amount
of capital and labor that can be bought for one dollar in the US versus
the amount of capital and labor needed to produce one dollar’s worth of
Apparel or Textile output. Relatively high capital costs in China, on
the other hand, render production of capital intensive Chemicals and Ma-
chinery unprofitable in China. Though Figure 1 builds intuition for these
relationships using just two factors, results are easily generalized to a world
of many factors and goods (Leamer 1987).
    Industry reallocation can be driven by the removal of trade barriers. As
the US opens its markets to imports from developing countries, the output
of the formerly protected industries is expected to decline and eventually
disappear. The logic of this reallocation can be seen by comparing the
right and left panels of Figure 1. In the right panel, trade barriers result
in higher US prices for Apparel and Textiles, represented by unit value
isoquants that are closer to the origin (where less capital and labor are
required to produce a dollar’s worth of output). As trade barriers fall, the
US moves toward the equilibrium depicted in the left panel, where as noted
above, production of Apparel and Textiles are not viable. It is of course
possible for firms in formerly protected industries to survive by improving
productivity. On the other hand, the magnitude of productivity gains
required to overcome competition from the world’s lowest wage countries
is considerable and is likely to be confined to industries of medium capital
and skill intensity rather than extreme labor intensity.
    Consideration of this model leads to several predictions about plant
performance and plant and industry characteristics. Our primary interest
is in the prediction of the theory about the response of plant growth to
                         Survival of the Best Fit                               6


low wage competition. We focus on responses by the average plant in the
industry as well as the interaction between low wage competition and plant
input characteristics.

Hypothesis 1 Plant growth is decreasing in industries where low wage
countries have comparative advantage.

    This cross-industry hypothesis follows directly from Figure 1. It pre-
dicts that plant growth will be lower where the share of imports from low
wage countries is higher.1

Hypothesis 2 Within industries experiencing competition from low wage
countries, plant growth is increasing in plant capital and skill intensity and
plant productivity.

    This is a within-industry hypothesis that assumes plant input tech-
niques are correlated with underlying product variation: labor intensive
plants produce labor intensive goods most likely to be in direct competition
with firms from low wage countries. This view of plant input intensities
controls for the arbitrary coarseness of four digit SIC industry aggregates.
Schott (2002a) documents a positive correlation across countries between
the techniques used to manufacture goods and the prices they command
in the US market. As a result, we expect higher capital and skill inten-
sity within industries to mitigate industry competition: within the textile
industry, for example, manufacturing should shift toward capital intensive
Gore-Tex and away from labor intensive cotton.

3.       Measuring Low Wage Import Competition

    Following Schott (2002b), we construct three measures of low wage
country competition at the industry level using product-level import data
compiled by Feenstra (1996). An important attribute of these measures is
their emphasis on where imports originate rather than the overall level of
     1
   The strong prediction of the model is that imports from low wage countries will
completely eliminate the aﬀected plants and industries.
                          Survival of the Best Fit                                 7


import activity. The first measure, referred to as the value share or V SH,
captures low wage country competition in value terms and is computed as
                                      P
                                          Mic
                                      c∈L
                            V SHi = P         ,                          (1)
                                          Mic
                                           c∈C

where Mic is US import value of industry i from country c in year t and L
is the set of low wage countries in year t.2 This measure yields the share of
an industry’s import value that comes from low wage countries. It does not
measure the level of imports from low wage countries.3 In our empirical
work below, we avoid problems with annual fluctuations in this measure
by averaging across inter-Census years: the value share for industry i in
Census year t is the average of V SHi across years t − 5 to t − 1.
    The second competition measure, referred to as the product share or
P SH, is a coverage ratio measuring the fraction of products within an
industry that originate in low wage countries,
                                             NiL
                                  P SHi =        ,                               (2)
                                             Ni
where Ni is the total number of products in industry i and NiL is the number
of products imported from at least one low wage country in that industry.
Together, V SHi and P SHi capture industry competition along both the
intensive (size) and extensive (breadth) margins. Our definition of a prod-
uct is the ten digit Harmonized System (HS) level of aggregation, which
is the most finely-detailed import data available. The average number of
products across manufacturing industries ranges from 21 in 1972 to 33 in
1992. As with the value share, we use five year averages of the product
share in our empirical work below.
    Finally, we construct an interaction of our two share measures to capture
the overall level of import competition from low wage countries,
                           P V SHi = P SHi × V SHi .                             (3)
   2
     Throughout the paper, we refer to value share and product share as measures of
competition from low wage countries. We recognize that this may be a non-standard
use of the term “competition” which usually denotes pressure on prices and we discuss
the relationship between our measures and import prices below.
   3
     The total volume of imports may also be of interest and we consider a measure of
import penetration in the robustness section below.
                           Survival of the Best Fit                                    8


We are able to compute each competition measure for 385 of 459 SIC4
industries.4
    We classify countries as low wage if they have less than 5% of US per
capita GDP.5 A list of countries fitting this criteria is reported in Table 1.
We choose a 5% cutoﬀ for several reasons. Most important, it represents
the cohort of countries most likely to have an eﬀect on US manufacturing
plants given the theory laid out in Section 2. Second, though this cohort
of countries is responsible for a relatively small level of exports, it accounts
for a significant share of US import growth among the broader set of less
developed countries.6 Third, it provides a relatively stable set of countries
over the 1972 to 1992 period we consider.
    One potential concern with using the 5% cutoﬀ is that our measures are
correlated with industry value and product shares for other groups of coun-
tries that are more important competitors for US firms. In fact, the value
and product shares for our definition of low wage countries are relatively
uncorrelated with analogous shares for alternate country cohorts. Table
2 displays the correlation of low wage value and product shares with the
value and product shares for the OECD, the Asian Tigers and three defini-
tions of “middle income” countries. As indicated in the first column, low
wage value shares are negatively correlated with OECD value shares and
have low or negative correlations with the remaining cohorts. Correlations
are higher for the product share measure, particularly with respect to the
Asian Tigers and the lower “middle income” cohorts. However, the third
column reveals that overall competition, as measured via the interaction
of intensive and extensive margins, is again negatively correlated with the
shares of the OECD and high “middle income” countries and only weakly
correlated with the other three groups.
    As indexes of import competition, V SH and P SH have significant ad-
   4
     Mapping products to four digit industries involves the use of several imperfect con-
cordances (Schott 2002b). These imperfections reduce the number of industries for which
V SHi and P SHi can be calculated.
   5
     We use current real exchange rates to perform the conversion to US$ rather than
a PPP exchange rate. For such low levels of income the use of current rates does not
change the list of countries below the cutoﬀ, while using PPP exchange rates sharply
limits the available number of countries and years due to the lack of available data.
   6
     Among countries with less than 30% of US per capita GDP, the cohort of countries
with less than 5% experienced the largest increase in import share, by far, between 1972
and 1992.
                            Survival of the Best Fit                                       9


vantages and some disadvantages over existing measures. An important
advantage is that they are largely robust to shocks aﬀecting both domestic
production and imports. Import penetration ratios (defined as imports di-
vided by domestic production plus imports less exports) can induce negative
correlation with plant output and employment growth due to the presence
of domestic production in the denominator. Two additional advantages
are that V SH and P SH are available for very disaggregate industries over
a long time horizon, and that they capture competition in terms of both
value and product coverage.
    An important disadvantage of V SH and P SH is that they are not
measures of true competition because they track low wage country presence
rather than their eﬀect on prices. However, Feenstra (1994) shows that
while V SHi is not a price index, it can vary inversely to the industry
import price index that one would want to observe.7 Existing import
price indexes are less than ideal for a couple of reasons. First, in terms
of practical usage, they are available only for a small number of years and
only for very aggregate industries. Second, they generally ignore the impact
of new varieties, which can bias them upwards and understate competition
(Feenstra 1994). The inclusion of the P SHi measure allows us to indirectly
measure the introduction of new varieties from low wage countries.
   7
    Feenstra (1994) shows that V SHi can be related to import prices. Suppose the
minimum cost of obtaining one unit of services from variety j from country n is given by
                                    "                 # 1
                                                       σ−1
                                      P P         1−σ
the CES cost function c(p, J, N ) =          bjn pjn       , where σ denotes an elasticity
                                       j∈J n∈N
of substitution greater than unity; p is the varieties price vector; bjn > 0 denotes a taste
parameter for variety j from country n which may be interpreted as variety quality; and
J and N are the sets of varieties and countries, respectively. If N H is the (constant) set
of high wage countries in both periods and the taste parameter for high wage countries
is time invariant, the Diewert (1976) exact price index (P ) between periods t and t − 1
                                                               H
                                                                  h          i 1
                                                                              σ−1
can be written P (pt , pt−1 ,J, N ) = c(pc(pt ,Nt )
                                         t−1 ,Nt−1 )
                                                     = c(pt ,N )    1−V SHt
                                                       c(pt ,N H ) 1−V SHt−1
                                                                                  , where the
first term on the right hand side is the rich-country only cost ratio. As indicated by
the second term on the right hand side, increases in the presence of low wage countries
via higher V SH drive down the price index. The intuition for this relationship is that
unavailable low wage country varieties eﬀectively have an infinite price, and this price
falls as V SH rises and low wage country varieties become available.
                           Survival of the Best Fit                                     10


3.1.   Low Wage Competition over Time and across Industries
    Table 3 summarizes the distribution of the value share and product
share measures from 1972 to 1992. Each column of the table reports the
mean and standard deviation of the competition measures across industries
over a five year period.8 The average industry imported 38.7% of its
products from at least one low wage country between 1972 and 1976. In
each period, the share of products imported from low wage countries is
significantly higher than the accompanying value share of imports.
    Both measures of low wage competition have roughly doubled over our
sample. Between 1972 and 1992, V SH in the average industry grew from
3.4% to 7.5% while the average P SH increased to 62.1% from 38.7%. Most
of the increase in product penetration occurred in the latter part of the
sample with over half coming during 1982 to 1986. Similarly, over two
thirds of the increase in value penetration occurred in the final sample
period, 1987 to 1991. In general, a high level of product penetration for
an industry is positively correlated with subsequent increases in the value
share.
    Table 4 reports the correlation between our low wage import share mea-
sures, import penetration, and real import price changes over the 1972 to
1992 sample. Because import price changes are computed for three digit
SIC industries, the final row of the table is based upon three digit SIC ver-
sions of all the competition measures. In general, though V SH and P SH
covary, the correlation of these measures with import penetration and real
import price changes is quite low, increasing our confidence in their ability
to pick up new aspects of import competition.
    We show how the value share and product share measures vary across
industries according to their input intensity in Figure 2. The figure con-
tains four endowment triangles (Leamer 1987).9 Industries can be plotted
in the simplex according to their input intensity vectors (i.e. according to
where these vectors pierce the simplex). Four representative industries
are displayed, Gloves, Socks, Chemicals and Instruments. Relatively pro-
duction worker intense Gloves (SIC 2381) is located nearer the production
worker vertex than more skill intense (i.e. non-production worker intense)
   8
    The periods are constructed to precede each of the four panels in the plant-level data.
   9
    The (Leamer) triangles are the two dimensional simplexes that result from intersect-
ing a three dimensional factor space with a plane.
                          Survival of the Best Fit                                   11


Instruments (SIC 3812). Note that industry locations change over time as
input intensities evolve. All four industries become more non-production
worker intensive over time.
    Low wage import competition over the endowment triangle is estimated
via a kernal density across the four digit SIC industry observations in each
year. Intensity of competition is indexed by shading, with light and dark
being the respective lower and upper bounds. The shading is consistent
across all four plots.
    The figure shows that, between 1972 and 1992, the growth of competi-
tion as measured by the value share is concentrated in industries that use
production workers intensively. Capital intensive manufacturing, such as
Chemicals (SIC 2819), faces very low import values from low wage coun-
tries. Competition as measured by product shares from low wage countries
is much more intense and far-reaching. Already high among production
worker intense industries in 1972, it spreads all the way up to the non-
production worker intensive portion of the triangle by 1992. This move-
ment of competition across manufacturing input intensity space provides
intuition for our results below. Over time, US manufacturing is reallo-
cating away from the labor intensive industries facing increasingly higher
competition from low wage countries and towards capital intensive indus-
tries where low wage countries do not have comparative advantage.

4.     Plant Data

    The data in this paper come from two sources. In addition to the
import competition measures described above, the plant data come from
the Longitudinal Research Database (LRD) of the Bureau of the Census.
We use data from the Censuses of Manufactures (CM) starting in 1977
and conducted every fifth year through 1997. The sampling unit for the
Census is a manufacturing establishment, or plant, and the sampling frame
in each Census year includes detailed information on inputs, output, and
ownership on all establishments.10
  10
    While the LRD does contain basic information on small plants (so-called Adminis-
trative records), we do not include them in this study due to the lack of information on
inputs other than total employees. Since our competition measures start only in 1972,
we must start our sample with the 1977 Census.
                             Survival of the Best Fit                                        12


    From the Census, we obtain plant characteristics including location,
capital stock at the plant, the quantity of and the wages paid to non-
production and production workers, total value of shipments, total value
of exports, energy and purchased material inputs, the number of products
produced at the plant, the primary four digit Standard Industrial Classifi-
cation (SIC), and age.
    In constructing our sample, we make several modifications to the basic
data. First, we drop any industry whose products are categorized as ‘not
elsewhere classified’. These ‘industries’ are typically catch-all categories
for a group of heterogenous products. In practice, this corresponds to
any industry whose four digit SIC code ends in ‘9’ and SIC 39xx. Sec-
ond, we combine some 4-digit SIC industries in order to match the import
competition measures, leaving us with 337 industry categories. We use in-
formation on all manufacturing establishments in the 1977, 1982, 1987, and
1992 Censuses but must drop any establishment that does not report one
of the input or output measures. We are left with 443,000+ observations
on 245,000+ plants across the four panels.

4.1.   Plant Productivity
     As noted above, productivity gains can play an important role in a
plant’s ability to survive low wage competition. As a result, we compute
a TFP measure for each plant and include it as a control in our regression
analysis. As is well known, accurately measuring multi-factor productivity
at the plant is quite diﬃcult. Since we have only single observations
for many of the establishments in the sample, we are constrained in our
choice of productivity measures. We estimate a simple five input production
function in logs for each industry and year,

ln Yipt = β 0it +β 1it ln Pipt +α2it ln N Pipt +β 3it ln Kipt +β 4it ln Bipt +β 5it ln Mipt + ipt
                                                                                             (4)
where Y is gross output of the plant in year t, P and NP are the number of
production and non-production workers at the plant, K is the book value of
machinery and equipment, B is the book value of buildings and structures
and M is the value of purchased inputs and energy. Recognizing that
we are unable to adequately control for the co-movement of markups and
productivity, or the co-movements of variable inputs and productivity, we
                          Survival of the Best Fit                                    13


use ipt as our measure of plant total factor productivity. By construction
the measure is mean zero for each industry in each period.

4.2.   Plant Factor Input Intensities
    We measure plant capital intensity via the log of the ratio of the capital
stock to total employment (K/L). Skill intensity is harder to measure
in the LRD as there is relatively little information on the characteristics
of the workforce. We use two measures of skill: the plant wage for pro-
duction workers and that for non-production workers. Variation in these
measures should capture diﬀerences in the average quality of the workers
at the plant if not their relative quantities. In our robustness checks, we
explore another measure of skill, the ratio of non-production to production
workers (N P/P ), where the sum of these workers is the total labor force
(L).

4.3.   Plant Survival
     We examine employment and output growth on a subset of surviving
plants as well as the full sample of surviving and dying plants. In per-
forming regressions on surviving plants, we control for plant survival via a
standard Heckman correction (Heckman 1976). The included mills ratio
is an estimate of the probability of plant survival. Following Bernard and
Jensen (2002), we estimate the probability of plant death as a function of
a number of plant, firm, and industry characteristics.11 To assist in iden-
tification of the selection equation we include measures of plant product
mix diversity, firm characteristics such as dummies for US multinational
ownership, recent ownership changes and multi-plant status, and industry
level measures industry sunk cost of entry, and relative regional specializa-
tion and diversity. The eﬀects of entry costs and the additional plant and
firm characteristics on plant deaths are large and significant allowing us to
separately identify the selection equation from the growth rate regressions
in the next section. As in Bernard and Jensen (2002), we find that plant
survival is positively associated with capital and skill intensity and nega-
tively associated with low wage competition. In addition, within industries
  11
    Complete results from the selection probit are available on request from the authors.
Alternatively, see Table 8, column 1 of Bernard and Jensen (2002).
                       Survival of the Best Fit                           14


that face high levels of low wage competition, plants with low capital and
skill levels are more likely to close.

5.   Empirical results

    We compute and analyze two diﬀerent growth rates. The first, due to
Davis and Haltiwanger (1992), is the change in plant employment inclusive
of plant births and deaths,

                        DH          1         Ep,t+5 − Ept
                       gp,t:t+5 =     ·   1                   ,          (5)
                                    5     2   (Ep,t+5 + Ept )

where Ept represents employment of plant p in year t. This growth rate
is equal to 2 for new plants and -2 for dying plants. Because we cannot
observe the characteristics of plants prior to their birth, we are unable
to include birth observations in our empirical specifications below. As a
         DH
result, gp,t:t+5 represents a lower bound on employment loss: within an
industry job creation at newly born plants will oﬀset some or all of this
loss.
    Our second growth rate is the annualized log diﬀerence of employment
at continuing plants,
                       ln
                      gp,t:t+5 = (ln Ep,t+5 − ln Ept ) /5.               (6)

    The results that follow are based on regressions of employment and
output growth on vectors of plant characteristics (Zpt ), industry competi-
tion measures (Cit ) and interactions of plant characteristics with industry
competition (Xipt ),
                    DH,ln
                   gp,t:t+5 = Z0pt α + C0it β + X0ipt γ + εpt .          (7)

The plant characteristics, Zpt , include the logs of employment, age, pro-
ductivity (T F P ), capital intensity (K/L) and skill intensity (ln P wage ln
N P wage) . Numerous studies on mean reversion in plant employment
growth have documented the relationship between initial size and age and
subsequent changes in employment (e.g. Hall 1987 and Blonigen and Tom-
lin 2001). While we are not interested in testing Gibrat’s law per se, we
                           Survival of the Best Fit                                     15


include the log of initial employment as well as plant age in all our specifi-
cations.12
    We control for plant capital and skill intensity as well as plant pro-
ductivity. The trade theories in Section 2 suggest that plant growth in
the US should be increasing in plant skill intensity and plant capital in-
tensity. Employment and output growth is expected to be lower in labor
intensive plants and higher in capital and skill intensive plants for com-
parative advantage reasons. Second, plant growth should be increasing
in plant productivity. Plants can survive head-to-head competition with
low wage country firms via productivity improvements. It is also possi-
ble that more capital and skill intensive plants have experienced relative
productivity gains over labor intensive plants.13
    The industry competition measures, Cit , are P SH, V SH and their in-
teraction, P V SH. The final vector, Xipt , contains the interacted compe-
tition variable, P V SH, interacted with the logs of productivity and plant
capital, as well as skill intensity. For regressions examining growth at
continuing plants, we include the mills ratio discussed in Section 4.3.

5.1.   Plant Employment and Competition from Low Wage Countries
    The first column of Table 5 summarizes the association between em-
ployment growth and plant and industry characteristics on the full set of
                                                      DH
plants in the sample. These OLS regressions use gp,t:t+5     as the dependent
variable.
    Conditioning on plant characteristics, both measures of low wage com-
petition as well as their interaction are significant at the 1% level. Taken
together, these coeﬃcients imply an overall negative relationship between
low wage competition and plant growth oﬀering strong support for Hypoth-
esis 1. Figure 3 illustrates how employment growth varies across industries
as a function of low wage competition in 1977 and 1992. For each industry,
the coeﬃcients in the first column of Table 5 are used to estimate employ-
   12
      The LRD does not record the precise start year for any plant. Instead, we only
know the first year the plant appears in a Census of Manufactures starting with the 1963
Census. Our measure of plant age is the diﬀerence between the current year and the
first recorded Census year. Plants that are in their first Census are given an age of zero.
   13
      Closed economy models of heterogeneous firms such as Olley and Pakes (1996) also
predict faster growth for more capital intensive and more productive plants.
                         Survival of the Best Fit                               16


ment growth. The percentage point deviation of this growth from that
of an industry facing the average level of P SH and V SH is then plotted,
yielding the surface displayed in the figure.14 Industries are denoted by
‘77’ or ‘92’ depending upon the year. The surface slopes down toward the
front of the figure, where competition is most intense.
    As indicated, plants in industries with above average competition ex-
perience sharp declines in employment growth. In 1992, for example, the
industry facing the highest level of competition, Leather Gloves (SIC 3151),
experienced employment growth that was 15 percentage points below that
of the average industry. Alternatively an industry with value and prod-
uct shares one standard deviation above the mean would have employment
growth 2.2 percentage points lower.
    An alternate view of the relationship between employment growth and
low wage competition — this time with respect to the median industry —
is provided in Table 6. There, industries are split into cohorts depend-
ing upon how much their estimated employment growth deviates from the
industry facing median competition. Consistent with the increase in com-
petition over time noted in Figures 2 and 3, the distribution of deviations is
moving towards lower estimated growth over time. In 1977, for example,
most industries had modest exposure to low wage competition, with the
result that 266 of 331 industries had estimated employment growth that
deviates less than 0.5 percentage points from the median. Even so, 8%
(30) of industries faced enough competition from low wage countries to
have their growth rates lowered by more than 0.5 percentage points, while
4% of industries (14), including Textile Bags (SIC2393) and Leather Gloves
(SIC3151), had their growth rates lowered by more than -1.5 percentage
points. By 1992, many more industries faced substantial competition from
low wage countries. As a result, more than twice as many industries (77)
experienced growth rates at least 0.5 percentage points below the median,
while the number of industries experiencing decreases of 1.5 percentage
points relative to the median tripled, to 53.
    The second column of Table 5 adds interactions of plant characteristics
with P V SHi . Consistent with Hypothesis 2, we find that capital intensive
plants have significantly higher growth rates in industries facing low wage
  14
    The industry with average levels of low wage competition in 1977 and 1992 shows
up as a zero on the surface.
                            Survival of the Best Fit                          17


competition relative to their labor intensive counterparts. The interactions
with plant skill intensity are also positive but not significant. Interestingly,
the productivity interaction is not significant and has the ‘wrong’ sign.
     The final column of Table 5 includes plant fixed eﬀects, which absorb all
time-invariant plant attributes that may be correlated with slower growth
and high levels of low wage competition.15 These ‘within-plant’ results
are even stronger than results in the second column of the table. Con-
trolling for plant eﬀects, increases in industry low wage competition have
an even more limiting eﬀect on employment growth. The interaction be-
tween import competition and plant characteristics confirms that import
competition from low wage countries has diﬀerent eﬀects on plants depend-
ing on their input characteristics. Plants with high capital intensity and
high skill intensity grow relatively faster when facing low wage competition.
The interactions with all three measures of capital and skill are positive and
significant. The eﬀect of the interaction with plant productivity remains
negligible.
     Table 7 examines employment growth across the subset of 323,000+
plants that survive from one Census to the next. These regressions use
  ln
gp,t:t+5 as the growth rate and include the selection correction described
in Section 4.3. Here too, we find that low wage competition continues to
have an overall negative relationship with plant employment growth. The
final two columns of Table 7 include interactions of plant attributes with
industry competition as well as a specification with plant fixed eﬀects. The
magnitude of the low wage competition measures is increased while the
capital and skill interactions are positive and significant in the fixed eﬀect
specification.

5.2.     Plant Output and Competition from Low Wage Countries
    The strong negative relationship between low wage competition and
plant employment growth has two possible interpretations. The first is that
firms facing low wage competition shrink (or die). The second is that such
firms respond to competition by substituting away from relatively expensive
US labor and toward relatively inexpensive US skill or capital. In the
second scenario, plant employment could decline even as output remained
 15
      Including just industry fixed eﬀects does not change the conclusions.
                         Survival of the Best Fit                                18


the same or even increased. To diﬀerentiate between these explanations,
we investigate the relationship between real output growth and competition
in Table 8. While we concentrate on the full sample of plants, results for
survivors are similar.
    Overall, we find that output and employment respond similarly to low
wage import competition. The coeﬃcients on P SHi , V SHi and P V SHi
are significant across all three specifications in Table 8. In each case, in-
creases in competition are associated with sharp declines in output growth.
Indeed, the distribution of estimated industry output growth around the
median industry exhibits an even sharper reallocation than is evident with
respect to employment growth in Table 6. While 10% of the industries
faced enough import competition from low wage countries to lower annual
relative output growth by at least 0.5 percentage points in 1977, the num-
ber more than tripled, to 31%, by 1992.16 Furthermore, the number of
industries whose output growth was more than 1.5 percentage points below
the median also increased dramatically over the period, from 5% up to 18%
of all industries. While relative output declines were frequent across labor
intensive sectors such as Apparel (SIC 23xx), relative output increases were
common among capital intensive sectors such as Chemicals (SIC 28xx).
    The second and third columns of Table 8 include interactions of plant
factor intensities and productivity with P V SHi . Here too, results with
respect to capital and skill intensity support the hypotheses of standard
trade theory: capital and skill intensive plants have significantly higher
growth rates in industries facing low wage competition relative to their
labor intensive counterparts. Unlike the employment specifications, the
interaction of low wage competition with plant productivity is positive,
and significant in one specification.
    There are two main explanations for the strongly negative association
between plant growth and low wage competition. Our preferred expla-
nation is that the imports from low wage countries are a driving force in
reducing the survival prospects and overall growth of plants in the aﬀected
industries. This view emphasizes the role of international trade in shaping
the reallocation of US manufacturing within and across industries. An
alternative explanation is that the US is becoming relatively capital and
  16
    Annualized output growth for the industry facing median competition was 0.03% in
1977-81 and -0.2% in 1992-97.
                       Survival of the Best Fit                           19


skill abundant, perhaps due to rapid skill-biased technological change, and
is leaving low capital and low skill sectors which are then being supplied
by low wage countries. From this perspective, international trade, i.e. the
location of imports, is responding to changes in the US economy. In order
to distinguish between these two views, all our specifications are run as the
change in employment (or output) from year t to t + 5 on the average levels
of low wage competition in years t−5 to t−1. For our findings to be consis-
tent with an endogenous response of low wage imports, low wage countries
would have to be entering industries that they expect to decline 5 to 10
years later: a hypothesis we find unlikely but cannot test directly. Instead,
we find more likely the conclusion that increasing imports from low wage
countries are a major component in the reallocation of US manufacturing.

5.3.   Robustness
    In this section we examine the robustness of our results to two speci-
fication changes. First, we re-estimate the model using the ratio of non-
production to production workers (N P/P ) as a measure of skill intensity
in place of the wage measures. Second, we ask whether the relationship
between low wage competition and plant growth remains after controlling
for a standard measure of overall import penetration. To conserve space,
we focus in this section on the plant fixed eﬀect specification.
    The first column of Table 9 repeats the results from column 3 of Table
5 to facilitate comparison. Column 2 of Table 9 reports the results using
the ratio of non-production to production workers, N P/P, rather than the
wages to control for plant skill intensity. While the eﬀects of low wage
competition and capital intensity are unchanged, N P/P has a negative
coeﬃcient in both its level and interaction. There are several possible
explanations for this result. First, the US may not have a comparative ad-
vantage in skill-intensive production. Second, N P/P may be a poor proxy
for the skill-intensity of production relative to low wage countries. We sus-
pect, given the strength of the results using the two wage measures, that
the relative skill intensity of production across plants is not well captured
by the raw quantity ratio.
    The final column of Table 9 includes ordinary industry import penetra-
tion in addition to our measures of low wage import competition. This
penetration is associated negatively with employment growth, but it does
                         Survival of the Best Fit                                 20


not eliminate the eﬀect of the low wage competition measures. Indeed,
the significance and magnitude of P SH and V SH are quite similar to the
values reported in the base regression in the first column. This result is
important because it emphasizes the fact that where imports originate has
a significant eﬀect on manufacturing reallocation that is independent of the
overall level of imports.

5.4.   Industry Switching
    Until now we have focused entirely on the employment and output
growth of plants facing import competition from low wage countries. In
this section, we consider another possible response by domestic plants to
foreign competition, changes in their product mix. For (detailed) prod-
ucts that are both exported from the US and imported to the US from
low wage countries, Schott (2002b) finds that the US export unit values
are significantly higher than import unit values of the low wage countries.
One explanation of this finding is that US producers of low unit value prod-
ucts shut down in the face of the low wage competition. Our evidence,
and that of Bernard and Jensen (2002), indicate that low skill, low capital
plants grow more slowly, primarily due to their increased probability of
shutdown. To the extent that capital and skill intensities are correlated
with within-industry product diﬀerentiation, plant exit could explain US
unit value upgrading. Another possibility is that plants alter their out-
put mix to avoid low wage competition, either by vertically diﬀerentiating
their products or by moving into a product subject to less competition from
poor countries. In both cases, such switches should involve capital or skill
deepening.
    Unfortunately, the LRD does not track plant output using the same
level of detail as our trade data. We can observe the primary 4-digit SIC
code of the plant. Many, or even most, potential product changes would
occur within an industry and thus not aﬀect the 4-digit SIC code of the
plant. However, some fraction of potential product upgrading may involve
industry switching.17 For surviving plants, we look at switches in the SIC
  17
    Bernard and Jensen (2001) find that plants which switch industries have a higher
probability of being exporters. This movement into more viable products is consis-
tent with the view that plants escape low wage country competition by upgrading their
product mix.
                        Survival of the Best Fit                              21


code reported by the plants and ask if they are related in a systematic way
to low wage competition.
    The 4-digit SIC code reported by the plant corresponds to the classifica-
tion for the product(s) that comprises the majority of the plant’s output. If
a plant is producing roughly equal amounts of two products, small changes
in output in the Census years could result in changes in the reported SIC
code. This element of random variation in classification changes should
bias us against finding any systematic changes in capital and skill intensity
across the old and new industries. We test whether switching plants move
to more capital and skill intensive industries. We compare the capital and
skill intensities in the old and new industries in year t, both unconditionally
and as a function of low wage import competition. We expect to find higher
capital and skill intensities in the new industries, especially for plants that
face higher competition from low wage countries.
    On average, 7.8% of the surviving plants in our sample report changes
in their 4-digit SIC code across neighboring Censuses, i.e. over a five year
period. For those switching plants, we look at the average input intensities
for the old and new industries in Table 10. If firms are trying to reduce
their exposure to low wage import competition through switching, we would
expect them to move to more capital and skill intensive industries. On
average, for the 25,000+ plants that switch, they do move to more capital
and skill-intensive industries. The physical capital-intensity of destination
industry in year t is 1.1% higher than that of the original industry in year
t. Similarly, non-production and production wages are significantly higher
in the new industries, by 0.7% and 0.1% respectively, although the latter is
not significant. Finally, we look at the measures of low wage competition
in the old and new industries for switching plants. As expected, we find
that plants switch to industries with lower levels of V SHi (2.1% lower and
significant at the 10% level) and P SHi (0.2% lower but not significant).
    Next, we regress the diﬀerence in industry factor intensity for switching
plants on our low wage competition measures,
                                        0
                           ∆fsdt = c + Cst β + εsdt

where ∆fsdt is the percentage diﬀerence in the factor intensity of the average
plant in the destination industry d in year t relative to the factor intensity of
the average plant in the starting industry s in year t. Table 11 reports the
                       Survival of the Best Fit                             22


results for capital intensity, non-production wages and production wages.
Increasing import competition from low wage countries has a strong positive
relationship with all three measures of factor intensity changes. Plants that
switch from an industry with high levels of low wage import competition
move to industries with higher capital and skill intensities than the average
switching plant. For example, a plant leaving an industry at the 75th
percentile of low wage import competition lands in a new industry that is
8.7% more capital intensive and pays 1.4% higher non-production wages,
and 2.8% higher production wages. For the average switching plant, the
new industry is 1.1% more capital intensive and pays 0.7% and 0.1% higher
non-production and production wages respectively. These results suggest
that surviving US firms employ a variety of responses to increased import
competition from low wage countries.

6.   Conclusions

    Imports from low income countries were the fastest growing compo-
nent of US trade from 1972 to 1997, increasing far more rapidly than total
imports. The rapid growth included both the value of shipments and the
variety of products from those countries. In this paper we consider the role
of import competition from low wage countries in changing the nature of
the US manufacturing sector over the last 30 years. We find that low wage
competition has been a powerful force for reallocation within and across
US industries. In particular, the major eﬀect of import competition from
low wage countries has been to accelerate the process of capital deepening
and skill upgrading across and within US manufacturing industries.
    The restructuring induced by low wage competition takes three related
forms: plant deaths, plant growth and product changes. Greater competi-
tion from low wage countries increases plant failure rates across industries.
Within industries, plants that are the best ‘fit’, i.e. the most capital and
skill-intensive, are the least likely to close when low wage competition rises.
Beyond plant shutdowns, we find that both employment and output growth
rates are significantly lower at plants that face high levels of low wage im-
port competition. Relative to the average plant, a 10 percentage point rise
in low wage import shares decreases employment and output growth by 1.3
and 1.6 percentage points per year, respectively. Again, within sectors,
                       Survival of the Best Fit                           23


growth is even slower for plants that are the most labor-intensive, i.e. the
poorest fit.
    Even within plants we see an impact of imports from low income coun-
tries. We provide evidence that some plants respond to low wage compe-
tition by changing their product mix. Plants that switch industries move
to sectors that are more capital and skill intensive than the industries they
leave behind. This is particularly true for plants that leave sectors with
high levels of low wage competition.
    This paper only begins to examine the role of increased trade with low
income countries on firms and industries in the US. Additional research is
also needed on the response by US firms to such competition in the form
of investment, workforce upgrading, and product innovation. Given the
diﬀerential impact across industries and plants, we expect to find signifi-
cant regional eﬀects of low wage competition including changes in industry
structure, wage levels and inequality.
                     Survival of the Best Fit                        24


References

Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. 2001. Why Some Firms Ex-
   port. NBER Working Paper # 8349.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. 2002. The Deaths of Manu-
   facturing Plants. NBER Working Paper # 9026.
Blonigen, Bruce A. and KaSaundra Tomlin. 2001. Size and Growth of
   Japanese Plants in the United States. International Journal of Indus-
   trial Organization, vol. 19, no. 6, pp. 931-52.
Davis, Steven J. and John Haltiwanger. 1992. Gross Job Creation, Gross
   Job Destruction, and Employment Reallocation. Quarterly Journal of
   Economics 107(3):819-863.
Diewert, W. Erwin. 1976. Exact and Superlative Index Numbers. Journal
   of Econometrics 4:115-145.
Feenstra, Robert C. 1996. US Imports 1972-1994: Data and Concordances.
   NBER Working Paper 5515.
Feenstra, Robert C. 1994. New Product Varieties and the Measurement
   of International Prices. American Economic Review 84:157-177.
Freeman, Richard and Lawrence Katz. 1991. Industrial Wage and Employ-
   ment Determination in an Open Economy, in Immigration, Trade and
   the Labor Market, edited by John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman.
   Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Grossman, Gene. 1987. The Employment and Wage Eﬀects of Import Com-
   petition. Journal of International Economic Integration 2(1):1-23.
Hall, Bronwyn H. 1987. The Relationship Between Firm Size and Firm
   Growth in the US Manufacturing Sector. Journal of Industrial Eco-
   nomics 35(4):583-606.
Heckman, J. 1976. The Common Structure of Statistical Models of Trunca-
   tion, Sample Selection and Limited Dependent Variables, and a Simple
   Estimator for Such Models. The Annals of Economic and Social Mea-
   surement 5: 475-492.
                      Survival of the Best Fit                        25


Kletzer, Lori G. 2000. Trade and Job Loss in U.S. Manufacturing, 1979-94.
   in Robert Feenstra, ed., The Impact of International Trade on Wages.
   University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Krueger, Anne, O. 1980. “Impact of Foreign Trade on Employment in
   US Industry” edited by J. Bleck and B. Hindley, Current Issues in
   Commercial Policy and Diplomacy. New York: St Martin’s Press.

Leamer, Edward E. 1987. Paths of Development in the Three-Factor, n-
   Good General Equilibrium Model. Journal of Political Economy 95:961-
   999.

Mann, Catherine L. 1988. The Eﬀects of Foreign Competition in Prices and
  Quantities on Employment in Import-Sensitive Industries. International
  Trade Journal II (Summer):409-444.

Revenga, Ana L. 1992. Exporting Jobs? The Impact of Import Competition
   on Employment and Wages in U.S. Manufacturing. Quarterly Journal
   of Economics 107(1):255-284.

Sachs, Jeﬀrey D. and Howard J. Shatz. 1994. Trade and Jobs in U.S. Man-
   ufacturing. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1994(1):1-69.

Schott, Peter K. 2002a. Endowment-Driven Product Specialization in
   International Trade. Yale School of Management mimeo.

Schott, Peter K. 2002b. Moving Up and Moving Out: US Product-Level
   Exports and Competition from Low Wage Countries. Yale School of
   Management mimeo.
                                        Survival of the Best Fit                                                   26




    K                   US                                       K                   US
                                   k2                                                           k2
           Chemicals                                                    Chemicals

   1/rUS                                                        1/rUS

                                                   k1                                                    k1
                Machinery                                                    Machinery


1/rCHINA                Textiles                        China                        Textiles                  China
                                              Apparel                                                Apparel

                                                        L                                                      L
                1/wUS                   1/wCHINA                             1/wUS

                        US Open to Trade                                  US Protects Apparel and Textiles



           Figure 1: Specialization in the Factor Proportions Framework
                             Survival of the Best Fit                                         27




    Low Wage Value                                             Low Wage Value
      Share (VSH)                                                Share (VSH)




  Low Wage Product                                            Low Wage Product
     Share (PSH)                                                 Share (PSH)




Notes: Endowment triangles display level of low wage country competition for 1972 and 1992. Each triangle is a
simplex defined by intersecting a plane with a three dimensional factor space. An industry's location in the triangle
is fixed by its skill and capital intensities. The shading of the surface is estiamted via a kernal density across the
four digit SIC industry observations for each year. Darker coloration corresponds to higher levels of competition.
Shading is consistent across all four plots to facilitate comparison. Four representative industries are plotted in each
simplex; their location shifts over time as production techniques evolve.




Figure 2: Value Share and Product Share Competition from Low Wage
Countries - Variation in Industry Input Space
                          Survival of the Best Fit                                    28




Notes: Figure plots industries' employment growth deviation (in percentage points) from the
employment growth of the industry facing the average level of low wage competition. Data for
both 1977 and 1992 are displayed and noted via either '77' or '92'. Industry employment
growth as a function of VSH and NSH are estimated using the regression coefficients in the
first column of Table 5.



Figure 3: Plant Employment Growth Relative to Industry Facing Average
Low Wage Competition (All Plants)
                              Survival of the Best Fit                                                  29


      Afghanistan            China                  India                  Pakistan
      Albania                Comoros                Kenya                  Rwanda
      Angola                 Congo                  Lao PDR                Samoa
      Armenia                Equatorial Guinea      Lesotho                Sao Tome
      Azerbaijan             Eritrea                Madagascar             Sierra Leone
      Bangladesh             Ethiopia               Malawi                 Somalia
      Benin                  Gambia                 Maldives               Sri Lanka
      Bhutan                 Georgia                Mali                   St. Vincent
      Burkina Faso           Ghana                  Mauritania             Sudan
      Burundi                Guinea                 Moldova                Togo
      Cambodia               Guinea-Bissau          Mozambique             Uganda
      Central African Rep    Guyana                 Nepal                  Vietnam
      Chad                   Haiti                  Niger                  Yemen


                    Table 1: Low Wage Countries 1972 to 1992

                                            Correlation with Low Wage Country Group
                                         (I.e. Countries with less than 5% of US PCGDP)

  Alternate Country Group            VSH                        PSH                    PVSH

  OECD Countries                     -0.65                      0.19                      -0.58


  Asian Tigers                        0.14                      0.70                      0.13

  Countries with 5-25% of
                                      0.15                      0.65                      0.09
  US PCGDP
  Countries with 25-50%
                                     -0.03                      0.56                      -0.03
  of US PCGDP
  Countries with 50-75%
                                     -0.23                      0.38                      -0.20
  of US PCGDP
  Notes: Each cell displays the correlation of value and product share competition for countries with
  less than 5% of US per capita GDP with the shares for an alternate group of countries. Correlations
  are computed across 387 SIC4 industries and four Census years (1977, 1982, 1987 and 1992).
  Correlation coefficients control for time effects. The OECD cohort excludes members added after
  1972 (e.g. Mexico and Korea). The Asian Tiger cohort consists of Hong Kong, Korea, Singapore and
  Taiwan. Examples of countries in the last three cohorts (which exclude the Tigers) in 1992 are
  Mexico, New Zealand and Spain, respectively. See text for definitions of VSH, PSH and PVSH.



Table 2: Similarity of Competition Members Across Diﬀerent Country
Groups
                               Survival of the Best Fit                                              30




                                1972-1976               1977-1981               1982-1986            1987-1991
                                      Standard               Standard                 Standard             Standard
Competition Measure          Mean     Deviation       Mean Deviation          Mean   Deviation     Mean   Deviation
Low Wage Product
                             0.387        0.253       0.427       0.248        0.544       0.237   0.621    0.237
Share (PSH)

Low Wage Value Share
                             0.034        0.082       0.035       0.071        0.048       0.086   0.075    0.115
(VSH)
Notes: Competition measures are recorded at the four digit SIC level.



               Table 3: Import Competition Summary Statistics




                                       Low Wage
                                      Product Share      Low Wage Value
          Competition Measure            (PSH)             Share (VSH)  Import Penetration

          Low Wage Value Share
                                           0.31
          (VSH)


          Import Penetration               0.17                0.17


          Change in Real Import
                                           -0.01               -0.01               -0.02
          Price Index
          Notes: Import Price Indexes are recorded at the three digit SIC level, are deflated
          by the US CPI and are unavailable for 1972 to 1976. Correlations for the first three
          rows of the table are based upon four digit SIC industries. Correlations in the final
          row of the table are based upon three digit SIC industries. Correlation coefficients
          control for time effects.


               Table 4: Import Competition Correlation Matrix
                             Survival of the Best Fit                                                     31




                                                                         All Plants
                                                        Employment       Employment      Employment
  Independent Variables                                     Growth           Growth          Growth
  ln(Employmentp)                                          0.009   ***     0.009   ***    -0.092    ***
                                                         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.001)
  Agep                                                     0.001   ***     0.001   ***    -0.011    ***
                                                         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)
  ln(K/L)p                                                 0.013   ***     0.010   ***     0.008    ***
                                                         (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.001)
  ln(NP Wage)p                                             0.023   ***     0.022   ***     0.018    ***
                                                         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.001)
  ln(P Wage)p                                              0.027   ***     0.027   ***     0.036    ***
                                                         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.002)
  ln(TFP)p                                                 0.033   ***     0.033   ***     0.024    ***
                                                         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.002)
  Low Wage Product Share (PSHi)                            0.016   ***     0.010   ***     0.001
                                                         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.004)
  Low Wage Value Share (VSHi)                              0.117   ***     0.074   ***     0.158    ***
                                                         (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.042)
  Product Share x Value Share (PSHi x VSHi)               -0.336   ***    -0.528   ***    -1.320    ***
                                                         (0.019)         (0.042)         (0.111)
         x ln(K/L)p                                                        0.076   ***     0.076    ***
                                                                         (0.006)         (0.015)
         x ln(NP Wage)p                                                    0.017           0.090    ***
                                                                         (0.011)         (0.023)
         x ln(P Wage)p                                                     0.017           0.141    ***
                                                                         (0.016)         (0.039)
         x ln(TFP)p                                                       -0.002           0.013
                                                                         (0.017)         (0.036)

  Plant Dummies                                             No              No              Yes
  Year Dummies                                              Yes             Yes             Yes
  Obs                                                     443,755         443,755         443,755
  R2                                                         0.05            0.05            0.77
  Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses and are heteroskedastic-consistent and adjusted for
  clustering at the plant level. ***Significant at the 1% level; **Significant at the 5% level;
  *Significant at the 10% level.



Table 5: Employment Growth and Low Wage Competition (All Plants)
                       Survival of the Best Fit                                 32




  Percentage Point Employment Growth                      Share of Industries
Deviation From Industry Facing Median Low                 (All Plant Sample)
        Wage Country Competition                         1977                  1992
                     >1.5%                                 0                     0
                [0.5% to 1.5%)                            11                     7
                  [0% to 0.5%)                            40                    43
                 [-0.5% to 0%)                            42                    28
               [-1.5% to -0.5%)                            4                    9
                    < -1.5%                                4                    13
Notes: Each cell reports the number of industries with the indicated deviation in
employment growth (in pecentage points) from the industry facing median competition
from low wage countries. Relative growth for industry i is computed using using the
regression coefficients in the first column of Tables 5 and 6, respectively. Numbers may
not sum to 100 due to rounding.

 Table 6: Eﬀects of Low Wage Competition on Employment Growth
                              Survival of the Best Fit                                                       33


                                                                          Surviving Plants
                                                         Employment         Employment       Employment
   Independent Variables                                     Growth             Growth           Growth
   ln(Employmentp)                                         -0.012   ***       -0.012   ***    -0.157   ***
                                                          (0.000)            (0.000)         (0.001)
   Agep                                                    -0.001   ***       -0.001   ***    -0.001   ***
                                                          (0.000)            (0.000)         (0.000)
   ln(K/L)p                                                 0.011   ***        0.011   ***     0.006   ***
                                                          (0.000)            (0.000)         (0.001)
   ln(NP Wage)p                                             0.018   ***        0.019   ***     0.012   ***
                                                          (0.001)            (0.001)         (0.001)
   ln(P Wage)p                                              0.017   ***        0.016   ***     0.022   ***
                                                          (0.001)            (0.001)         (0.002)
   ln(TFP)p                                                 0.022   ***        0.023   ***     0.014   ***
                                                          (0.001)            (0.001)         (0.002)
   Low Wage Product Share (PSHi)                            0.024   ***        0.023   ***     0.004
                                                          (0.001)            (0.001)         (0.003)
   Low Wage Value Share (VSHi)                              0.134   ***        0.126   ***     0.045
                                                          (0.010)            (0.011)         (0.028)
   Product Share x Value Share (PSHi x VSHi)               -0.180   ***       -0.277   ***    -0.731   ***
                                                          (0.015)            (0.047)         (0.106)
          x ln(K/L)p                                                           0.002           0.023   **
                                                                             (0.005)         (0.011)
          x ln(NP Wage)p                                                      -0.017           0.040   *
                                                                             (0.011)         (0.021)
          x ln(P Wage)p                                                        0.061   ***     0.145   ***
                                                                             (0.016)         (0.032)
          x ln(TFP)p                                                          -0.025           0.004
                                                                             (0.017)         (0.029)
   Mills Ratiop                                             0.013 ***          0.012   ***     0.020   ***
                                                          (0.002)            (0.002)         (0.003)

   Plant Dummies                                             No                 No             Yes
   Year Dummies                                              Yes                Yes            Yes
   Obs                                                     323,601            323,601        323,601
   R2                                                         0.05            0.05            0.76
   Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses and are heteroskedastic-consistent and adjusted for
   clustering at the plant level. ***Significant at the 1% level; **Significant at the 5% level;
   *Significant at the 10% level.



Table 7: Employment Growth and Low Wage Competition (Surviving
Plants)
                           Survival of the Best Fit                                                     34




                                                                       All Plants
Independent Variables                                       Output          Output           Output
ln(Employmentp)                                          0.015   ***     0.015   ***    -0.074    ***
                                                       (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.001)
Agep                                                     0.001   ***     0.001   ***    -0.007    ***
                                                       (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)
ln(K/L)p                                                 0.004   ***     0.000          -0.027    ***
                                                       (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.001)
ln(NP Wage)p                                             0.020   ***     0.019   ***    -0.005    ***
                                                       (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.002)
ln(P Wage)p                                              0.022   ***     0.021   ***    -0.010    ***
                                                       (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.002)
ln(TFP)p                                                -0.021   ***    -0.023   ***    -0.098    ***
                                                       (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.003)
Low Wage Product Share (PSHi)                            0.001          -0.006   ***    -0.002
                                                       (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.004)
Low Wage Value Share (VSHi)                              0.170   ***     0.112   ***     0.215    ***
                                                       (0.014)         (0.014)         (0.044)
Product Share x Value Share (PSHi x VSHi)               -0.416   ***    -0.618   ***    -1.290    ***
                                                       (0.019)         (0.044)         (0.121)
       x ln(K/L)p                                                        0.108   ***     0.090    ***
                                                                       (0.006)         (0.016)
       x ln(NP Wage)p                                                    0.013           0.111    ***
                                                                       (0.012)         (0.026)
       x ln(P Wage)p                                                     0.008           0.066    *
                                                                       (0.017)         (0.041)
       x ln(TFP)p                                                        0.083   ***     0.062
                                                                       (0.019)         (0.044)

Plant Dummies                                             No              No              Yes
Year Dummies                                              Yes             Yes             Yes
Obs                                                     443,755         443,755         443,755
R2                                                         0.05            0.05            0.74
Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses and are heteroskedastic-consistent and adjusted for
clustering at the plant level. ***Significant at the 1% level; **Significant at the 5% level;
*Significant at the 10% level.



Table 8: Output Growth and Low Wage Competition (All Plants)
                                  Survival of the Best Fit                                                        35


                                                     Base Regression        NP/P for Skill
                                                   (Table 5, Column 3)        Intensity          Import Penetration


 Independent Variables                             Employment Growth Employment Growth Employment Growth
 ln(Employmentp)                                            -0.092 ***            -0.096 ***             -0.093 ***
                                                           (0.000)               (0.001)                (0.001)
 Agep                                                       -0.011 ***            -0.011 ***             -0.011 ***
                                                           (0.000)               (0.000)                (0.000)
            1
 ln(K/L)p                                                    0.008 ***             0.011 ***              0.008 ***
                                                           (0.000)               (0.001)                (0.001)
 ln(NP Wage)p                                                0.018 ***                                    0.018 ***
                                                           (0.000)                                      (0.001)
 ln(P Wage)p                                                 0.036 ***                                    0.036 ***
                                                           (0.000)                                      (0.002)
 ln(NP/P)p                                                                        -0.006   ***
                                                                                 (0.001)
 ln(TFP)p                                                    0.024 ***             0.034   ***            0.024 ***
                                                           (0.000)               (0.002)                (0.002)
 Low Wage Product Share (PSHi)                               0.001                 0.003                  0.001
                                                           (0.000)               (0.004)                (0.004)
 Low Wage Value Share (VSHi)                                 0.158 ***             0.177   ***            0.142 ***
                                                           (0.000)               (0.042)                (0.041)
 Product Share x Value Share (PSHi x VSHi)                  -1.320 ***            -0.852   ***           -1.202 ***
                                                           (0.000)               (0.073)                (0.111)
                 1
        x ln(K/L)p                                           0.076 ***             0.111 ***              0.064   ***
                                                           (0.000)               (0.013)                (0.014)
        x ln(NP Wage)p                                       0.090 ***                                    0.089   ***
                                                           (0.000)                                      (0.023)
        x ln(P Wage)p                                        0.141 ***                                    0.135   ***
                                                           (0.000)                                      (0.038)
        x ln(NP/P)p                                                               -0.014                  0.013   ***
                                                                                 (0.015)                (0.036)
        x ln(TFP)p                                           0.013                 0.058                  0.013
                                                           (0.000)               (0.036)                (0.000)
 Import Penetration                                                                                      -0.148   ***
                                                                                                        (0.014)

 Plant Dummies                                             Yes                    Yes                   Yes
 Year Dummies                                              Yes                    Yes                   Yes
 Obs                                                     443,755                443,755               443,755
   2
 R                                                         0.77                  0.77                   0.77
        1
 Note: The log of K/P is used in place of K/L in column 2. Standard errors are in italics and are heteroskedastic-
 consistent and adjusted for clustering at the plant level. ***Significant at the 1% level; **Significant at the 5%
 level; *Significant at the 10% level.


Table 9: Robustness Checks: Wages for Skill and Adding Ordinary Import
Penetration, All Plant Sample
                         Survival of the Best Fit                                      36




                                         Mean Difference Across
                                       Plants Between New and Old        T Statistic
 Plant Characteristic                           Industries               (Mean=0)           P Value
 Capital Intensity (K/L)                           1.1%                    3.24               0.00
 Non Production Wage (NP Wage)                      0.7%                    8.73              0.00
 Production Wage (P Wage)                           0.1%                    0.82              0.21
 VSH                                               -2.1%                   1.65               0.09
 PSH                                               -0.2%                   -0.55              0.58
 Notes: Calculations based upon a sample of 25,425 plants that switched their four digit SIC
 industry over the four, five year sample periods.

Table 10: New vs Old Industry Characteristics of Plants Switching SIC4
Industries




                                                       NP Wage                 P Wage
 Independent Variables        K/L Change                Change                 Change
 Low Wage Product
 Share (PSH)                        0.234 ***              0.020 ***               0.088 ***
 Low Wage Value Share
 (VSH)                              -0.038                 0.125 ***               0.017
 Product Share x Value
 Share (PSH x VSH)                  0.699 ***              -0.063                  0.189 ***
 Obs                             25,425                 25,425                25,425
   2
 R                                0.02                   0.00                  0.02
 Notes: ***Significant at the 1% level; **Significant at the 5% level; *Significant at the
 10% level. Standard errors are heteroskedastic-consistent and adjusted for clustering at
 the plant level.

Table 11: Change in Switching Plants’ Characteristics and Low Wage Com-
petition
