                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    DECOMPOSING WAGE INEQUALITY CHANGE USING
                          GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM MODELS


                                            Lisandro Abrego
                                             John Whalley


                                          Working Paper 9184
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9184


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




This paper is part of a project on Globalization and Social Exclusion supported by the EU. We are grateful
to Huw Edwards, Carlo Perroni, and Dan Treffler for comments, and to seminar participants at Toronto and
Warwick. The main parts of this paper were written while the first author was at the University of Warwick.
The views expressed are personal and not necessarily those of the International Monetary Fund or the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Lisandro Abrego and John Whalley. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Decomposing Wage Inequality Change Using General Equilibrium Models
Lisandro Abrego and John Whalley
NBER Working Paper No. 9184
September 2002
JEL No. J3, D5


                                            ABSTRACT

   This paper presents ex post decomposition analysis of wage inequality change using multi-

sector general equilibrium models. The analytical structure used is a specific- factors model of trade,
which we calibrate to UK data for the two years 1979 and 1975. We first calibrate our general
equilibrium trade model to observations on wage inequality, trade, production and consumption
spanning these years, capturing the separate influences of trade, technology and demographics on
inequality. Between these years wage inequality changed, but multiple changes in exogenous
variables occurred (world prices, technology, endowments). We use calibration techniques to
determine parameter values consistent with both the equilibria and the changes in exogenous
variables contributing to the wage inequality change being decomposed. We then compute
counterfactual equilibria in which only some of the changes in exogenous variables are present to
allow us to assess what portion of the observed change is attributable to the various contributing
factors. Our findings are that the roles of trade and factor-biased technological change are relatively
larger than in earlier literature. We also find that changes in factor endowments to offset increased
inequality generated by trade and skilled-biased technological changes, a feature that seems to have
gone relatively unnoticed in earlier literature.



Lisandro Abrego                                                John Whalley
International Monetary Fund                                    Department of Economics
                                                               Social Science Centre
                                                               University of Western Ontario
                                                               London, Ontario N6A 5C2
                                                               Cananda
                                                               and University of Warwick
                                                               and NBER
                                                               jwhalley@julian.uwo.ca
1.     Introduction

       Economists have long been interested in decomposing observed economic outcomes

driven by multiple factors into parts attributable to each. This is the case in both the growth

accounting literature (Solow, 1957), and the economic history literature (Fogel (1964), for

instance). The majority of these exercises focus on identifying the separate role played by a few

key factors presumed to be the main sources behind the outcome, typically leaving a residual as

attributed to factors not explicitly modelled. How to decompose observed economic outcomes

has been little studied in the applied general equilibrium literature (see Shoven and Whalley,

1992). Models have, instead, largely been used for ex-ante counterfactual exercises of

anticipated policy changes, whose outcome has not been observed.

       In this paper, we report on an ex-post general-equilibrium calibration methodology which

we use to decompose observed economic outcomes generated by multiple sources into

components attributed to each source, and apply it to the trade-technology debate on the causes

of increased OECD wage inequality (Leamer, 2000; Krugman, 2000). We decompose observed

(ex-post) economic outcomes into portions attributed to component influences, rather than

computing ex-ante counterfactual equilibria, recognizing that these influences need not be and

typically will not be additive. We base our analysis on multiple-period rather than single period

calibration, since model parameterisations need to be consistent with changes over time, not just

a base year observation. Our calibration to initial- and terminal-year data may be either exact or

inexact (see Dawkins, Srinivasan, and Whalley, 2000), depending on the restrictions imposed.

       The model structure we use is a specific-factors (or Ricardo-Viner) trade model, which

differs from a more standard Heckscher-Ohlin-type structure through the presence of specific

factors that are immobile across sectors, and hence yields decreasing returns to scale to the
mobile factors. The traditional Heckscher-Ohlin model with fully mobile factors and constant

returns to scale, when used with conventional functional forms (such as CES), cannot

accommodate relative product-price changes of the magnitude that have been observed along

with increased wage inequality in countries such as the US or the UK (see OECD, 1997; Abrego

and Whalley, 2000). This is due to the near linearity of the transformation frontier associated

with this model structure and the ensuing problems of full specialisation documented some years

ago by Johnson (1966). For the small open economy case, the standard Heckscher-Ohlin model

is also unable to accommodate factor-biased technical change as a source of relative wage

change (Leamer, 1998; Krugman, 2000). This is unsatisfactory since the available empirical

evidence seems to support the hypothesis that factor-biased technical change has been a major

source of increased OECD wage inequality. A fixed-factors model eliminates the full

specialisation problems, produces relative wage changes under factor-biased technical change,

and hence can be used for decomposition of inequality change.

       We apply these techniques to a component decomposition of increased wage inequality

over the 1980s and 1990s as has occurred for a number of OECD countries such as the US and

the UK (e.g. Gottschalk and Smeeding, 1997; Slaughter, 1999). The literature on recent increases

in wage inequality has concentrated on two main contributing factors---trade with low-wage

countries, and technological change. Most literature concludes that technological change is the

main source of this increased inequality, rather than trade (Bound and Johnson, 1992; Baldwin

and Cain, 1997; Feenstra and Hanson, 1999). The model and the techniques we present here

suggest that, within a general equilibrium setting, other factors, such as changes in endowments

and a wider variety of technical change, also enter the picture and can play a significant role.




                                                 2
       The paper is organised as follows. The next section briefly reviews the literature on wage

inequality and decompositional analysis. Section 3 present our model and calibration procedures.

Section 4 describes our data, while Section 5 presents and discusses results. Section 6 concludes.




                                                3
2.       Background

         The motivation for our decomposition analysis is the extensive literature which tries to

attribute portions of recent OECD wage inequality change to various contributory factors. Little

or none of this conducts decompositions using the explicit equilibria structures which dominate

related trade theoretic literature; rather, reduced-form econometrics motivated by quantitative

theory are used.

         In this literature, most attention has been paid to two factors behind increased inequality;

trade with low-wage countries and factor-biased technical change (e.g. Burtless 1995; Slaughter,

1999). Some literature has also looked at the contribution of changes in relative factor supplies

(e.g. Bound and Johnson, 1992; Baldwin and Cain, 1997) as well as of changes in labour market

institutions (e.g. Fortin and Thomas, 1997; Card, 1998; Machin and van Reenen, 1998). With

only a few exceptions (Wood, 1994; Feenstra and Hanson, 1996), this work has concluded that

the contribution of trade to increased OECD wage inequality has been small, with technical

change playing the more important role. Empirical evidence on the role of changes in factor

supplies is conflicting, and sometimes statistically insignificant.1 Some studies (Gottschalk and

Smeeding, 1997; Card, 1998; Machin and van Reenen, 1998) have also reported a substantial

role for changes in labour market institutions. Some limitations of the reduced-form econometric

methodologies used have been discussed in Abrego and Whalley (2000), who point out that

multiple structural-form specifications are available which are consistent with observed changes,

but each provide different decomposition results. Also, technological change has been treated in

this literature in different ways; as a residual in Solow-type (Solow, 1957) (sectoral) growth-


     1
      See for example, Murphy and Welch (1989); Bound and Johnson (1992); Baldwin and Cain (1997); and
Harrigan and Balaban (1999).
accounting framework (Leamer, 1996; Harrigan and Baliban, 1999); as the change in R&D

expenditure (e.g. Machin and van Reenen, 1998; Anderton and Brenton, 1998); as the change in

a factor’s cost share not explained by the factor price change (e.g., Berman, Bound and

Griliches, 1994; Haskel and Slaughter, 1998); or merely as the factor that is left in determining

the wage inequality change after trade is taken into account (Abrego and Whalley, 2000). An

advantage of the techniques that we use here is that the measure of technical change determined

through such calibration is fully consistent with the model structure being used and the observed

equilibria.

        Two earlier papers have reported on more limited decomposition-type experiments than

here, also using multi-sector general equilibrium models (e.g. Abrego and Whalley, 2000;

Francois and Nelson, 1998). One weakness of earlier procedures is that if the second

counterfactual equilibrium is unconstrained, except for consistency with the wage inequality

change (as in Abrego and Whalley, 2000), model solutions will not generally correspond to

observed data for both periods. The wage change may be replicated but trade, output,

employment and consumption changes will not. Our procedures are aimed at remedying these

weaknesses. Our decompositions involve changes over time in the relative wages of skilled and

unskilled labour. These are accompanied by both trade changes (reflected in changes in the terms

of trade) and technology changes (which may be sector or factor biased), and the issue is the

contribution of each factor. Decomposition proceeds by calibrating an explicit general

equilibrium model to the data for the years in question, and then computing counterfactual

equilibria with or without the added influence of trade and/or technological change. These

computations aim to isolate the influence of each of the factors.




                                                 5
3.     A Calibrated Model For Use in Decomposition

       For our decomposition analysis we use a model of a small open, price-taking economy

calibrated to data for the UK for two years (1979 and 1995). We use a Ricardo-Viner specific-

factors model, in contrast to a Hecksher-Ohlin-type, fully-mobile factors model.

       During the period we study, substantial increase in wage inequality occurred. The issue is

what portion of the observed change can be attributed to import surges of low-wage goods and

which to technical change. Most of the recent empirical literature assessing the importance of

factors contributing to increased wage inequality notes that OECD countries generally import

low-skill intensive goods, and export high-skill intensive goods.

       The attraction of using Heckscher-Ohlin-type models to earlier researchers in this area

has been that they provide a simple and widely used analytical framework in which the

relationship between relative wages and relative price changes is clearly defined. But for widely

used functional forms, the Heckscher-Ohlin model (with homogeneous goods and constant

returns to scale) has problems in accommodating relatively large product price changes (Abrego

and Whalley, 2000). This is due to the near linearity of the transformation frontier implied by the

model, and the ensuing problems of complete specialisation following relative price changes

(Johnson, 1966). Conventional Heckscher-Ohlin structures are also incapable of accommodating

factor-biased technical change as a source of wage change for the small open economy case

(Leamer, 1998; Krugman, 2000).

       Although Armington (country differentiated product) models have been widely used in

the applied general equilibrium literature, they are harder to work with analytically and hence no

general results linking changes in relative prices with relative wages are available from them.

Using a specific factors trade model (Ricardo-Viner) with decreasing returns to scale, a structure
that has been more widely explored in the analytical literature of international trade (Jones,

1971; Samuelson, 1971; Mussa, 1974), yields decreasing returns in each sector with respect to a

composite of mobile skilled and unskilled labour. We model fixed factors in each sector of 2

sectors (skilled and unskilled labour intensive) as well as 2 fully-mobile factors (skilled and

unskilled labour).



3.1 Production

       We treat the UK as a small open, price-taking economy that produces two goods, M and

E, both of which are traded at fixed world prices (Pit ; i = M , E ) , in period t. The production of

each good in each period requires the use of two mobile factors: skilled labour, S, and unskilled

labour, U, along with a sector-specific fixed factor. Production, consumption and trade take

place in each of the two time periods, 1 and 2, which we refer to as the initial and terminal

periods.

       Thus, each good in each period is produced according to a decreasing returns to scale

technology:

        Yit = Ait Lαitit ,     i = M , E; t = 1,2                                                  (1)

where Yit represents output of good i in period t, Ait denotes a sector-specific efficiency measure

of a composite labour factor input, and Lit is use of a composite labour input. αit is the output

elasticity with respect to composite labour, assumed to be strictly less than one to yield

decreasing returns to scale. Consistent with a Ricardo-Viner approach, (1) implicitly defines a

fixed factor in production in each sector, with a Cobb-Douglas share (1- αit).

       The composite labour input in each sector, Lit, is, in turn, a CES aggregate of unskilled

and skilled labor, U and S,


                                                    7
                       [                                                                                           ]
                                                                                                                        ρ it
                                  ( ρ −1) / ρ                      ( ρ −1) / ρ
        Lit = Bit β it (δ t U it ) it it + ( 1 - β it ) (δ t S it ) it it
                           U                                S                                                          ρ it −1    ,              i = M , E; t = 1,2       (2)

where Bit defines units for composite labor used in sector i in period t, and βit is the CES share

parameter in the aggregation function. δtU and δtS are factor-augmenting technical change

parameters which capture changes in input quality over time. ρit denotes the elasticity of

substitution in sector i in period t between unskilled and skilled labor.

Combining (1) and (2) for each sector in each period yields


                              [                                                                                             ]
                                                                                                                                 α it ρ it
               Yit = γ it β it (δ t U U it )( ρ it −1) / ρ it + ( 1 - β it ) (δ t S S it )( ρ it −1) / ρ it                      ρ it −1     ,       i = M , E; t = 1,2    (3)

where the units parameter in the consolidated function (3) γ it = Ait Bit . In (3), changes in γit

represent sector-specific, Hicks-neutral technical change, while δtU and δtS reflect factor-biased

technical change. In our empirical implementation of this model, we assume that (as in most

OECD economies) production of the importable good, M, is intensive in unskilled labour in both

periods, i.e. βMt > βEt ∀ t.



3.2 Labour Markets

        Competitive labour markets are assumed, so that each type of labour is paid its marginal

value product, with full employment of each type of labour in each period. The endowments of

unskilled and skilled labour, U t and S t respectively, are assumed to be fixed in each time

period, while varying across periods.

        First order conditions for factor demands implied by marginal product pricing are

        WUt = Pitα it β itδ ut( ρit −1)/ ρit Yit[ρit (α it −1)+1]/ α it ρit / U it1/ ρit γ it(α it ρit / ρit −1)          i = M , E; t = 1,2                              (4)

        WSt = Pitα it (1 − β it )δ St( ρit −1)/ ρit Yit[ ρit (α it −1)+1]/ α it ρit / Sit1/ ρit γ it(α it ρit / ρit −1)                 i = M , E; t = 1,2                (5)




                                                                                       8
where W Ut and W St denote unskilled and skilled wage rates respectively, and Pit is the (fixed)

world prices of good i in period t. Given the decreasing returns technology set out in (1),

payments to unskilled and skilled labour do not exhaust the value of production in either sector,

and the remaining factor income implied by (1) accrues to the fixed factor in each sector.



3.3 Trade

       We model trade shocks in this framework as changes in world prices, which, in turn,

typically induce increased import volumes. Here, we consider the shock to be a fall in the

relative price of unskilled intensive to skill intensive goods between the initial and terminal

years. These generate larger import volumes in the model, adjustment of labour out of the

unskilled intensive sector, and increases in exports.

       In equilibrium a zero trade balance condition holds, i.e.,

         ∑
        i= M ,E
                  Pit T ti = 0                                                                (6)


where Tit denotes the net trades of the country in the two goods, M and E. The sign convention
is that if good i is exported, domestic production less consumption is positive; if good i is
imported this difference is negative. Imports and competitive domestically produced goods are
treated as homogeneous, as is also assumed to be the case with exports. This homogeneity
assumption implies that trade flows involving any good are always one-way, and that one of the
goods is exported and the other imported.




3.4 Equilibrium Conditions

       Given the small open economy assumption underlying the model, goods markets do not

clear domestically. Imports and exports reflect positive and negative excess demands which are



                                                 9
absorbed or met by world markets subject to trade balance, with the small economy facing

perfectly elastic demands and supplies at world prices.

        Equilibrium in each period in this model is given by unskilled and skilled wage rates

such that the two domestic labour markets clear. The value marginal product of each mobile

factor in each sector is equal to the corresponding wage rate, as in (4) and (5), and the fixed

factor in each sector i receives the residual in return, Fit , in period t. Market clearing conditions

of this form hold in both periods, i.e.

        ∑U
         i
              it   =Ut ,    i = M, E; t = 1,2                                                     (7)


        ∑S
         i
              it   = St ,   i = M , E ; t = 1,2                                                   (8)


        The two market-clearing conditions (7) and (8) determine the equilibrium wage rates for

skilled and unskilled labour. The fixed factor in each sector receives the difference between the

value of production at world prices and payments to mobile factor inputs. This enters incomes

which, in turn, finance goods demands.

        Consumption of each good in equilibrium is given by the difference between production

and net trade, i.e.

        C it = Y it - T it , i = M , E; t = 1,2                                                   (9)

where C it denotes consumption of good i in period t. A property of equilibrium in such a model

(from Walras Law) is that trade balance will be satisfied.

3.5 Model Calibration

        Calibration is now a widely used technique for specifying numerical values of parameters

in general equilibrium simulation (see Dawkins, Srinivasan, and Whalley, 2000). Usually, in

micro-based models used to evaluate policy options on an ex-ante basis, calibration occurs in so


                                                  10
called levels form to a single, model-consistent equilibrium data set constructed from observed

outcomes. The sub data sets are built from basic data which may violate the model equilibrium

conditions, but which is modified for model compatibility (see Shoven and Whalley, 1992).

Here, because of our focus on understanding factors behind ex-post changes in key variables

(skilled and unskilled wage rates), we need a different calibration procedure; one which is

consistent with data which captures the changes in variables over time that are at the heart of the

analysis. In this case, it involves two data observations, rather than one as in more conventional

calibration.

       For the model structure we specify above, our calibration consists of choosing values for

model parameters such that the model gives, as far as possible, equilibrium solutions consistent

with data in both periods. In the case we consider here, with the small open economy treatment,

the demand and production sides of the model are separable. This separability allows us to

concentrate only on production function parameters when calibrating since the focus of our

decomposition analysis is on determinants of wage rate change, and does not involve demand

side considerations (such as statements about consumer welfare would do).            Thus, in the

calibration used here, the demand side of the model is irrelevant to the outcome of the

decomposition of wage inequality change.

       In single period calibration it is usual to assume that the values of elasticities of

substitution in production (ρ) are exogenously given, based on separate literature-based

estimation of parameters. Here we also assume that this is the case, but now for both periods.

This leaves sixteen production-side parameter values to be determined through calibration; the

output elasticities with respect to composite labour, the units terms in sector production




                                                11
functions, CES shares in aggregation functions, and factor biased technological change

parameters, i.e.

       αit, γ it,, β it,, δtU, δtS ; i = M, E; t = 1,2                                       (10)

       If these parameters are to be consistent with the model equilibrium conditions in each

time period, the values determined for them must satisfy the first order conditions (4) and (5), as

well as equation (3). These equations yield a system of 12 equations in 16 unknowns, and to

determine parameter values from it we need to introduce additional identifying restrictions.

       We first set

       δ1 U = δ1 S = 1                                                                         (11)

This is a normalization rule for factor-biased technological change terms, and we can adopt this

because it is only changes in technology parameters over time that are relevant in model.

       We then impose further restrictions on the model parameterization to yield an equation

system for calibration across the two time periods in which the remaining endogenous model

parameters are exactly identified. We use three alternative sets of restrictions, each of which

yields an exactly identified system of equations from which parameter values for the model are

determined. These are

           1) γi1 = γi2, i = M, E                                                              (12)

           2) δ2U =δ2S=1                                                                       (13)

           or

           3) β i1 = β i2, i = M, E                                                            (14)

       These three alternatives differ in their implied treatment of technical change over time.

Restriction 1 implies that no Hicks-neutral technical change takes place over time. Restriction 2

implies that no factor-biased technical change occurs over time. Restriction 3 allows technical



                                                         12
change to be both Hicks-neutral and factor-biased, but rules out any change over time in share

parameters in the composite CES labour aggregation function. For each of these sets of

restrictions, we calibrate the model and assess the implications for decomposition results. We do

not restrict the αit when implementing calibration since these parameter values represent the

share of the composite labour input in sectoral income, and must be consistent with the shares

implied by the data assembled for each time period.

       With this calibration set-up, changes in technology go beyond a simple Hicks-

neutral/factor-biased classification since other technology-related model parameters can also

change. Procedures 1 and 2 leave the βit unconstrained, and therefore subject to variation across

time. Under all the calibration procedures listed above, the assumption that the outcome

observed in each period constitutes an equilibrium implies that the elasticity of output with

respect to the aggregate labour input (αit) is also varying through time.

       Exact identification of parameter values from model equilibrium conditions does not hold

if added restrictions are imposed on parameter values. We therefore also use a further double

calibration procedure in which calibration is inexact, rather than exact. In this case, we maintain

exact calibration for period 1. For period 2, parameter values are chosen such that the sum of

squared deviations of model-predicted values relative to actual values for endogenous variables

is minimized, subject to the full set of general equilibrium constraints. Parameters chosen must

be consistent with both optimising behaviour and model equilibrium conditions. Calibration is

exact in one period, but inexact in the other because (through equation 11) we set our factor-

biased technological change parameters to one in the first period (making the equation system

exactly identified for that period), but allow them to be endogenously determined in the second




                                                 13
period. This units convention could be reversed allowing exact calibration in the second period

and inexact calibration in the first period.

       To simplify our computations, we implement our inexact calibration procedures only for

the case where technical change is assumed to be factor biased; a variant on calibration

procedures 1 and 3 above, but with both β it and γit held fixed over time. In the inexact calibration

case, the model-generated equilibrium for period 2 differs from the observed equilibrium, and

the model parameterization is determined by minimizing a criterion function.

       The objective function minimised in inexact calibration is the sum of squared deviations

of model-predicted values relative to observed values for the second period. This criterion is

applied to four variables; output, consumption (and hence trade), and employment of the two

labour types. We choose values for the two factor-biased technological change parameters

( δ 2U , δ 2S ) so as to minimize the criterion function while meeting model equilibrium conditions.

Other criterion functions are possible (such as adding further variable differences between actual

and predicted values), although our computational experience indicates that differences in

subsequent decomposition results from doing this are small. In our inexact calibration used here,

only one additional parameter is restricted relative to exact calibration. Factor endowments and

the parameters αit are given by the data and both vary from period to period, as with exact

calibration.

       More formally, the optimisation problem solved under this form of inexact calibration is

given by

                     (      )          (          )            (        )            (
        min ∑ Pi 2 Yi 2 − Yˆi 2 t + ∑ Pi 2 Ci 2 − Cˆ i 2 + ∑W2 Si 2 − Sˆi 2 + ∑W2 U i 2 − Uˆ i 2
                                2                       2     S            2     U
                                                                                                   )
                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                       (15)
               i                  i                        i



       w.r.to δ 2u , δ 2s



                                                      14
         s.t. (3) – (9).

Where Yˆi 2 , Cˆ i 2 , Sˆi 2 , and Û12 are model-predicted values in period 2 for output consumption,

employment of skilled labour, and employment of unskilled labour. The choice variables are the

factor-bias technological change parameters, δ 2u and δ ss . The model first order conditions and

equilibrium conditions are given by (3) – (9).



3.6 Decomposition Experiments

         We have used the model calibrated in each of the ways set out above to generate

estimates of the contributions of increased trade, factor-biased technical change, and factor

endowment change (demographics) to increases in wage inequality in the UK between 1979 and

1995. We capture trade shocks in our analyses as changes in world prices (the relative price of

skill intensive to unskilled intensive goods). These affect trade flows, which are also

endogenously determined in the model. We consider the fall in the relative price of the unskilled-

intensive products (in our case, aggregated under M) which took place in the UK between 1979

and 1995. Factor-biased technical change over time is modeled as changes in the factor-

augmenting technical change parameters, δ tU and δ tS . We also consider other production

function parameter changes generated by the model and calibration procedures as indicated

above.

         We use the calibrated versions of the model to carry out decomposition experiments

using both the exact and inexact calibration procedures described above. In the process, changes

in model technology parameters are determined over time using two-period data and the various

calibration procedures. The parameter values that are generated change with the procedures

implemented.


                                                 15
       For any model parameterization generated by calibration, we assess the contribution to

wage inequality of each individual component. We first do this by taking the equilibrium of

period 1 as our base model solution, and resolving the model by considering only the trade

shock. This allows us to calculate the portions of the total change in wage inequality attributable

to this shock. We then change each of the technology parameters implied by the calibration

procedure used and repeat the procedures. We finally assess the impact of changes in factor

endowments on inequality in a similar manner. These changes taken together are consistent with

the observed wage inequality change, as well as other characteristics of the observed period 2

equilibrium.

       The proportions of the total change attributed in this way need not (and typically will not)

sum to the total change. Each experiment considers a change in only one of three variables, and

these variables have interacting effects which imply that their separate contributions may sum to

more or less than the observed wage inequality change. The quantitative significance of this non-

addivity property is something revealed by numerical computation.




                                                16
4.     Data Used in Decomposition Experiments

       We perform our decomposition experiments using UK data for the two years, 1979 and

1995. This choice of years covers a period during which there was substantial change in wage

inequality in the UK, with a near 25% decline in the ratio of unskilled to skilled wage rates. As

Table 1 indicates, there was also a significant increase in real UK GDP, a rise in trade (imports),

a roughly constant composition of employment of unskilled and skilled labour by sector, and a

sharp rise in the size of the skilled labour pool.


                                             Table 1
                                    UK data for 1979 and 1995

                                                                 1979    1995

                     UK GDP in 1979 prices (Billion Pounds)      198     262

                     Import to gross output ratio for
                     Unskilled-intensive products                0.129 0.173

                     % employment in skilled-intensive sector    48.0    49.8

                     Ratio of unskilled to skilled labour
                     Employment aggregate                        1.04    0.715

                     Unskilled to skilled labour wage rate       1.0     0.769
                     ratio
                     (1979 set at 1.0 as a normalization)

       Source: Office for National Statistics (1997a).


       We parameterize the model described in the previous section and apply the double

calibration methods set out above. Using double calibration procedures in this way, we fit the

model to both initial and end of period observations. Three main issues arise in producing micro

consistent data covering each of our two years. One is how to aggregate more detailed and

sectorally disaggregated data from original sources into the skilled-unskilled intensive
breakdown in the model. Another is how to define the returns to skilled and unskilled labour by

sector, and to aggregate these factor returns from information on more detailed sectoral

classifications. The third relates to the definition of other variables; production, trade, and

broader factor incomes.

       Following our model structure, we aggregate UK production activities into the two broad

sectoral groups of skilled-intensive and unskilled-intensive. Table 2 presents a list of those

industries from UK national accounts classifications which we include in each of these two

groupings. Sectoral employment of skilled and unskilled workers is taken as given by the use of

non-manual and manual workers by industry as reported in the UK Office for National Statistics

(ONS) Employment Gazette and Labour Market Trends. Though this measure of skill

differentiation is not entirely satisfactory, it has been widely used in other recent wage inequality

literature both for the US and the UK (e.g. Sachs and Shatz, 1994; Machin and van Reenen,

1998; Haskel and Slaughter, 1999).

                                         Table 2
                 UK National Accounts Industries Included in the Skilled (S)
                           and Unskilled (U)-intensive Sectors

               S-intensive sector                             U-intensive sector
               Mining and quarrying                           Agriculture, hunting and forestry
               Paper and publishing                           Food, beverages and tobacco
               Petroleum products and nuclear fuel            Textiles and textile products
               Chemicals                                      Leather and leather products
               Machinery and equipment                        Wood and wood products
               Electrical and optical equipment               Rubber and plastic
               Transport equipment                            Non-metallic minerals
               Electricity, gas and water                     Basic metals and metal products
               Transport, storage and communication           Other manufacturing
               Financial intermediation                       Construction
               Real estate                                    Trade, restaurants and hotels
               Public administration, defence                 Health and social work
               and social security services                   Education
                                                              Other



                                                 18
           Sectoral production, broad-factor income (labour and capital) and trade data for 1979

come from the UK input-output table for that year (OECD, 1995). We separate manual from

non-manual labour income by sector using ONS data on employment and wages for these two

groups for the closest available year (1981-82). This data does not split employment and wages

by worker type for the sector disaggregation we report in Table 1, and only allows for

disaggregation of employment data into manual and non-manual categories for the whole

economy. However, from this information, we are able to determine aggregate income for each

labour type, and combine this with data on wage rates by skill level to determine sectoral

employment and wage bill data for each labour category for 1979.

           We use information from ONS sources (for 1981-82 and 1996) to calculate the change in

relative hourly wage rates for the period 1979-95. This calculation covers all full-time adult

workers in each year, and yields a sizeable relative decline of 23.1% in the wage of unskilled

workers compared to skilled workers.2 From Abrego and Whalley (2000) (who, in turn, draw on

Neven and Wyplosz, 1999) we use the figure of 7.9% as the fall in the relative price of the

unskilled-intensive good on international markets faced by the UK producers.3 This is the trade

shock experienced by the UK in the model over the period 1979-95, and enters as an input in our

calibration procedures.

           Data on production, broad-factor income and trade for 1995 are obtained from the UK

input-output table for the year (ONS, 1997b). We use data on sectoral employment and wages by

skill category from ONS (1996) to obtain wage bill data for each labour type. Using data on


2
  This differs from the 15% figure used in Abrego and Whalley (2000), because it covers all full-time workers and
involves a slightly different time period (Abrego and Whalley’s figure is based on male workers only and is for the
period 1976-90).
3
    This estimate was based of information in Neven and Wyplozs (1999).



                                                         19
hours worked by sector from the same source, we are able to measure the amount of each labour

input used by sector in terms of hours.

       When calibrating the model, our data are adjusted such that the terminal year (1995)

reflects the observed relative price and wage changes (in real terms). Changes in the value of

sector output experienced over the period are similarly adjusted. We employ all this information

to parameterize the model using each of the calibration procedures described in the preceding

section, including the inexact calibration procedure set out above. We use a base value for the

elasticity of substitution between skilled and unskilled labour, ρit, of 1.25, which is consistent

with input substitution elasticity estimates reported in Hamermesh (1993).

       Table 3 reports the 1979 and 1995 model parameters implied by each of the calibration

procedures we use, as well as the changes between equilibria and other information used in our

decomposition experiments. We note that some of the changes in technology parameters that

these procedures produce (especially procedure 3) are large, and sometimes change sign between

skilled and unskilled labour.




                                               20
                                        Table 3
         Changes in production-side parameters, relative prices and endowments
          during 1979-95 (%), and base level of input elasticity of substitution

                             Exact Calibration Procedure
                    1                     2                             3
         1979   1995 % change 1979 1995 % change 1979                1995 % change
Change
  δU      1.00 1.17        17.2     1.00 1.00        0.00     1.00   0.23     -76.9
  δS      1.00 1.95        95.3     1.00 1.00        0.00     1.00   3.81     281.1
  βM      0.53 0.42       -21.4    0.53 0.40        -26.0    0.53    0.53       0.0
  βE      0.38 0.28       -26.7    0.38 0.26        -31.9    0.38    0.38       0.0
  γM     17.56 17.56        0.0    17.56 24.62       40.2    17.56   24.0      36.5
  γE     18.58 18.58        0.0    18.58 26.13       40.6    18.58   19.6       5.4
  αM      0.68 0.73         8.3    0.68 0.73          8.3    0.68    0.73       8.3
  αE      0.64 0.64         0.1    0.64 0.64          0.1    0.64    0.64       0.1
 PM/PE    1.00 0.92        -7.9     1.00 0.92        -7.9     1.00   0.92      -7.9
  U       1.00 0.75       -25.0    1.00 0.75        -25.0    1.00    0.75     -25.0
   S     1.00 1.09          9.3    1.00 1.09          9.3    1.00    1.09       9.3
  ρitt    1.25 1.25         0.0    1.25 1.25          0.0    1.25    1.25       0.0




                                           21
5.      Results

        We have performed decomposition experiments with the model parameterized using the

exact double calibration procedures set out above, as well as further experiments using model

parameterizations based on inexact calibration methods. For each, we perform decomposition

exercises in which we separately evaluate the influences of trade, technology and endowments

on observed relative wage change for the UK between 1979 and 1995. We refer to the first of

these experiments as 1, 2 and 3. In all these experiments, relative goods prices change over time

as do factor endowments, and (through the data and calibration) the output elasticity with respect

to the composite labour input, αit. We examine the sensitivity of experiment results to different

values of production substitution elasticities, ρit.



5.1 Central Case

        Table 4 presents decomposition results for experiments 1, 2 and 3. The identifying

restrictions used in the first experiment imply that no Hicks-neutral technical change occurs over

time, and that technical change is factor-biased. In contrast, the calibration procedures used in

experiment 2 removes factor-biased technical change and allow for Hicks-neutral change. In

both of these experiments, the production function parameter in each sector βit (the share of

unskilled labour in composite labour) varies over time. Experiment 3 allows for both factor-

biased and Hicks-neutral technical change, but βit is constant over time.




                                                   22
                                            Table 4

                 UK 1979-1995 wage inequality decomposition experiments
                      under alternative exact calibration procedures

    % of Wage Inequality Change
         Attributed to Each
        Contributing Factor                           Calibration Procedure
                                              1                  2                 3
   Increased trade                           17                 17                17
   Factor-biased technical change            47                  0               211
   Hicks-neutral technical change             0                  1                -49
   Factor endowment changes                 -144               -144              -144
   Changes in βit                           157                183                 0
   Changes in αit                            -19                -19               -19


       We perform these experiments by alternatively introducing the changes specified in the

first column of Table 4 into the base period specification of the model and comparing the

resulting model solution to the full observed change. By identifying the separate effects of

changes in exogenous variables between periods (such as changes in world prices which

generate trade surges), decomposition results show the importance of the factor involved. For

changes in trade, results are the same i under all calibration procedures since the size of the

trade shock is unique and is not obtained through calibration. Where changes over time are in

calibrated technology parameters (as with factor biased technical change), results vary with the

calibration procedure used since the size of the change in these parameters depends on the

specific procedure employed, as shown in Table 3

       While results in Table 4 vary for changes in the calibration method, they suggest that

there is a relatively small contribution of trade (17%) to increased wage inequality over the

period. A larger role emerges for factor-biased technical change (procedures 1 and 3), which, in

turn, varies significantly depending upon the calibration used. Where changes in share




                                              23
parameters, β it , are not allowed, factor-biased technical change accounts for more than the

observed wage inequality change. Factor endowment changes have large negative effects on

wage inequality, but these are offset by the positive effects of changes in share parameters under

methods 1 and 2, and by factor-biased technical change under method 3.

       Under procedure 1, factor-biased technical change is responsible for slightly less than

half the relative wage change. This is accompanied by larger offsetting positive and negative

effects from changes in βit and endowments. Under procedure 3, the contribution of factor-biased

technical change is more than twice the observed change in wage inequality, but is offset by the

opposite effect generated by both Hicks-neutral technical change and the relative decrease in the

endowment of unskilled labour. Changes in the parameter αit act as an offset to factor-biased

technical change in all experiments, though to a much lesser degree.

       Results from procedures 1 and 3 thus appear to confirm the finding in the trade and

wages literature that skilled-biased technical change is a more significant contributory factor to

increased wage inequality than trade. Results from procedure 3, in which the parameter βit is

held constant across periods, also highlight a feature which has figured less prominently in the

literature; namely that changes in factor endowments offset new wage inequality associated with

trade and factor-biased technical change. This case also shows how other technology-related

factors, importantly sector specific technical change, are also non-trivial factors. Finally, results

using procedure 3 suggest that the impact of skill-biased technical change on wage inequality

could be more significant than existing literature suggests.

       Results using procedure 2 are similar to those from procedure 1 in that increases in wage

inequality are accounted for mainly by changes in βit. Relative to those generated using




                                                 24
procedure 3, these results point to a smaller role for Hicks-neutral technical change, although

changes in βit cannot themselves be interpreted as technical change in a conventional sense.



5.2. Sensitivity Analysis

       We have also performed sensitivity analyses on the results generated by our central case

model specifications by changing the exogenous values set for the elasticity of substitution in

production, ρit, for each of the three exact calibration procedures. Results from cases where ρit =

0.5, and ρit = 2.0 are presented in Table 5.

                                             Table 5
                Sensitivity Analyses of Model Results to Alternating Values of
                           Elasticities of Substitution in Production

                                                 ρit = 0.5                        ρit = 2.0
 % of wage inequality change
attributed to each contributing              Calibration                     Calibration
             factor                          Procedure                       Procedure
                                          1       2        3               1       2       3
Increased trade                          37      37       37              11      11      11
Factor-biased technical change           -22      0       241            164       0     159
Hicks-neutral technical change            0      -16      490              0       2      -3
Factor endowment changes                -385    -385     -385            -88     -88     -88
Change in βit                            274     267       0              -9     155       0
Change in αit                            -45     -45      -45            -12     -12     -12


       For ρit = 0.5, the magnitude of the trade effect is double that of the central case, while the

contribution of factor-endowment changes almost trebles. This is because as the elasticities of

substitution in production fall, price and wage responses to shocks are larger and quantity are

responses smaller. The size of the effects attributed to factor-biased technological change alters

little in one of the cases (3), but its sign is reversed in another (1). Using procedure 3, with ρit =

0.5, the size of the Hicks-neutral technical change effect increases substantially, and becomes a



                                                 25
major factor in offsetting the effects of trade and factor-biased technical change on increased

wage inequality.

        Increasing ρit to 2.0 also produces significant changes in results, most notably in the size

of the factor-biased technical change effect, which increases sharply relative to procedure 1, and

that of changes in factor endowments, which are reduced by about half relative to the central

case. These results, taken together with those using the central case model parameterizations,

suggest that Hicks-neutral technical change tends to reduce wage inequality, but the magnitude

of the effect is small.

        Taken as a set, these results seem to indicate that the qualitative pattern of the

decomposition result in our central case results remains unchanged in terms of relative rankings

of various factors acting on wage inequality change as we move across different model

parameterizations, but there are clearly significant quantitative changes. Our finding above that

factor-biased technological change has played a larger role in generating increased wage

inequality than previously suggested in the literature, and that changes in factor endowments

have been a key offsetting force, seems to remain reasonably robustas does the relatively small

contribution of trade-related factors.



5.3 Decomposition with Inexact Calibration

        We have also generated decomposition results using the inexact calibration procedure

described above. To implement this, we isolate the effects of factor-biased technical change by

using a model calibration in which both Hicks-neutral technical change parameters, γit, and

factor shares in production, βit, remain constant across periods.




                                                 26
                                            Table 6
                      Wage inequality decomposition with inexact calibration

         % of Wage Inequality Change
         Attributed to Each Contributing Factor
         Increased trade                                                17

         Factor-biased technical change                                 183

         Factor endowment changes                                       -144

         Change in αit                                                  -19




         Results again highlight both the significance of the contribution of factor-biased technical

change to wage inequality and the offsetting effect coming from changes in factor endowments

(Table 6). They are similar to those using exact calibration procedure 3 (Table 4). This is

because, as indicated earlier, the inexact calibration case is in fact a variant of exact calibration

procedure 3: the former corresponds to the latter but without Hicks-neutral technical change.

And since the effect on Hicks-neutral technical change under exact calibration procedure 3 is

relatively small (Table 4), the difference between the two cases is not very pronounced. As

pointed out earlier, the inexact calibration case can also be seen as a variant of exact calibration

procedure 1, with the difference being that under the former the share parameters βit do not

change over time. And since changes in the βit have a large impact on wage inequality (Table 4),

the difference between the two cases is now substantial.4




4
 Note that, compared to exact calibration procedure 3, the effect of factor-biased technical change under inexact
calibration is reduced because under the former the impact of Hick-neutral technical change (which the latter now
implicitly incorporates) is negative. Compared to exact calibration procedure 1, however, factor-biased technical
change has, with inexact calibration, a stronger impact on inequality since under the former the change in βit (now
implicitly incorporated by the latter) is inequality increasing.


                                                         27
28
6.     Summary and Conclusions

       In this paper we present techniques for performing ex post decomposition analysis using

calibrated multi-sector general equilibrium models; applying them to an analysis of the sources

of increases in wage inequality in the UK between 1979 and 1995. The novelty in our technique

lies in calibrating a general equilibrium model to two (or more) observations, and generating

parameter values which allow the model to reflect the influences of various exogenous changes

which jointly contribute to the observed outcome being decomposed. Relative to existing trade

and wages literature, we employ a full structural form general equilibrium model rather than an

estimated reduced form.

       We show how the calibrations involved can be performed in ways that are either exact or

inexact. These procedures allow for direct estimation of the main sources of increased wage

inequality discussed in recent literature (increased trade and factor-biased technical change), as

well as of other technology-related factors (including sector-biased technical change) and

changes in factor endowments.

       Our results suggest that between 1979 and 1995 the role of factor-biased technological

change in generating increased wage inequality in the UK has been even larger than suggested

by other results in previous literature. We also find that changes in factor endowments have

played a major role in partially offsetting pressures for increased wage inequality from trade and

factor-biased technological changea feature that has received less attention in existing

literature. Our estimate of the contribution of increased trade to UK wage inequality is small, and

consistent with results from earlier literature.




                                                   29
References

Abrego, L. and J. Whalley (2000), “The Choice of Structural Model in Trade-Wages
      Decompositions.” Review of International Economics, Vol. 9, No. 3 (August).

Anderton, B. and P. Brenton (1998) “The Dollar, Trade, Technology and Wage Inequality in the
      USA,” CEPS, Brussels, mimeo.

Baldwin, R.E. and G.G. Cain (1997), “Shifts in US Relative Wages: The Role of Trade,
      Technology and Factor Endowments,” NBER Working Paper No. 5934.

Berman, E., J. Bound and Z. Griliches (1994), “Changes in the Demand for Skilled Labour
      within US Manufacturing: Evidence from Annual Survey of Manufactures,” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics 109: 367-98.

Bound, J. and G. Johnson (1992), “Changes in the Structure of Wages in the 1980's: An
      Evaluation of Alternative Explanations.” American Economic Review 82: 371-92.

Burtless, G. (1995), “International Trade and the Rise in Earnings Inequality,” Journal of
       Economic Literature 33: 800-816.

Card, D. (1998), ``Falling Union Membership and Rising Wage Inequality: What's the
      Connection?'' NBER Working Paper No. 6520.

Dawkins, C. T.N. Srinivasan, and J. Whalley (2000), “Calibration” in ed. E.C.Leamer and J.
      Heckman, Handbook of Econometrics, North-Holland.

Feenstra, R. and G. Hanson (1996), “Globalization, Outsourcing and Wage Inequality,”
       American Economic Review, May, 240-45.

Feenstra, R. and G. Hanson (1999), “The Impact of Outsourcing and High-Technology Capital
       on Wages: Estimates for the United States, 1979-90,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
       113: 907-40.

Fogel, R. (1964), Railways and American Economic Growth. Baltimore: John Hopkins Press.

Fortin, M. and L. Thomas (1997) “Institutional Changes and Rising Wage Inequality,” Journal
        of Economic Perspectives 11: 75-96.

Francois, F. and D. Nelson (1998) “Trade, Technology and Wages: General Equilibrium
       Mechanics,” Economic Journal 108: 1483-1499.

Gottschalk, P. and T. Smeeding (1997) “Cross National Comparisons of Earnings and Income
       Inequality,” Journal of Economic Literature 35: 633-87.
Harrigan, J. and R. Balaban (1999) “US Wages in General Equilibrium: The Effects of Prices,
       Technology, and Factor Supplies, 1963-1991,” NBER Working Paper No. 6981.

Haskel, J. and M. Slaughter (1998), ``Does the Sector Bias of Skilled-Biased Technical Change
       Explains Changing Wage Inequality?'' NBER Working Paper No. 6565.

Haskel, J. and M. Slaughter (1999), “Trade Technology and UK Wage Inequality.” NBER
       Working Paper No. 6978.

Jones, R.W. (1971), “A Three-Factor Model in Theory, Trade and History.” In J.N. Bhagwati,
       R.A. Mundell and J. Vanek, Trade Balance of Payments and Growth: Essays in Honor of
       Charles P. Kindleberger. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Johnson, H.G. (1966), “Factor Market Distortions and the Shape of the Transformation
      Frontier.” Econometrica 34: 686-98.

Krugman, P. (2000), “Technology, Trade and Factor Prices” Journal of International Economics
     50: 51-71.

Leamer, E. (1998), “In Search of Stolper-Samuelson Linkages between International Trade and
      Lower Wages.” In S. M. Collins (ed.) Imports, Exports, and the American Worker.
      Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution.

Machin, S. and J. van Reenen (1998) “Technology and Changes in Skill Structure: Evidence
      from Seven OECD Countries.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 113: 1215-44.

Murphy, K. and F. Welch (1989), “Wage Premiums for College Graduates: Recent Growth and
      Possible Explanations.” Educational Researcher 18: 17-26.

Mussa, M. (1974), “Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of Factor
      Specificity, Substitutability, and Intensity in the Short and Long Run.” Journal of
      Political Economy 82: 1191-1204.

OECD (1995), The OECD Input-Output Database. OECD: Paris.

Office for National Statistics (1996), Labour Market Trends (May issue). London: ONS.

Office for National Statistics (1981-82), Employment Gazette (various issues). London: ONS.

Office for National Statistics (1996), Labour Market Trends (May issue). London: ONS.

Office for National Statistics (1997a), United Kingdom National Accounts. London: ONS.

Office for National Statistics (1997b), Input-Output Balances for the UK. London: ONS.
Sachs, J. and H. Shatz (1994), “Trade and Jobs in US Manufacturing.” Brookings Papers of
        Economic Activity: 1-84.


                                              31
Samuelson, P.A. (1971), “Ohlin Was Right.” Swedish Journal of Economics 73: 365-84.

Shoven, J. and J. Whalley (1992), Applying General Equilibrium. Cambridge: Cambridge
      University Press.

Slaughter, M. (1999), “Globalization and Wages: A Tale of Two Perspectives World Economy
       22: 609-29.

Solow, R. (1957), “Technical Change and the Aggregate Production Function.” Review of
      Economics and Statistics 39: 312-20.

Wood, A. (1994), North-South Trade, Employment and Inequality, Oxford: Clarendon Press.




                                            32
