                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        THE EFFECT OF EDUCATION ON MEDICAL TECHNOLOGY ADOPTION:
          ARE THE MORE EDUCATED MORE LIKELY TO USE NEW DRUGS?


                                        Adriana Lleras-Muney
                                        Frank R. Lichtenberg


                                          Working Paper 9185
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9185


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




We are very grateful to thank Sherry Glied, Bo Honoré, Christina Paxson, Darren Lubotsky and participants
of the NBER Summer Institute for their suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Adriana Lleras-Muney and Frank R. Lichtenberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Effect of Education on Medical Technology Adoption: Are the More
Educated More Likely to Use New Drugs
Adriana Lleras-Muney and Frank R. Lichtenberg
NBER Working Paper No. 9185
September 2002
JEL No. I12, I21


                                            ABSTRACT

       There is a large body of work that documents a strong, positive correlation between
education and measures of health, but little is known about the mechanisms by which education
might affect health. One possibility is that more educated individuals are more likely to adopt new
medical technologies. We investigate this theory by asking whether more educated people are more
likely to use newer drugs, while controlling for other individual characteristics, such as income and
insurance status. Using the 1997 MEPS, we find that more highly educated people are more likely
to use drugs more recently approved by the FDA. We find that education only matters for
individuals who repeatedly purchase drugs for a given condition, suggesting that the more educated
are better able to learn from experience.




   Adriana Lleras-Muney                            Frank R. Lichtenberg
   Princeton University                            Columbia University
   Department of Economics                         Graduate School of Business
   320 Wallace Hall                                726 Uris Hall
   Princeton, NJ 08540                             3022 Broadway
   and NBER                                        New York, NY 10027
   alleras@princeton.edu                           And NBER
                                                   frank.lichtenberg@columbia.edu
        The National Center for Health Statistics reported in 1998 that “the

chronic disease death rate for men with a high school education or less

was 2.3-2.5 times that for men with more than a high school education”.

Similarly strong, positive correlations between education and different

measures of health (while controlling for income, occupation and other

individual characteristics) have been documented by a large number of

studies (see Grossman and Kaestner, 1997 for a review). There is some

evidence that education has a causal impact on health, i.e. that more

education makes one healthier (Berger and Leigh 1988, Sander 1995,

Leigh and Dhir 1997, Goldman and Lakdawalla 2001 and Lleras-Muney

2001). Some studies even suggest that the health gap across education

groups has been rising over the past 30 years (Feldman et al. 1989, Pappas

et al. 1993, and Elo and Preston 1996). However, little is known about the

many potential          causal mechanisms by which education might affect

health. 1

        This paper explores one possibility: that more highly educated

individuals are more likely to adopt new technologies, and that they are

better at implementing those new technologies as well. In 1966, Nelson

and Phelps suggested that “educated people make good innovators” and

that “education is especially important to those functions requiring


1
  Go ld ma n and Lakdw alla (2001) show th at th e mo r e edu cated choose mor e p a tien t-
or ien ted treatmen t and are better at u s ing th ese tr eatme n ts. Th is ev id en ce suppor ts
Gro ssman’ s 1972 “productive ef ficien cy” h ypo thesis. K enk el (1991 ) and Mear a (2001)
prov id e ev id ence th at th e mor e educated h ave mo r e in for mation and use th at
information b e tter. But th e effect of edu cation is no t fu lly accoun ted for in these
s tu d i e s.


                                               2
adaptation to change”. Using a panel of manufacturing industries in the

U.S.,     Bartel     and    Lichtenberg         (1986)      showed       that    more     educated

individuals also had an advantage in implementing new technologies (i.e.

in learning how to use those technologies more effectively), given

adoption.

        But the relationship between education and medical technology has

not been explored. 2 Since the medical field is one of the most active in

terms of innovation, 3 it is important that we understand how these

innovations are used by and diffused among consumers. If the more

educated are better able to adopt new medical technologies, then the

introduction of new technologies will generate a health gap across

education categories, ceteris paribus. This gap could increase overtime if

the rate of innovation increases (and if innovations benefit all individuals

equally). Since these predictions are consistent with the stylized facts,

this theory seems worthy of investigation.

        The challenge when looking at technological change consists in

finding     reasonable        measures       of    innovation.       Following        Lichtenberg

(2000a), we use the age of a drug, defined as the number of years since

FDA approval, as a measure of innovation in medical technology. Given




2
  W ith the imp or tan t exc ep tion of an a lys es of th e eff ec t of h ea lth informa tio n such as
th e eff ect o f th e Surgeon G en eral’s r epor t on smo k ing .
3
  The r a tio of R&D expend itur e to to tal expend itur e is h igher for health (3 .6%) than it
is for th e e cono my a s a who le (2.6% ). Moreov er, ph ar ma c eu tica ls— th e fo cus of our
a na lys is — is mu ch mor e R&D- in tensiv e th an o ther h ealth car e expend itur e. (Sour ces:
S c ienc e & Eng in eer ing Ind ica tor s, and H e a lth, Un ited S ta te s. )


                                                  3
that newer drugs embody advances in the medical field 4 and are more

effective, then the more educated should be healthier as a result of their

using newer drugs. The advantage of looking at prescription drugs then is

that we can know the date of innovation for all drugs. Therefore this study

goes beyond other studies of innovation adoption because it is not limited

to a particular case study.

        The specific question we address in this paper is whether more

educated people are more likely to use newer drugs, controlling for other

individual characteristics, such as income and insurance status. A simple

correlation between education and the age of drugs could be easily

explained due to the fact that new drugs are more expensive, and the more

educated have higher incomes and are more likely to be insured. We are

not interested in such indirect effects of education. Rather, we are

interested in the behavior of the more educated with respect to their

health, conditional on income and insurance, since this is the correlation

that most studies have documented. If we find that education affects

health independent of income and insurance, the policy implications are

very different than the case where education matters only because of

income.

        We use the 1997 MEPS to answer our question. This is a highly

detailed data set which contains information on individuals, their

conditions, and the drugs they take. Even after controlling for many


4
 Lich tenb erg (1996 , 2001) h a s shown th at n ewer drug s are of h igher qu ality: they are
mo r e ef f e c t iv e a t r e d u c in g mo r ta l i t y, morb id ity and to tal me d ical expend itures.


                                                    4
factors, we do indeed find that the more educated use drugs more recently

approved by the FDA. We also find that education only matters for

individuals     that    repeatedly      purchase      drugs    for    a   given    condition,

suggesting that the more educated are better able to learn from

experience.

        This paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses in

greater detail many possible mechanisms through which education might

affect health. Section II presents the data. Section III presents the basic

results and a number of additional estimates. Section IV concludes.

I-What is the mechanism by which education affects the age

of the drugs taken?

        One reason why the more educated are more likely to adopt a new

medical innovation is that they are better informed. According to a 1999

National Science Foundation survey, 32% of those with more than a

college degree declared they were both very interested and very well

informed about new medical discoveries, whereas only 14% of those with

less than a high school degree did. 5

        But differences in access to information alone are not the only

reason why we might expect differences in medical technology adoption

across education categories. Conditional on equal information, different

subjective evaluations of the risk and benefits of new technologies should


5
  Fro m Science and Eng in eer ing Ind icator s 2000 , pub lished by th e N a tion al Science
Found ation. The r epor t can be found at th e fo llow ing w ebsite:
h ttp ://www.n sf.gov /sb e /s rs/seind00 /access/toc.htm


                                               5
result in differential adoption. There is some evidence that the evaluation

of new technologies differs by education levels. In 1999, 71% of those

with a college degree or higher thought that the benefits of new

technologies strongly outweigh the harmful results, whereas only 25% of

those with less than a high school degree thought so. 6 The question of

why such evaluation is different across education categories might be

related to the understanding of science.                           For example, the National

Science Foundation estimates that 53% of those with more than a college

degree understand the nature of scientific inquiry, whereas only 4% of

those with less than a high school degree do. 7 This type of knowledge

does not directly relate to any particular innovation but more generally

helps individuals process information about all innovations better.

Presumably this knowledge is acquired in school.

         Rosenzweig (1995) gives additional insights into why a relationship

between education and technology exists.                         Education not only improves

the ability to understand information but it enhances the ability to learn

from experience and observation. If the more educated are better at

learning then education will make a difference in situations where

learning is possible, such as in the case of chronic conditions. Lakdawalla

and Goldman (2001) and Case et al. (2001) do indeed find that education


6
  ib id .
7
  ib id . Th e lev e l of und ers tand ing o f s c ien tif ic inqu ir y w a s de ter min ed fro m an swe rs
to thr e e qu estion s. One qu estion ask p eop le if th ey und erstood scien tific stud y and ask
th em to descr ibe the me thodo log y. Ano th er question ask peop le if a con tro lled
e xper ime n t w as a b e tter w a y to ev a lu a te the imp ac t of a tr ea tme n t than o th er d a ta a nd
th ey w ere asked why. Fin a lly the last set of question s assessed th e ind iv idu al’s
und erstand ing of prob ab ilities.


                                                     6
matters more for chronic diseases. In the case of prescription drugs, one

would expect that among consumers with chronic conditions, the more

educated will be better at identifying the most effective (i.e. the newest)

drugs.

         Another implication of the learning theory, is that the more

complex a particular technology is (and therefore the higher the potential

gains from learning), the higher the advantage of the more educated will

be. In other words, the benefits of new technologies could also be higher

for the more educated (although note that there is evidence to the contrary

in the case of drugs, see Lichtenberg and Virabhak, 2002). Rosenzweig

and Schultz (1989) provide an example by comparing success rates of

different contraception methods for women with different levels of

education: success rates are identical for all women for “easy” methods

such as the pill, but the rhythm method is only effective for educated

women. 8 Admittedly, new drugs may be easier to use—e.g. once a day

rather than several times a day. So according to this argument differences

between     education      groups     should     persist    only    for   complex      drug

treatments.

         The previous section suggests that the main effect of education on

drug adoption is related to differences in information, differences in

perceptions of technological progress, differences in learning and in the

potential gains that accrue to the more educated depending on the


8
 Go ld ma n and Smith (2001) p rov ide add itional ev id ence that th e mor e educated are
mo re lik e ly to adh ere to tr eatme n ts.


                                             7
complexity of the innovation. There are several other mechanisms, more

specifically related to the use of prescription drugs, that could lead us to

find a positive relationship between education and the vintage (FDA

approval year) of the drug consumed.

         One important issue is whether or not there is any choice at all with

respect to drug choices or drug adoption. It is important to emphasize here

that today, there are many different drugs available to treat the vast

majority of conditions. Using the National Drug Data File (see data

appendix for details), we calculate that the average number of drugs that

are available to treat a condition is 4.74. Furthermore, the number of

drugs available is larger for the more prevalent conditions. This statistic

is calculated by looking at the condition that the FDA approved the drug

for. In reality, drugs are taken to treat many more conditions than they

were originally approved for. So if we calculate the same statistic using

the MEPS, we find that on average there are 22 drugs used for a given

condition! 9 The important point here is that there exists a choice of drug.

         A different question is whether the choice of prescription drug is

made by the patient. One possibility is that doctor and patient jointly

decide what drug is most appropriate to treat the condition if there is a

choice among different drugs. Another hypothesis is that individuals have

no choice with respect to the prescriptions they take—these are chosen

entirely by their physician—but individuals do select their physicians. It


9
 No te th a t th is av er ag e is we igh ted b y pr ev a lenc e and a lso r ef lec ts th e la rge r v ar iety
of u s es for wh ich drug s ar e even tu ally pr e scr ibe d.


                                                      8
is possible that the more educated select better doctors, who are better

informed about new innovations or more willing to prescribe newer drugs.

Alternatively, it is possible that individuals will switch doctors if they are

not being prescribed the drugs that they want to consume.

         There is anecdotal evidence that suggests that all of the above

occur.     There     is   evidence       that    patient     demand       influences       doctors’

prescribing behavior. In their 1989 study, Schwartz et al. found that

“patient demand for drugs, whether for a specific preparation or for a

prescription in general, was the most frequently cited motivation (46%)

for nonscientific prescribing”. 10 On the consumer side, recent evidence on

the effect of direct-to-consumer advertising suggests that consumers

respond to such advertising and ask their doctors about the prescriptions

advertised on television. 11 These studies suggest that patients can have an

important influence on their doctors’ prescribing behavior. Also note that

there is wide variation in the prescription behavior of doctors, and in the

rate at which doctors start prescribing new drugs (see review by Bradley,

1991). Another way to exercise choice consists in changing physicians.


10
    The stud y found th at “ph ysicians also fr equen tly attr ibu ted th eir p rescr ib ing of
th ese drug s to in ten tional use o f p lacebo eff ect.”
11
    A recen t stud y b y the K a is er Found ation analyz ed prescr iption drug con su mer
b ehav ior since the par tia l “ban ” on d ir ect- to-con su mer adver tis ing was lif ted in 1997.
I t found th at “A mong the 30% of Amer ican s who said they talk ed to their do ctor abou t
a me d icin e th e y s aw adve r tis ed in the p as t, 44% s a y th a t th e do c tor g ave th e m the
pr escr ip tion me d icine th ey ask ed abou t”. The ma j or ity of those who did no t con sult
th eir ph ysician abou t the adver tised drug s w er e no t actually aff ected b y th e cond ition
tr ea ted b y th e drug. Th is ev id en ce is no t un con trov ersial how ever . The FDA r epor ts
th at on ly 2% of p eop le who v isited a do ctor in th e last 3 mon ths dur ing wh ich th er e
w as a conv er sation about a pr escr ip tion drug d id so b ec au se t h e y “re ad o r s aw
so me th ing ” ( e.g. an adver tis emen t for a d rug). See qu estion 17 of
h ttp ://www.fd a.gov /cder /dd mac/d tctitle.h tm.



                                                  9
Legal evidence documents that patients change doctors to obtain different

prescriptions (See Temin, 1980) or that they obtain prescription medicine

illegally (the most recent example being the use of Oxycontin 12).

        In a similar vein, perhaps the choice of drug is made by the

insurance company or HMO. 13 Yet again it is possible that the more

educated choose better health care insurance plans, with more choices

among potential doctors and greater prescription drug coverage. Although

health insurance is mostly provided through employers, in 1999, 47% of

those employed declared that they had a choice of health care plans. 14

Furthermore individuals can switch health insurance plans. In 1996-97

however, only about 8% of those that changed health plans did so to

obtain better services. This channel is therefore plausible but perhaps less

likely. But among those that changed plans, the more educated did so at

higher rates (see Cunningham and Kohn, 2000).

        A    final   possibility      is   that     newer    drugs     are    developed       by

pharmaceutical companies for the more educated because the more

educated also are wealthier (although we control for income and wage).

12
    Meier, Barry, “Ov erdo ses o f Paink iller Ar e Link ed to 282 D eath s” Th e N ew Yo rk
Time s O c tob er 28, 2001, Sund ay.
13
    The work by Baker (2000), and Bak er and Ph ibb s (2000) suggests in f act that the
r a te of techno log y adoption h as been aff ected by ma n ag ed car e. Bu t sin ce the more
educated app ear to b e mo r e lik e ly to b e long to an H MO , and H MO s app ear to adop t
n ew techno log ies at a slow er p ace (Bak er , 2000, and Bak er and Ph ibb s, 2000), we ar e
po ten tia lly und erestimating th e tru e eff ect of edu cation . See Benjamin i and Benj amin i
(1984) . U sing th e 1996 MEPS, w e f ind th at th e mo re edu c ated are more lik e ly to
b e long to an H MO : among tho se with in sur ance, 21 % of me n w ithou t a h igh schoo l
d egree b e long to an HMO, wher e as abou t 53% of tho se w ith a Ph. D. do (for wo me n
th e d iff er enc e is 29 % ag a ins t 58 %). W e thank Sh err y G lied fo r prov iding th is
infor mation: The data on H MO is no t p ar t o f the ME PS public f iles so w e cou ld not
c a l cu la t e the s e n u mb er s o u r s e lve s.




                                               10
Note however that new drugs are developed for particular diseases. If

pharmaceutical companies target diseases of the rich and educated, we

would indeed observe a correlation between education and the age of the

drug. But this correlation would disappear once we control for condition.

II-Data

       To analyze prescription drug consumption, we use the Medical

Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) for 1997. 15 The MEPS is an individual-

level survey containing information on demographic characteristics (such

as age, sex, race, education, income, etc), insurance status, and drug use

(including drug price, who paid for the drug, the condition for which the

drug is taken, and how long the person has had the condition). 16 Since we

are interested in the effect of completed years of schooling, we restricted

the sample to individuals age 25 and above that used at least one

prescription drug in 1997 and had no missing observations.

       The MEPS data were collected in modules. The information on

prescription drugs is in a separate file from the person data and the

condition data. Each individual can be potentially matched to several

conditions and each condition can be matched to several prescriptions. In

the final data, every prescription, including refills, constitutes an

observation. Thus an individual will appear potentially several times in

these data.

14
   Fro m th e Co mmo nwealth Fund 1999 N a tion al Su rvey o f W orkers’ Health Insur an ce.
See Du chon et al. (2000).
15
   The 1996 MEPS d a ta is also av aila b le bu t in our conv ersation w ith th e AH RQ they
suggested th at th e pr escr ip tion d a ta for 1996 shou ld no t be used.


                                             11
           Data on drug approval dates come from several sources, but were

mostly obtained by filing a freedom of information act request with the

FDA (see Data Appendix). The FDA provided a list of all new drug

approvals since 1938 (the year when the FDA came into existence). We

determined from the FDA list the date at which the FDA first approved all

of the approximately 2000 active ingredients contained in drugs consumed

in 1997. For each medicine we calculated the age of the drug as the

number of years prior to 1997 that the active ingredient(s) in the

prescribed drug was first approved by the FDA. Although prescribed

medicines can contain one or more active ingredients, more than ¾ of the

drugs in our list are single-ingredient drugs. The average number of active

ingredients per drug is 1.27. For medicines with multiple active

ingredients we calculated the average age across all ingredients.

           The reason why we use the year when the active ingredient was

approved rather than the year when the drug was approved is that we

consider the approval of active ingredients to be the most important

innovation. The FDA also approves generic equivalents, and new dosage

forms of already existing drugs. There is a very large difference between

the number of drugs and innovation: today there are about 80,000

different drugs, but only about 2000 different active ingredients.

           Graph 1 shows the number of active ingredients approved each year

since the FDA’s inception. Note that many ingredients were first approved

soon after the FDA was established. Most of the ingredients contained in

16
     Se e App end ix fo r d e tails abou t the ME PS d a ta w e us e.

                                                    12
these products had already been discovered and were being used prior to

1938. Year of approval is not a good measure of the innovation date for

the early years, but this phenomenon is not very important after 1943

(approximately). Also note that we have some ingredients with an

approval date of 1930. 1930 was an arbitrarily chosen date for drugs that

existed prior to 1938 and never came to be approved by the FDA. The

actual innovation date is unknown.

      We link MEPS data with data on drug age from the FDA using drug

NDC codes, which uniquely identify all drugs available in the market. The

summary statistics for the final data are presented in Table 1. These

statistics are also presented for those with a high school degree or more,

and for those with less than a high school degree.

      The average age of drugs in the sample is about 25 years. The mean

is slightly higher for the less educated but not much. However these two

groups are very different on a number of other dimensions: the less

educated are also older, more likely to be single, to live in rural areas, to

be poor, and to be in poor health (they are more likely to report in poor

health, they have a higher number of hospital visits and they have higher

total health care expenditures). The means comparisons preview our

regression results: the difference in the age of the drug is affected by

education but the effect is not large.

      Several important statistics are not presented in the Table. The

minimum drug age in our data is –4. Although this might appear strange,




                                     13
we do observe individuals consuming drugs in 1997 that were approved

only in 2001. 17 There are 12,431 individuals in the data and 163,081

prescription-level observations. So the average number of prescriptions

per person is around 13. The average number of conditions per person is

about 2.6. So individuals are consuming about 5 prescriptions per

condition. This number might appear high at first but recall that it

includes refills. It is not clear whether is appropriate to use refills but we

note that the results presented below are very similar if we estimate all

regressions using means at the person level. 18 We present prescription

level results here since the prescription level data contains more

information, such as the amount the individual paid for the drug.



            III-Results

            1-Basic Results

We estimate the following model , which estimates whether education

decreases the age of the drug taken, conditional on taking a drug:

                     Age d c i = β X i        + µ Pdci + αc + εdci ,                  (1)

where Age d c i is the average age (measured in years) of drug d taken by

individual i for condition c; X i are characteristics of the individual taking

the drug, such as education, personal income and insurance status (these

characteristics do not change across drugs for the same individual); P d c i is

a set of prescription level variables such as the percentage of the total

17
     The s e ind iv id u a ls w er e ma y b e p ar t o f c l in i c a l tr i a l s.



                                                                14
amount paid by the individual for this drug; and α c is a set of 3-digit level

condition dummies. In all the estimation we cluster the errors at the

person level and we use the person weights provided by the survey. 19

           We control for detailed disease categories because innovation varies

significantly across diseases. The theory suggests that the more educated

will use newer technologies to treat the particular disease they are

affected with. The latest drug for condition i might be years older than the

latest drug for condition j. Since the distribution of diseases also varies

across education, the results could be biased if we fail to control for

condition.

           Table 2 presents the results. We find that one more year of

education lowers the age of the drug by 0.16 years. This effect is

statistically significant at the 1% level, but it is not very large given that

the mean age of drugs in the data is 25 years. Also this effect is small

when compared to other coefficients in the regression: for example, being

white or having private insurance decreases the age of the drug by 1.6

years. The economic magnitude is discussed further below.

           One important issue is that, as we discussed in the data description,

the true age of the drug is censored for drugs that were approved prior to

1943. We estimate a linear probability model where the dependent

variable is whether or not the drug was approved after 1970, 1980 and

1990 (columns 2, 3 and 4). As expected we find that the effect of


18
     Resu lts availab le upon r equest.
19
     Ou r r esu lts ar e no t v ery sen s itiv e to th e u se of w e igh ts .


                                                        15
education is positive and significant for all three specifications. We also

estimate the model using a Tobit specification to account for censoring 20

(Column 5). In this specification, the effect of education is somewhat

smaller but it is still negative and statistically significant.

        Finally, we address some issues concerning measurement of the age

of drugs. When constructing the data for the age of the drugs, we made a

series of imputations (see Data Appendix). If this measurement error is

random then it should not bias the regression coefficients at all. If it is

not random then the sign of the bias depends on the form of the

measurement error. We constructed a dummy variable equal to one if the

age of the drug was imputed, and equal to zero if the age of the drug was

known. The coefficient on this variable is positive and significant

suggesting most imputations we made were for older drugs. Including this

variable in our regression (last column in Table 3) has no significant

impact on the coefficient on education however.

        Although not reported in the table, we also estimated additional

model to test the robustness of the results for different measures of drug

vintage. Estimations that drop drugs for which drug age is imputed, use

date of approval of the main new molecular entity (instead of the approval

of the main active ingredient), or look only at priority drugs (the FDA has

a different schedule for drugs it considers more innovative), yielded

identical coefficients to those reported here.


20
   W e censor ed th e ag e at 54, under the assu mp tion th at, as d iscu ssed in th e d a ta
d escr ip tion, th e tru e innov ation d ate is known after 1943.


                                                16
      2-The effect of income and insurance

      An important issue is whether we can distinguish the effect of

education from that of income. Newer drugs are more expensive than

older drugs (see Graph 2), and the more educated are also wealthier.

Given that many individuals do not have insurance, a positive correlation

between age of a given drug and education could solely reflect differences

in income or borrowing constraints. All previous estimates controlled for

insurance status and income. But of course measures of income are

usually noisy, and insurance does not pay for all medical expenses. Also

note that insurance requires co-payments to be made for each purchase,

and the co-payment might be higher for newer drugs (since newer drugs

are more expensive). Graphs 3 does indeed document that individuals pay

more for newer drugs (except prior to FDA approval, so for ages –4 to -1).

      However the issue here is whether the less educated pay more out of

pocket for newer drugs. Lichtenberg and Phillipson (2001) find that

“drugs purchased under Medicaid [by low-income persons] are fairly

representative of all US drug transactions, at least in terms of price.” This

suggests that access to new (expensive) drugs by low-income (low

education) individuals (at least those covered by Medicaid) may not be

that limited. Graphs 4 and 5 show indeed that payments for prescription

(either total payments or percentage paid by self) are not higher for the

uneducated. Graphs 6 and 7 suggest an explanation: private insurance

covers a much larger percentage of prescription drugs for the educated,




                                     17
but on the other hand Medicaid pays a large percentage of prescriptions

for the uneducated.

      To further investigate this issue, we estimate the model again using

different specifications (table 3). Column 1 reproduces the basic results

form Table 1. In column (2) we add the percentage of the prescription that

the individual paid. The amount paid by the individual captures the

marginal cost to the individual and is perhaps the more relevant measure

(although it might be endogenous since people can move away from drugs

not covered by insurance). This variable is positive and very significant:

if the individual’s percentage payment increases by 10%, the age of the

drug increases by 0.6. However note that the inclusion of this variable

increases, rather than decreases, the coefficient on education.

      Next, we add the percentage of prescription drug expenditure that

the individual (or his family) paid for out-of-pocket over the year. This

variable captures the extent of prescription drug coverage that the person

has. Its effect is positive and significant: if the fraction of drug

expenditure borne by the individual increases by 10 percentage points, the

age of the drugs they use increases by 0.25 years. But interestingly the

inclusion of this variable has no impact on the coefficient of education.

      To fully account for the effects of insurance, we break down

insurance further into several components. In column 4 we estimate

models that include the percentage of total health expenditures paid over

the year from several sources. We find (as suggested by Graphs 6 and 7)




                                     18
that Medicaid coverage and private insurance result in newer drug

purchases (although only the later is statistically significant). Again, the

effect of education does not change much by adding these controls.

        Note that we assume that insurance can be taken as exogenous in

these specifications, which need not be the case as we discussed in

Section 2. However there is some evidence this is a plausible assumption

for prescription drugs. 21 There is no evidence that we know of about

whether income can be taken as exogenous in our specification. However,

if we estimate our basic model and control only for gender, race, and age,

we find that the effect of education is about –0.211 and significant.

        As a last attempt to control for access, we estimate a model

including the number of physician visits in the year. Presumably

prescription drugs are obtained after visiting a doctor. Those individuals

that do not have good access to doctors (because they are poor or

uninsured) would presumably not use prescription drugs. 22 The last

column of Table 3 shows the results. The number of physician visits is

insignificant and does not alter the coefficient of education. Note that this

variable can also be thought of as a measure of the severity of the illness,

an issue that we discuss below.




21
   For examp le, Lillard , Rogow sk i and K ig ton (1999) con c lud e th at insur ance is
exogenou s in a mo del of th e eff ect of d rug coverag e on drug u se and ou t of pocket
expend itur es for drugs. Cou lson et al. (1995 ) con c lude that in sur ance decision is
exogenou s to th e d e ma nd fo r drug s.
22
   And ther e wou ld no t be in our samp le un less th ere are consu ming r ef ills, or they
ob tain the prescrip tion afte r a hospital v isit. We still believ e th at the nu mb er o f visits
to th e doctor is a good me a s u r e o f a c c e s s a mo n g tho se tha t h a v e s o me a c c e s s .


                                                  19
        It is worth commenting about how we think of the issue of drug

prices. Although we observe the total amount of payments made for the

prescription, which can be thought of as the price paid for the drug, we do

not include it in our estimations 23 because the standard economic models

suggest that the relevant price information consists of the quality adjusted

relative price of the new drug (compared with other drugs for the same

condition), which we don’t observe. Furthermore if all individuals faced

identical price schedules then we could not estimate the effect of price

using a cross section. But since there is price discrimination in the drugs

market, 24 individuals do face different price schedules, which again we do

not observe. However we do control for detailed insurance coverage,

which is one of the reasons (in addition to location) why individuals face

different relative prices for the same drugs.

        Finally, although we find that the effect of education remains even

with     detailed       controls       for    income        and     insurance,        one      possible

interpretation of our results is that education is capturing the effect of

permanent income or wealth rather than the effect of education itself. This

is possible since we only observe annual income, which is prone to

measurement error and at best is only a measure of current income. We do

not have data that allows us to construct permanent income measures. But

23
   W e d id estima te a model using to ta l amoun t paid for prescr ip tion at th e pr escr ip tion
le ve l. Th e eff e c t of educ a tion wa s un chang ed in th es e e s tima tio ns . Res ults av a ilab le
upon r equ est.
24
   D if fer en t ind iv idu als pay d iff er en t amoun ts for th e same pr escr ip tion drug
d epend ing on th eir in surance p lans and th e pr ices that par ticu lar ph ar macies off er .
So ren sen (2001) do cu me n ts th at “[pr escr ip tion drug ] pr ices var y w id e ly across stor es,



                                                   20
we note here that others have found that the effect of education on health

does not disappear once permanent income or wealth is accounted for. 25

         3-controlling for severity

         It is reasonable to hypothesize that the more seriously ill have

greater access to newer drugs. Our data, like previous research, 26 suggests

that the less educated are more likely to be seriously ill (recall the

discussion in the data description). Therefore we could be underestimating

the effect of education. Note however that the inclusion of severity

measures is not without problems since severity variables are possibly

endogenous: those without access to newer drugs will become sicker.

Nonetheless, we add several controls for severity.

         The results are in Table 4. First we include the number of times the

person visited the hospital over the year. Then we include a dummy if the

individual self reported to be in bad health and, finally, we add total

health expenditures over the year. None of these measures is significant at

the 5% level, nor does their inclusion affect the coefficient on education.

Interestingly note that the effect of hospital is positive—consistent with



and sto res' pr ice r ank ing s are inconsisten t across d rugs (so th e low-p r ice phar macy is
d iff er en t for on e p re sc rip tion v s. ano th er) ”.
25
   Meer et. all (2001 ) show u s ing in stru me n tal v ar iab le s th at th e eff ect o f w ealth on
h ea l th is n o t c au s a l. I n t h e ir r eg r ess io n s edu ca ti o n ( l a ck the r eo f ) i s a lw a ys
sign if ic an t. Hurd et al. (2001) also show th at fo r so me h ealth measu res education as
w e ll as w e alth app ear to h av e cau sal imp acts on h ealth. Case et al (2001) f ind th at
p aren t’s educ a tion af fe cts ch ild ren’s he a lth n e t of p er ma n ent in co me : for
o ld er k id s mo m's education is signif ican t (no t d ad 's) and for young er k ids, d ad 's
education is sign if ican t (no t mo m's). ( th ese r e su lts are no t p ar t of the curr en t v er s ion
of th eir paper bu t Ann e Case k ind ly ma d e th em av ailab le to me ) . A lthough our
ou tco me of in terest is no t h ealth, this ev id en ce i s su g g es t iv e th a t the e f f ec t o f
education is no t so lely cap tur ing the eff ect of per manen t inco me or w ealth.
26
   F o r exa mp l e s e e r ev i ew b y A d ler a n d N ew ma n .


                                                      21
Lichtenberg (1996, 2001)—suggesting this variable may be endogenous

(i.e. taking newer drugs reduces the probability of hospital admission). 27

         4-Variation across conditions in the effect of education

         Although our data do not allow us to test all the mechanisms by

which education affects the age of the drug consumed, we can test one

hypothesis, that education matters only or primarily where learning is

possible, i.e. for chronic conditions. In the MEPS data, we do not have

information          about       whether         conditions          are     chronic        or     acute.      And

unfortunately information on how long the person has had the condition is

missing for a large part of our sample. So we cannot simply categorize

conditions into acute and chronic. We can however test the hypothesis in

two ways. First, we can estimate separate regressions by condition to see

whether the effect of education is larger for conditions that are usually

classified as chronic. Alternatively, we look at whether the effect of

education is larger for individuals who repeatedly purchase drugs for a

given condition.

         We first estimate regressions separately by broad disease categories

(Table 5). We find some evidence to support the learning hypothesis: the

effect of education is negative and significant for chronic diseases such as

diseases of the nervous system, mental disorders and cardiovascular

diseases. The effect is positive and insignificant for several diseases that

are generally acute such as all infectious diseases and disease of the


27
  The MEP S a l so con t a in s inf o r ma t i o n ab o u t w h en th e ind iv id u a l f ir s t b ec a me s i ck,
bu t w e d id no t u se it because it is missing for a large nu mb er of observ a tions.


                                                         22
digestive and genitourinary system. However there are a couple of odd

results: we find a positive effect for cancers, which are chronic diseases

and we find a negative effect for respiratory diseases, several of which

are acute. However we note that these categories are very broad and so

this is not a clear test of the acute versus chronic condition effect. At the

bottom of the table we re-estimate regressions for chronic diseases for

which we have many observations at the three digit level. We confirm that

the effect of education is negative for hypertension and chronic sinusitis,

but again we find that the effect of education is positive (although small

and insignificant) for diabetes and depression.

      To further investigate this hypothesis we look at whether the effect

of education is larger for those people who repeatedly purchase drugs for

a given condition. The MEPS contains information about the number of

prescriptions that the individual reports to have taken over the year for

each of his conditions. This is probably a good, but by no means perfect,

indicator of whether the condition is chronic. If the more educated can

learn better from experience, we should observe that the effect of

education is larger for those who repeatedly purchase drugs for a given

condition. First we estimate the results for three different groups: those

that have only 1 prescription for the condition, those that have between 2

and 6 prescriptions and those with 7 or more prescriptions for the

condition. Note that the median number of prescriptions per condition is

3. The results are presented in Table 6.




                                     23
        We find strong evidence to support our hypothesis. The effect of

education      is   positive     and     insignificant      for    those    with     only        one

prescription for the condition, it becomes negative and significant for

those with 2 to 6 prescriptions by condition and it increases to –0.269 for

those who use more than 7 prescriptions. In the last column of Table 6 we

re-estimate the model pooling all individual together and interacting

education with the log of the number of prescriptions by condition. 28

Again we find that the effect of education is larger for those who use

many prescription. These results are consistent with the learning model.

        5-Effects of education for different demographic groups

        There are large differences in a variety of health outcomes between

different demographic groups. We therefore re-estimate the model by race

and gender in Table 7. The effect of education is negative for both

genders, although the effect is larger and only statistically significant for

males. We also find that the effect of education is large and significant

for whites, and small and insignificant for blacks, but the sample is

smaller for this last group. Both of these findings are consistent however

with previous findings in the health literature, which suggest larger

effects of education on health for whites and for males (for example see

Elo and Preston, 1996 and Christenson and Johnson, 1995).

        6-Is the effect causal?




28
  W e chose a log sp ecif ication becau se th e p revious r esu lts suggest th e eff ects ar e
non- lin ear, bu t th e r e sults are ver y similar if we use a lin ear specif ication.


                                               24
      So far we have assumed that the measured effects of education

reflect the fact that the more educated use newer drugs, i.e. we have given

the education effect a causal interpretation. This need not be the case.

      One possibility is that there is omitted variable bias. Perhaps

education captures differences in unmeasured ability. In additional

estimations not reported here, we added wages to capture differences in

ability. They were never significant, nor did their inclusion affect the

coefficient on education. But of course wages are only a proxy for ability.

      Perhaps there are also differences in discount rates: the more

patient individuals invest more in education and health, with investment

in health being captured by the use of newer drugs. Alternatively there

could be some form of reverse causality: those that don’t use new drugs

are sicker when growing up, and they obtain less education. Unfortunately

no instruments are available, 29 so our results must be interpreted with

caution. We note nonetheless that, as stated in the introduction, other

studies provide evidence that there is a causal effect of education on

health, consistent with our results.



IV-Conclusions

      This paper has shown a robust relationship between education and

the age of drugs consumed. The MEPS data allowed us to control for a

variety of detailed individual characteristics, the majority of which had no




                                       25
impact on the estimated effect of education. The evidence presented in

this paper does strongly suggest there is differential adoption by the more

educated. Importantly, we also find that the effect of education is larger

for individuals who repeatedly purchase drugs for a given condition. This

result suggests that the more educated are better able to learn from

experience.

        However, the effect of one more year of schooling on the age of the

drug consumed is small. Nonetheless we note here that in the absence of

Medicaid the relationship between education and drug age might be much

larger. It is impossible for us to actually test this hypothesis but the

evidence presented here certainly suggest that access to newer drugs by

uneducated poor consumers might be much lower if Medicaid did not

provide prescription drug coverage.

        How important is the effect of education on health because of use of

newer innovations? This question is difficult to answer, in part because in

order to evaluate the impact of new drugs on health one needs to know not

only whether the more educated adopt first but also how much they

benefit from new innovations. Evidence from Lichtenberg and Virabhak

(2001) suggests that the less educated benefit more form new drugs. We

find that they are also late adopter. Overall it is unclear what effect

innovation might have on the health gap. Nonetheless we note here that

ceteris     paribus      (i.e.    if   everyone        benefits      identically       from       new


29
  We inv estig ated d ifferen t possib ilities with the ME PS, but we failed to find
instru me n ts th at wou ld satisf y the usu a l cr iter ia. Resu lts availab le upon r equest.


                                                 26
innovations), then differential adoption can only explain a small part of

the education-health gap. We calculate that a ten-year increase in

education decreases the average age of the drug taken by 1.6 years. Using

results from Lichtenberg (2001b), we calculate that this decrease results

in a life expectancy gain of .0475 years, or about 2.5 weeks. This is a

very small gain from a large increase in education.

      Nonetheless, our results do suggest that the more educated use

newer medical technologies, controlling for income and insurance. We

have documented the effect in one area of medical innovation: drugs.

Given that prescription drugs is a realm where individuals may have

relatively little choice, it is quite possible that the effect of education is

larger in other areas where choice is more important. Also note that

although newer drugs are important innovations in terms of their effects

of health, other innovations in the medical field in recent years may have

had larger impacts on health (see Fuchs and Sox, 2001). In these areas,

therefore, the effect of education on health via technology adoption may

be larger. Finally we believe these results are important in that they

document that the more educated have fundamentally different behaviors

with respect to health. This paper is a first step in understanding how

education affects health.

      We note however a couple of caveats to our analysis. We cannot

claim with confidence that our results represent causal estimates of the

effect of education given that we do not have good instruments in our




                                     27
data. But the results do suggest that unobservables may not be very

important. Also, even with the detailed data available in the MEPS we

cannot investigate all the possible mechanisms by which education affects

the age of the drugs consumed. We find evidence to support the

hypothesis that education matters for situations where learning is

possible, such as for chronic diseases. On the other hand, we do not know

if the educated have access to better information about new drugs, or if

they perceive them to be more effective. Additionally there are other

hypothesis we cannot test, such as whether the educated use drugs more

effectively or whether they change doctors in order to obtain the

prescriptions they want. Work in these directions would provide very

useful insights about how education changes individual behaviors towards

health and health production.




                                   28
                              Data Appendix


Data on drug approval
Each drug used by individuals in the MEPS was assigned an age that was
calculated using the FDA date of approval of the active ingredient(s).
Most drugs are composed of a unique ingredient—for drugs that contain
more than one ingredient we calculated the average year of approval.
The FDA provided the date at which all active ingredients were approved.
There were several ingredients in the data for which approval date was not
available. Some dates were imputed as follows:
-we imputed the date if the name of the ingredient was very similar to the
name of another FDA active ingredient for which we have a date. We
interpret the FDA lack of data on a similar ingredient as meaning that the
FDA does not consider it a separate ingredient. For example, the FDA has
an approval date for adenosine (1988) but provides no data for adenosine
phosphate,   adenosine   5   monophosphate,     adenosine   5   triphosphate
disodium, so we interpret that FDA considers all these the same compound
(adenosine) and imputed a 1988 date for them.
-Mosby (a private company) provided another list of FDA approval dates
that was used to impute the dates that were still missing. We used this list
to manually replace an additional 27 cases.
-No attempt to impute missing dates for those ingredients that never
appear in the prescribed medicine event, to this extent our data on
approvals might not be yet as complete as possible.


Data on drug approval year was matched to NDC codes by active
ingredient. Multum Information Services provides data that matches drugs
to active ingredients using the unique NDC drug code. This data are
available from the internet at: http://www.multum.com. Then the data was
matched to the prescribed medicine 1997 MEPS data by NDC code.




                                    29
There were about 1500 cases that couldn’t be matched due to errors in the
NDC codes in the prescribed medicine event file. We imputed the active
ingredient (and therefore the approval date) for the majority of these
cases using the name of the drug (the MEPS provides that name).


Because of these imputations, we are concerned about the effect of
measurement error. We therefore created an additional variable "imputed"
that is equal to one if the date was imputed at all, that we use in some of
the analysis.


MEPS data


We use the following MEPS components for 1997: Person data file (HC-
020), prescription event data (HC-016A) and condition data (HC-018).
The prescription and the condition data are merged using the linking files
(HC-16IF1). We keep only those observations for which there is
prescription and condition data.




                                    30
Bibliography
Adler, Nancy E. and Katherine Newman, forthcoming, “SES Disparities in
Health. Pathways and Policies” Health Affairs

Baker, Laurence C, November 2000, “Managed Care and Technology
Adoption in Health Care: Evidence from Magnetic Resonance Imaging,”
NBER Working paper W8020

Baker, Laurence C and Ciaran S. Phibbs, September 2000, “Managed
Care, Technology Adoption and Health Care: The Adoption of Neonatal
Intensive Care,” NBER Working paper W7883,

Bartel, Ann P. and Frank R. Lichtenberg, February 1987, “The
Comparative Advantage of Educated Workers in implementing new
technology,” the Review of Economics and Statistics, pp.1-11

Benjamini, Yeal and Yoav Benjamini, September 1984, “An Empirical
Study of the Choice Among Medical Insurance Plans,” Working paper

Berger, Mark C. and J. Paul Leigh, 1989, ``Schooling, Self Selection and
Health,'' Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 24, pp.433-455

Bradley, Colin p., 1991, “Decision Making and Prescribing Patterns—a
Literature Review,” Family Practice, Vol. 8, No. 3, pp. 276-287

Case, Ann, Darren Lubutosky and Christina Paxson, March 2001,
“Economic Status and health in Childhood: the origins of the gradient,”
Center for Health and Well being Working paper

Christenson, Bruce A. and Nan E. Johnson, May 1995, “Educational
Inequality in Adult Mortality: An Assessment with Death Certificate Data
from Michigan,” Demography, Vol. 32, No. 2, pp. 215-229

Coulson, N. Edward, Joseph V. Terza, Cheryl A. Neslusan, Bruce C.
Stuart, May, 1995, “Estimating the Moral-Hazard Effect of Supplemental
Medical Insurance in the Demand for Prescription Drugs by the Elderly,”
American Economic Review, Vol. 85, No. 2., pp. 122-126

Cunningham, Peter J. and Linda Kohn, May/June 2000, “Health plan
Switching: Choice or Circumstance?,” Health Affairs, Volume 19, Number
3, pp.158-164

Duchon Lisa, Schoen Cathy, Simantov Elizabeth, Karen Davis, and
Christina An, January 2000, “Listening to Workers: Findings from The
Commonwealth fund 1999 National Survey of Workers’ Health
insurance”, www.abtassoc.com


                                  31
Elo, Irma T. and Samuel H. Preston, 1996, ``Educational Differentials in
Mortality: United States, 1979-85,'' Social Science and Medicine 42(1),
pp. 44-57

Feldman J. D. Makuc, J. Kleinman and J. Cornoni-Huntley, 1989,
``National Trends in Educational Differences in Mortality,'' American
Journal of Epidemiology, pp. 919-933

Fuchs, Victor R. and Harold C. Sox Jr., “Physicians’ View of the Relative
Importance of Thirty Medical innovations,” Health Affairs, Volume 20,
Number 5, September/October 2001

Goldman, Dana and Darius Lakdawalla, June 2001, “Understanding Health
disparities across education groups,” NBER Working paper 8328

Goldman, Dana P. and James P. Smith, June 2001''Can Patient Self-
Management Explain the SES Health Gradient,'' RAND Working Paper

Grossman, Michael, 1972, ``On the Concept of Health Capital the Demand
for Health,'' Journal of Political Economy 80, (Illinois, United States)
223-255

Grossman, Michael and R. Kaestner, 1997, “Effects of Education on
Health,” in J.R. Berhman and N. Stacey Eds., The Social Benefits of
Education, University of Michigan Press, pp. 223-255

Hurd, Michael, Daniel McFadden, Angela Merill and Tiago Ribeiro,
forthcoming, “Healthy, Wealthy, and Wise? New Evidence from AHEAD
Wave 3,” Journal of Econometrics

Kaiser Foundation, November 2001, “Understanding the Effects of Direct-
to-Consumer Prescription Drug Advertising,” report, www. kff.org

Kenkel, Donald, April 1991, ``Health Behavior, Health knowledge and
Schooling,'' Journal of Political Economy, Volume 99, Issue 2, pp. 287-
305

Leigh, J. Paul and Rachna Dhir, 1997, ``Schooling and Frailty Among
Seniors,'' Economics of Education Review, Volume 16, No. 1, pp. 45-57

Lichtenberg, Frank R., May 1996, "Do (More and Better) Drugs Keep
People Out of Hospitals?", American Economic Review 86, pp. 384-8.




                                   32
Lichtenberg, Frank R. September/October 2001 “Are the Benefits and
Costs of Newer Drugs Worth Their Cost? Evidence from the 1996 MEPS,”
Health Affairs 20(5), pp. 241-51.

Lichtenberg, Frank R., forthcoming, “Pharmaceutical Knowledge-Capital
Accumulation and Longevity,” in Measuring Capital in the New Economy,
ed. by Carol Corrado, John Haltiwanger, and Dan Sichel, (University of
Chicago Press)

Lichtenberg, Frank R. and Thomas J. Philipson, April 2001, “The Dual
Effects of intellectual Property Regulations: Within- and Between-Patent
Competition in the US Pharmaceutical Industry,” mimeo,

Lichtenberg, Frank R., and Suchin Virabhak, 2001,“Pharmaceutical-
embodied technical progress, longevity, and quality of life: drugs as
‘equipment for your health,’” Columbia University, mimeo

Lillard, Lee A., Jeannette Rogowski, and Raynard Kington. 1999,
"Insurance Coverage for Prescription Drugs: Effects on Use and
Expenditures in the Medicare Population." Medical Care, vol. 37, No. 9,
pp. 926-936

Lleras-Muney, Adriana, May 2001, “The Relationship Between Education
and Adult Mortality in the United States,” NBER Working paper #8986

Meara, Ellen, April 2001, “Why is health related to socio-economic
Status? The case of pregnancy and low birth weight,” NBER Working
Paper

Meer, Jonathan, Douglas Miller and Harvey S. Rosen, August 2001,
“Exploring the Health-Wealth Nexus,” mimeo, Princeton University

Nelson, Richard R. and Edmund S. Phelps, 1966, “Investment in Humans,
Technological Diffusion and Economics Growth,” American Economic
Review, pp. 69-75

Pappas, Gregory, Susan Queen, Wolber Hadden and Grail Fisher, 1993,
``The Increasing Disparity in Mortality Between Socioeconomic Groups in
the United States, 1960 and 1986,'' The New England Journal of Medicine,
pp. 103-109

Rosenzweig, Mark R., May 1995, “Why are there returns to Schooling?,”
American Economic Review, Volume 85, Issue 2, pp. 153-158




                                    33
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and T. Paul Schultz, May 1989, ``Schooling,
Information and Nonmarket Productivity: Contraceptive Use and its
effectiveness,'' International Economic Review, 30920. pp. 457-77

Sander, William, 1995, ``Schooling and Quitting Smoking,'' Review of
Economics and Statistics, 77, pp. 191-199

Schwartz, RK, Avorn J. Soumerai and Jerry Avorn, 1989, “Physician
Motivation for non-scientific drug prescribing,” Social Science and
Medicine, vol. 28, pp. 577-582

Sorensen, Alan T., October 2001, “An Empirical Model of Heterogeneous
Consumer Search for Retail Prescription Drugs,” NBER Working Paper
No. W8548

Temin, Peter, May 1980, “Regulation and the Choice of Prescription
Drugs,” American Economic Review, Volume 70, Issue 2, Papers and
Proceedings of the Ninety-Second Annuals Meeting of the American
Economic Association, pp. 301-305




                                 34
         Graph 1: Number of active ingredients first observed in
                 FDA new drug approvals data, by year

160

140

120

100

 80

 60

 40

 20

  0
  1930      1940     1950     1960     1970         1980   1990    2000
                               Approval year




                                               35
                                   Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                     Prescription Level Data

                                                  A ll             Ed <12            Ed >=12
V ar iab le                                   Me an S td . D ev.   Me an S td . D ev. Me an S td . D ev.
# of ye ar s sin ce drug was
approved                                     25.876    17.855      25.920   17.767    25.855   17.896
Ag e                                         58.501    15.825      64.024   15.059    55.891   15.504
Co mp leted year s of education              11.862    3.337       8.121    2.592     13.629   1.868
Marr ied ( =1)                                0.565    0.496       0.491     0.500     0.601    0.490
W hite ( =1)                                  0.851     0.356       0.809    0.393     0.870    0.336
In u rban ar ea ( MSA =1)                     0.709     0.454       0.599    0.490     0.762   0.426
Fema le ( =1)                                0.658     0.474       0.669    0.471     0.653    0.476
In co me 0-10K                                0.433     0.496       0.671    0.470     0.321   0.467
In co me 10 - 20 K                            0.224     0.417       0.213   0.410      0.229   0.420
In co me 20 - 30 K                            0.127     0.333       0.069   0.253      0.155   0.362
In co me 30 - 40 K                            0.089     0.284       0.030   0.170      0.116   0.321
In co me 40 - 50 K                            0.047     0.211       0.008   0.089      0.065   0.246
In co me 50 - 60 K                            0.031     0.174       0.002   0.044      0.045   0.207
In co me 60 - 70 K                            0.016     0.124       0.003   0.051      0.022   0.146
In co me 70 - 80 K                            0.014     0.117       0.001   0.037      0.020   0.139
In co me 80 - 90 K                            0.005     0.074       0.002   0.040      0.007   0.085
In co me 90 - 100 K                           0.002     0.045       0.001    0.035     0.002   0.049
In co me 100 - 110 K                          0.004     0.062       0.000   0.000      0.006   0.075
In co me 110 - 120 K                          0.004     0.065       0.000   0.000      0.006   0.079
In co me 120 - 130 K                          0.001     0.026       0.000   0.010      0.001   0.031
In co me 130 - 140 K                          0.001     0.028       0.000   0.000      0.001   0.033
In co me 140 - 150 K                          0.001     0.031       0.000   0.000      0.001   0.038
In co me 150K +                               0.001     0.038       0.000    0.000     0.002    0.047
H as Pr iv ate In suran c e on ly ( =1)       0.650     0.477       0.423    0.494     0.757    0.429
H as Pub lic In suran c e on ly ( =1)         0.298     0.457       0.516    0.500     0.194    0.396
Approv ed after 1970                          0.559     0.496       0.565    0.496     0.556    0.497
Approv ed after 1980                          0.438     0.496       0.447    0.497     0.434    0.496
Approv ed after 1990                          0.182     0.386       0.171    0.377     0.187    0.390
Ag e of th e drug imp u ted ( =1)             0.122     0.327       0.106    0.308     0.130    0.336
Nu mb er o f ph ys ician v isits in
year                                          9.384    11.350      9.009     9.211    9.561    12.227
% paymen t p a id b y self fo r
pr escr ip tion                               0.585     0.424      0.607     0.444    0.574     0.414
% pr escr ip tions paid b y
self /f amily in year                         0.522     0.350      0.554     0.373    0.507     0.338
To ta l h e a lth c are exp end itur es in
year                                         7485.49 12337.86 8501.65 13969.12 7005.3 11455.53
Self repor ted b ad h ealth                   0.155    0.362   0.250    0.433   0.111   0.314
Nu mb er o f ho spital v isits in year        0.372    1.059   0.424    0.988   0.347   1.091
Nu mb er o f pr es cr ip tions b y            4.342    3.688   4.390   3.740   4.319   3.787
cond ition

                    Sample: Individuals aged 25 and above. Data 1997 MEPS. N=163,081.




                                                      36
                                   Table 2: Effect of education of the age of drug consumed
                                                       Basic regressions
            Model                                   OLS             OLS            OLS            OLS        TOBIT           OLS
            D epend en t V ar iab le            Ag e of d rug       Drug           Drug           Drug       Ag e of        Ag e of
                                                 in years        approved       approved       approved      drug in        drug in
                                                                af te r 1970   af te r 1980   af te r 1990   year s ( a )    year s

            Edu c a tion                          -0.158**        0.004**         0.003*        0.004**      -0.116**       -0.158**
                                                   (0.045)        (0.001)        (0.001)        (0.001)       (2.0e-04)      (0.045)
            Marr ied                               -0.568*        0.016*         0.018*          0.009        -0.114**       -0.568*
                                                   (0.250)        (0.007)        (0.007)        (0.006)        (0.001)       (0.250)
            White                                 -1.501**        0.032**        0.036**         0.015        -0.245**      -1.473**
                                                   (0.349)        (0.010)        (0.010)        (0.008)        (0.002)       (0.348)
            Urb an                                  0.084          -0.004         -0.000         0.004         0.094**        0.088
                                                   (0.277)        (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.007)        (0.002)       (0.277)
            F e ma le                                0.306         -0.012         -0.014         0.003         3.440**        0.288
                                                   (0.269)        (0.008)        (0.008)        (0.007)        (0.001)       (0.268)
            Pr iv a te in sur anc e (=1)          -1.604**         0.037*        0.054**        0.043**       -1.845**      -1.600**
                                                   (0.513)        (0.018)        (0.016)        (0.013)        (0.003)       (0.514)
            Pub lic In surance ( =1)                -0.615         0.015           0.033        0.040**       -1.137**        -0.597
                                                   (0.553)        (0.019)        (0.017)        (0.014)        (0.003)       (0.553)
            Ag e of th e drug imp u ted ( =1)                                                                               1.344**
                                                                                                                             (0.380)
            16 in co me categor y du mmies          yes             yes            yes            yes           yes            yes

            R- squar ed                             0.27            0.27           0.26           0.14                        0.27

Notes: Data: 1997 MEPS. N = 163081. Sample: All prescriptions for individuals aged 25 and above with no missing values. Regressions
include region of residence dummies, single years of age dummies and 3 digit level condition dummies. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are
clustered at the person level.
(a) dependent variable right censored at 54. A random effects tobit model would not converge, therefore the errors are not clustered here.
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                       37
                  Table 3: Effect of education of the age of drug consumed
                               Further control for insurance


D epend en t V ar iab le:                                       Basic % p r i ce             %     Br eak Do ctor
Ag e of d rug                                                 r eg r es s i p a id b y pr es cr ip down   v is i t s
                                                                  on         s e lf ( a ) tions insu ran
                                                                                           s e lf   ce
                                                                                          p a ys cover ag
                                                                                                      e

Edu c a tion                                                  -0.158** -0.169** -0.161** -0.167** -0.157**
                                                               (0.045)  (0.046) (0.045) (0.045) (0.045)
Marr ied                                                       -0.568* -0.499* -0.539* -0.534* -0.572*
                                                               (0.250)  (0.249) (0.248) (0.254) (0.250)
White                                                         -1.501** -1.632** -1.553** -1.530** -1.492**
                                                               (0.349)  (0.350) (0.350) (0.346) (0.349)
Urb an                                                          0.084    0.417    0.264    0.165    0.086
                                                               (0.277)  (0.276) (0.276) (0.277) (0.277)
F e ma le                                                        0.306   0.228    0.268    0.351    0.312
                                                               (0.269)  (0.270) (0.269) (0.270) (0.269)
Pr iv a te in sur anc e (=1)                                  -1.604**   0.661   -0.443           -1.589**
                                                               (0.513)  (0.524) (0.539)            (0.514)
Pub lic In surance ( =1)                                        -0.615  1.969**   0.633            -0.592
                                                               (0.553)  (0.567) (0.579)            (0.554)
% paymen t p a id b y self fo r pr escr ip tion                         5.990**
                                                                        (0.278)
% of p a ymen ts paid b y self for pr escr ip tions in year                     2.573**
                                                                                 (0.366)
% paid b y oth er sources is lef t ou t categor y
% of me d ical expend itur es paid b y Med icaid                                                 -0.309
                                                                                                (0.953)
% of me d ical expend itur es paid b y Med icar e                                                 0.310
                                                                                                (0.997)
% of me d ical expend itur es paid b y pr iv ate insur ance                                     -1.978*
                                                                                                (0.815)
% of me d ical expend itur es paid b y self                                                      -0.076
                                                                                                (0.885)
# of f ice-b ased ph ys ician v isits                                                                        -0.005
                                                                                                            (0.011)

16 in co me categor y du mmies                                  yes         yes        yes        yes        yes
Cond ition du mmies                                             yes         yes        yes        yes        yes

R- squar ed                                                     0.27       0.29       0.27        0.27       0.27
        Notes: Data: 1997 MEPS. N = 163081. Sample: All prescriptions for individuals aged 25 and
        above with no missing values. Regressions include region of residence dummies, single years
        of age dummies and 3 digit level condition dummies. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are
        clustered at the person level.
        (a) N=163079 when including % price paid by self for prescription
        * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                      38
                                        Table 4: Eff ect of educat ion of t he ag e of drug consumed
                                                Perso n level results. Contro l for Sev erity
                    D epend en t v ar iab le:                    Basic          Ho sp ital      Bad               To ta l
                    Ag e of d rug in ye ar s                  r egr ession        v is i t s H ea l th ( a )   expend itur es

                    Edu c a tion                                 -0.158**          -0.158**       -0.158**        -0.157**
                                                                  (0.045)           (0.045)        (0.045)         (0.044)
                    Marr ied                                      -0.568*           -0.564*        -0.585*         -0.565*
                                                                  (0.250)           (0.250)        (0.251)         (0.251)
                    White                                        -1.501**          -1.502**       -1.503**        -1.509**
                                                                  (0.349)           (0.349)        (0.352)         (0.349)
                    Urb an                                         0.084             0.089          0.039           0.091
                                                                  (0.277)           (0.277)        (0.279)         (0.277)
                    F e ma le                                      0.306             0.305          0.318           0.309
                                                                  (0.269)           (0.269)        (0.270)         (0.268)
                    Pr iv a te in sur anc e (=1)                 -1.604**          -1.609**       -1.606**        -1.623**
                                                                  (0.513)           (0.514)        (0.512)         (0.514)
                    Pub lic in surance ( =1)                       -0.615            -0.631         -0.632          -0.631
                                                                  (0.553)           (0.553)        (0.553)         (0.555)
                    Nu mb er o f ho spital v isits in year                            0.049
                                                                                    (0.170)
                    Self repor ted b ad h ealth                                                     0.176
                                                                                                   (0.398)
                    To ta l h e a lth c are exp end itur es in                                                     0.000
                    year
                                                                                                                  (0.000)
                    16 in co me du mmies                           yes              yes             yes             yes
                    R-squ ar ed                                    0.27             0.27            0.27           0.27
Notes: Data: 1997 MEPS. N = 163081. Sample: All prescriptions for individuals aged 25 and above with no missing values. Regressions
include region of residence dummies, single years of age dummies and 3 digit level condition dummies. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are
clustered at the person level.
(a) N=161,359 when including self reported bad health
* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                       39
                                   Table 5:Effect of education of the age of drug consumed
                                                     By disease categories

                                                                                         Beta(a)     s.e.      N      R - squ ar ed



                By bro ad d isease categor ies ( b )
                Infectious and p arasitic d iseases                                       0.097    (0.187 )   2831       0.25
                Can c er (N eop lasms )                                                    0.623   (0.383 )    1457      0.36
                Endo cr in e, nu tr ition al, me tab o lic and immu n ity d isord ers      0.014     (0.1 )   22546      0.59
                D isease of b lood and blood fo r ming org an s                           1.319*   (0.671 )    563       0.75
                Men tal d isord ers                                                       -0.115   (0.136 )   10835      0.23
                D iseases or th e n ervous systems and sen s e org ans                  -0.688**   (0.188 )   8430       0.23
                Card iovascular d iseases                                                -0.183*   (0.086 )   41645      0.13
                Resp ir ator y system d iseases                                          -0.283*   (0.122 )   17433      0.08
                D ig estiv e system                                                        0.06    (0.138 )    7532      0.37
                D iseases of th e g en itourin ar y system                                 0.02     (0.14 )   6920       0.47
                A ll O th er                                                             -0.180*    (0.09 )   42889       0.2

                For so me commo n 3 d igit I CD 9 d ise a se s
                H yp er ten sion ( ICD9 code=401)                                        -0.161    (0.093 )   25257      0.05
                Chron ic sinu sitis (ICD9 cod e=473)                                     -0.353    (0.222 )   2147       0.12
                D iabetes (ICD9 code=250)                                                 0.265    (0.158 )    8129      0.13
                D epression (I CD9 cod e=311)                                             0.005    (0.188 )   5512       0.16
Notes: Data: 1997 MEPS. Sample: All prescriptions for individuals aged 25 and above with no missing values.
(a) Each coefficient represents the effect of more more year of schooling and is obtained from separate regressions. Each regressions include
all the controls used in previous tables. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the person level.

(b) These broad categories were created by grouping icd9 codes at the two digit level as follows: as follows infection (13 and less), cancer
(14-23) endocrine (24-27), blood (28-29), mental (29-31), nervous (32-38), cardiovascular (39-45), respiratory (46-51), digestive (52-57),
urinary (58-62) and other (63 and above). In these regressions 3-digit condition dummies (within category) were included.

* significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                          40
                              Table 6: Effect of education by extent of prescription drug use

             D epend en t v ar iab le: Ag e of d rug in       A l l-          1           Betw een 2          7 or mor e             A l l-
             year s                                          Basic     pr es cr ip t ion      and 6         pr es cr ip t ions In ter action
                                                          r egr ession       for         pr es cr ip t ions b y cond ition w ith log (#
                                                                        cond ition           for the                           pr es cr ip t ions
                                                                                           cond ition                          b y cond ition)

             Edu c a tion                                   -0.158**          0.042          -0.194***          -0.269**              0.021
                                                             (0.045)         (0.074)          (0.054)            (0.113)             (0.065)
             Edu cation* log(nu mb er of                                                                                           -0.160***
             pr escr ip tions for cond itions)                                                                                       (0.053)
                                                                                                                                    2.690***
             log(nu mb er of p rescr ip tions for                                                                                    (0.684)
             cond itions)

             N                                             163,081           24,626           108,767            29,688             163,081
             R-squ ar ed                                     0.27             027              0.33               0.19

Notes: Data: 1997 MEPS. Sample: All prescriptions for individuals aged 25 and above with no missing values.
Each coefficient represents the effect of more more year of schooling and is obtained from separate regressions. Each regressions include all
the controls used in previous tables. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are clustered at the person level.




                                                                          41
                                   Table 7 Effect of education of the age of drug consumed
                                                          By groups
                D epend en t v ar iab le: Ag e of d rug in     All        Males       F e ma l e s   Whites     Non-Whites
                year s

                Edu c a tion                                 -0.158**     -0.266**     -0.091        -0.170**     -0.018
                                                              (0.045)      (0.069)     (0.053)        (0.048)     (0.115)
                Marr ied                                      -0.568*      -0.913*     -0.532         -0.610*     -0.931
                                                              (0.250)      (0.431)     (0.291)        (0.266)     (0.651)
                White                                        -1.501**     -2.270**    -1.172**
                                                              (0.349)      (0.609)     (0.388)
                Urb an                                         0.084        0.096       0.051          0.175       -1.087
                                                              (0.277)      (0.431)     (0.326)        (0.292)     (0.706)
                Pr iv a te in sur anc e (=1)                   0.306       -1.947*     -1.265        -1.686**      -1.635
                                                              (0.269)      (0.879)     (0.652)        (0.572)     (1.119)
                Pub lic in surance ( =1)                     -1.604**       -0.175     -0.712         -0.880       -0.463
                                                              (0.513)      (0.960)     (0.697)        (0.627)     (1.164)
                F e ma le                                      -0.615                                  0.391      -1.335*
                                                              (0.553)                                 (0.284)     (0.661)
                16 in co me du mmies                            yes         yes          yes            yes         yes

                N                                            163,081       55,708      107,373       138,716      24,365
                R-squ ar ed                                    0.27         0.24        0.30          0.28         0.26
Notes: Data: 1997 MEPS. N = 163081. Sample: All prescriptions for individuals aged 25 and above with no missing values. Regressions
include region of residence dummies, single years of age dummies and 3 digit level condition dummies. Standard errors (in parenthesis) are
clustered at the person level. * significant at 5%; ** significant at 1%




                                                                     42
Graph 2

                              131.335
Mean prescription payment




                              4.56406
                                        -4                                                    67
                                                         Years since FDA approval
                                    Average payment for Prescription by age of the drugs
Graph 3
                               49.615
Mean presc. payment by self




                                   0
                                        -4                                                    67
                                                         Years since FDA approval
                               Average payment for prescription by self by age of the drugs




                                                             43
Graph 4
                                    896.036
total prescription expenditures




                                    490.534
                                              0                                                     17
                                                                  years of schooling
                                   total prescription medicine expenditures in 1997 by education level

Graph 5

                                    .657584
% prescriptions paid by self '97




                                    .469265
                                              0                                                     17
                                                                  years of schooling
                               Average % paid for prescription medicine by self by education level



                                                                   44
Graph 6

                                   43.1073
% prescriptions paid by private




                                   2.90235
                                             0                                                    17
                                                                 years of schooling
                                  Average % paid for prescriptions by private insurance by education
Graph 7
                                   46.6375
%prescriptions paid by Medicaid




                                   1.55644
                                             0                                                    17
                                                                 years of schooling
                                      Average % paid for prescriptions by Medicaid by education



                                                                 45
