NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRUST IN PUBLIC FINANCE
Joel Slemrod
Working Paper 9187
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9187
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

This paper was presented at the conference Public Finances and Public Policy in the New Millennium, a
celebration in honor of Richard A. Musgrave’s 90th birthday and the 10th anniversary of CES held in Munich
on January 12-13, 2001. I am grateful to Elizabeth Oltmans and Peter Katuscak for expert research assistance
and extended conversations on the themes of this essay. I also thank two referees, David Bradford,
Christopher Clague, Bruno Frey, Michael Burda, John T. Scholz, Daniel Shaviro and the participants at the
New York University Tax Symposium and the Musgrave-CES conference for helpful comments on an earlier
draft. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Joel Slemrod. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Trust in Public Finance
Joel Slemrod
NBER Working Paper No. 9187
September 2002
JEL No. H10, P10, O40
ABSTRACT

Using data on trust and trustworthiness from the 1990 wave of the World Values Survey, I
first investigate a model of the extent of tax cheating and the size of government that recognizes the
interdependence of the two. The results reveal that tax cheating is lower in countries that exhibit
more (not-government-related) trustworthiness. However, holding that constant, tax cheating
becomes more acceptable as government grows. All in all, there is some weak evidence that the
strong positive cross-country correlation between the size of government and tax cheating masks
the fact that big government induces tax cheating while, at the same time, tax cheating constrains
big government.
I then add to the structural model an equation determining the level of prosperity, allowing
prosperity to depend, inter alia, on the level of government and on trust in others. I find some
evidence that both prosperity and government involvement are higher in more trusting societies.
Moreover, holding these measures of trust constant, the association of government size with
prosperity is positive until a level of government spending somewhere between 31% and 38% of
GDP, after which its marginal effect is negative. Thus, although a trusting citizenry allows larger
government, the tax burden this entails erodes the rule obedience taxpayers exhibit toward
government.
Joel Slemrod
University of Michigan
A2120D Business School
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
jslemrod@umich.edu

Trust in Public Finance
Joel Slemrod

"Although good economic analysis calls for joint consideration of both [the expenditure
and revenue sides], the practice is to deal with them as more or less separate issues."
Musgrave and Musgrave (5th ed., p. 11)
"Some people are happy that there are externalities everywhere, and others would prefer
that there be none at all." [paraphrased]
Richard Musgrave, on the occasion of receiving the honorary degree of Doctor of Laws
from the University of Michigan, December 15, 1991.
1. Introduction
With a few exceptions, the positive and normative analysis of taxation has
proceeded as if the purposes for which the funds are being raised and the efficiency if
which they are utilized are irrelevant. As the first statement above makes clear, Richard
(and, in this case, Peggy) Musgrave lamented this dichotomy.1 He argued that analytical
blinders blurred important questions such as the net distributional impact of government
and prevented fruitful discussion of policies such as the earmarking of revenues.
Throughout his career Professor Musgrave also took seriously the vital role government
can play in an economy and a society, including but not limited to achieving an
appropriate allocation of resources in the presence of externalities. In the second
statement quoted above, he recognizes that not all people enjoy the interaction among
people—the sense of community--that the presence of externalities compels. But clearly
he himself does. He writes: "I think of the state as an association of individuals, engaged
in a cooperative venture, formed to resolve problems of social coexistence and do so in a
democratic and fair manner. And also: "Overrepresented in my German and
1

Note that I am speaking here of why public finance theorists treat expenditures and taxation separately,
and not about why in practice expenditure programs are not tied to particular tax instruments, the practice
known as earmarking. Opponents of earmarking argue that it leads to a fragmented and inefficient tax
system, and that tying expenditure amounts to specified tax revenues causes inefficient resource allocation
decisions.

1

underrepresented in my U.S. years, I am well aware that the concept of community is
subject to abuse...At the same time, the concept of community should not be exorcised
for that reason." (Buchanan and Musgrave 1999, pp. 31, 33)
In this essay I argue that the idea of community, fostered by trust among citizens
and perhaps also by trust in government, ties together these two lifelong concerns of
Professor Musgrave. Moreover, consideration of these issues may shed light on some
important public finance issues, including whether taxpayers' evaluations of government
expenditures or the fairness of the tax system affect their willingness to comply with the
tax law, and whether variations in trust are an important factor in explaining the crosscountry patterns in levels of taxation and the type of taxes used.2
In what follows I first critically review some of the literature on trust among
private parties and between citizens and government, and its implications for tax
compliance behavior. Then, I discuss some empirical explorations into untangling the
complex causal interactions between trust, government, and prosperity. I focus on
whether trust in public finance can shed light on such longstanding questions such as
Wagner's law, the effect of government on prosperity, and under what circumstances
taxpayers act as free riders.
2. Trust and Trustworthiness among Private Parties
The notions of trust and the more recently coined term social capital have
received much recent attention in social science, stimulated in part by the work of
Putnam (1993) and Fukuyama (1995), but with antecedents in, for example, Coleman
(1990). Economists have recognized the critical role played by trust in economic
performance. Arrow (1972) has remarked that “virtually every commercial transaction
has within itself an element of trust, certainly any transaction conducted over a period of
time. It can plausibly be argued that much of the economic backwardness in the world
can be explained by the lack of mutual confidence.” In high-trust societies, individuals
need to spend less resources to protect themselves from being exploited in economic
2

The idea that the structure of the public finances can be instrumental in developing a sense of
national community has a long history in the United States. Discussing Alexander Hamilton's plans to have
the U.S. federal government assume the revolutionary debts of the states and combine them into existing
federal debts, Sandel (1998, p. 134) says, "Fearful that local sentiments would erode national authority and

2

transactions. Knack and Keefer (1997) argue that trusting societies tend to have stronger
incentives to innovate and to accumulate both physical and human capital. Lack of trust
in government may also have costs. Clague (1993, p. 412) argues that “a society with
very low levels of rule obedience cannot…have a net of institutions that is conducive to
economic progress.”
The idea of reputation--the level of trust one is perceived to merit--has also been
examined. As Axelrod (1986) puts it, an individual’s reputation derives from adherence
to or violation of a norm that others view as a signal about the individual’s future
behavior in a wide variety of situations. In Cripps and Thomas (1995), one establishes a
reputation as others learn, in games with incomplete information, about one’s propensity
to use a particular strategy. Such reputation effects are common in multiple-player games
modeling contributions to public good provision. For example, Marks and Schansberg
(1997) find that providing the group with individual-specific information about past
contributions partially offsets free riding.
Reputation also matters in interactions between individuals and firms. As
explained by Campbell (1995), in a market economy, a firm has two sets of rivals: other
firms and consumers. Competition with other firms keeps the return to capital low, so a
firm must do years of business in order to pay off its initial expenditures on capital. This
means that its strategy against consumers takes on a time dimension, as the firm relies on
repeated interactions. The consumer’s choice to “cooperate with,” or buy from, the firm
will then depend on whether the firm has “defected,” or been misleading about its
product, in the past. A firm’s reputation, then, is simply the record of its past
performance. The return to a firm’s reputation comes in the willingness of others to enter
into future incomplete contracts with the firm.
The flip side of trust is trustworthiness. Just as reputation is the ability to elicit
trust from others, social capital—according to Glaeser et al. (2000)—is the ability to
elicit trustworthiness from others. They distinguish between trusting behavior, which
they define as “the commitment of resources to an activity where the outcome depends
upon the cooperative behavior of others,” and trustworthy behavior, which “increases the

doubtful that disinterested virtue could inspire allegiance to the nation, Hamilton saw in public finance an
instrument of nation-building."

3

returns to people who trust you.” Glaeser et al. report the results of two experiments.
The first operationalizes trust and trustworthiness as behavior in the two roles of a trust
game in which the first player (the “sender,” who is in a position to exhibit trusting
behavior) is given $15 and can choose how much of that to send to the second player (the
“recipient,” who is in a position to exhibit trustworthy behavior). The recipient receives,
through the experimenters, twice whatever the sender sends, and then can choose how
much to send back. In their second experiment, subjects report their willingness to pay
for an envelope containing $10 that is addressed to them and dropped in different public
places; this experiment measures only trusting behavior.
One of their findings has important implications for evaluating much of the
empirical research I discuss below. It turns out that the answer that their subjects gave to
the survey question often used to measure trust in others in empirical studies--“Generally
speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you can’t be too careful
in dealing with people?”--correlates with trustworthy, but not with trusting, behavior.
Moreover, high-status individuals tend to be trusting because their status induces people
to act in a trustworthy manner toward them, ensuring a high return to trust. They suggest
that much of the past research on individual behavior based on this and similar “trust”
questions should therefore be reinterpreted, and conjecture that such questions are best
used to predict “the overall level of trustworthiness in society.” The distinction and
relationship between trust and trustworthiness is important in the empirical analysis
reported later.
3. Trust and Government
3.1 Trust in Government
What affects the relationship between citizens and the government has a quite
different flavor than what affects relationships among private parties. The crucial
difference is not the relative size of the two parties. After all, a consumer dealing with a
large corporation is in the same relative size position as a citizen is in with respect to
most federal governments.
What is unique to government is its role as the sole provider of public and other
goods and services, its coercive power to collect taxes to pay for these goods and services

4

and, critically, the absence of a link between what the citizen receives from government
and what he or she pays to government. Firestone Tire Company wants to establish a
reputation for a high-quality product because consumers need not buy its tires. Citizens,
however, do not purchase public goods from government the way consumers purchase
tires; the amount they pay in taxes does not determine the amount or quality of
government services they receive. If, as the standard model of taxpayer behavior
maintains, the perceived quality of government goods does not influence the level of
taxes remitted, a government does not have a financial incentive to invest in its reputation
for public goods production, since it will be unable to capture the return to such an
investment. (It might, of course, have a political motive to do so.)
A more apt analogy is with a large charitable organization. As with government,
any one person's contribution is a drop in the bucket and will not materially affect the
organization’s activities. Of course, unlike government, a charity cannot coerce (other
than via peer pressure) donations. However, if one values what use the money is put to,
then the donor or taxpayer might consider the donation to be a purchase rather than an
exaction.
Note that there is at least anecdotal evidence that donors do respond to
information about the trustworthiness of large charitable organizations. For example,
after its national president was charged, and later convicted, of diverting charitable funds
to his own use, the United Way, the premier fundraising organization in the United
States, experienced a drop in donors and donations of about 20%. (Johnston 1997).
Moreover, there is considerable evidence that consumer purchasing decisions may
depend on aspects of their perceptions of the producing company that are unrelated to the
value-for-price tradeoff. The consumer boycotts of goods produced by Nike is a recent
example. Kahneman, Knetsch, and Thaler (1986) discuss evidence that the response to a
consumer good price increase will be more favorable if people judge the price increase to
be necessitated by input cost increases rather than the desire for increased profits. Thus,
even in the realm of purely private goods, some consumers may override their
opportunistic impulses and be influenced by their approval of or trust in the producer.
The distinctive element of the relationship between taxpayer and government is
the free-rider problem, also known as the zero contribution thesis. Because one’s own

5

outcome is unaffected by one’s own “contribution,” no one should voluntarily contribute
to a public good--pay taxes--unless the threat of punishment makes it sensible.3 Thus,
governments have a political, but not a financial, incentive to invest in their
trustworthiness, and taxpayers have no incentive to be trustworthy toward the
government, unless the enforcement regime makes it in their financial interest.4
It is undeniable that free riding behavior is ubiquitous. The story does not,
though, end there. For example, a vast amount of experimental work (not to say anecdotal
evidence) suggests that free-riding behavior is context-specific. Ostrom (2000, p. 140)
remarks that the finding that "the rate of contribution to a public good is affected by
various contextual factors" is one of seven phenomena that "have been replicated so
frequently that these can be considered the core facts that theory needs to explain." The
challenge, then, is to identify aspects of government expenditure and tax policies that
mediate the free rider impulse in an empirically important way.
Although trust in other people and trust in government are not the same thing,
they may be related. Brehm and Rahn (1997) argue that confidence in government may
be partly a reflection of the more general relationship of trust in people--if people are
untrustworthy in general, then people in government are untrustworthy as well. Of
course, as Brehm (1998) points out, taxpayers may not see people in government as being
ordinary people, perhaps because they believe that being in government creates
opportunities for people to exploit others that are not available to ordinary people.
Furthermore, confidence in government can be a positive force in trusting others,
in part because government can act as a safeguard for our willingness to extend trust to
others. Establishing a fair and efficient legal system is the best example of this, but there
are others. Fukuyama (1995) stresses the role of government in lowering the personal
investments and providing the assurances that make possible the trust that lubricates
cooperation. On the other hand, some argue that the centralized state undermines
cooperation and destroys trust among individuals. Taylor (1982) argues that the

3

The same argument, of course, applies to other decisions such as whether one should anyone expend the
time and effort to vote.
4
Note that citizens cannot invest in reputation by being trustworthy towards government. Tax compliance
lacks the characteristic—vital to building reputation by signaling trustworthiness—of being observable. In
only the rarest cases, after all, is one’s tax evasion made publicly known.

6

centralized state drives out spontaneous coordination that depends on small groups and
“thick” networks of interaction.
3.2 Trustworthiness and Reputation of Government
In a competitive political system such as a democracy, governments face
incentives to establish good reputations in order to encourage the electorate to select them
rather than their rivals in the future. Moreover, to the extent that capital is mobile,
governments with good reputations for cooperating with business will find that more
businesses choose their country in the future.
The role of government reputation and credibility has been extensively examined,
most often in the context of monetary policy (e.g., Barro and Gordon 1983), but
reputation has also been used to interpret actors’ responses to other sorts of government
policies. For example, Epple (1998) discusses local government reputation with respect
to whether a town will continue a no-rent-control policy if it is not bound to do so, and
the choices that property owners make that are dependent on that reputation.
In these situations, it is in individuals' interest to evaluate whether commitments
made by the government are credible. The question on the table is, though, quite
different--whether trust in government can cause citizens to abandon their short-term
financial interest of free riding. In this context, Levi (1998) argues that citizens are likely
to trust government only to the extent that they believe that it will act in their interests,
that its procedures are fair, and that their trust of the state and others is reciprocated. She
argues that government trustworthiness, plus the perception that others are doing their
share, can induce people to become "contingent consenters" who cooperate even when
their short-term material self interest would make free riding the individual's best option.
She writes that "the willingness to pay taxes quasi-voluntarily or to give one's contingent
consent to conscription often rests on the existence of the state's capacity and
demonstrated readiness to secure the compliance of the otherwise noncompliant." (Levi
1998, p. 91)
The operating definitions of trustworthiness of government and trust in
government that I will adopt are in the spirit of Levi. Government trustworthiness is all
those actions that may induce people to forego their opportunistic behavior and become
contingent compliers. Trust in government is a belief that the government is carrying out

7

those actions. The first two aspects of this trust do not depend on the reciprocal actions
of other citizens, and in these cases trust is close to “approval.” The third aspect--the
perception that others are doing their share--is more closely related to the notions of trust
in others that I have already touched on, because it is about whether people act as if
others will follow through on what they have promised to do. Clearly, the survey
questions on which the empirical investigations that follow rely do not precisely
correspond to these definitions; they are, though, close enough to be worth examining.
4. Trustworthiness of Taxpayers: Tax Compliance
With regard to free rider behavior toward the government, tax compliance poses
the foremost temptation. Although officially the U.S. income tax system is based on
voluntary compliance,5 in one sense that characterization is purely Orwellian. An
elaborate system of employer withholding, matching of information reports, and audits
with penalties for detected evasion “encourages” compliance. The fact that, line item by
line item, there is a clear positive correlation between the so-called voluntary compliance
rate with the U.S. income tax and the presence of these enforcement mechanisms
confirms their importance.6
Some have argued, however, that the idea of voluntary compliance is not just
Orwellian Newspeak. The argument is sometimes loosely based on the observation that,
given the probability of audit and the penalties typically assessed, evasion seems to be a
winning proposition for many more people than actually do evade. For example, Feld
and Frey (2000, p. 5) assert that it is "impossible to account for tax compliance in terms
of expected punishment." From this perspective, the puzzle is not to explain why people
5

The IRS Mission Statement, as cited in Steuerle (1986, p. 1) lists as its first task to "encourage and
achieve the highest degree of voluntary compliance in accordance with the tax laws and regulations." IRS
measures of the level of tax compliance are all couched in this language, featuring concepts such as the
“voluntary” reporting percentage, and “voluntary” compliance level.
Some tax protestors in the United States have used references in court cases to the voluntary
nature of taxes as a justification for non-payment. A quotation frequently cited is the following by the U.S.
Supreme Court: "Our tax system is based upon voluntary assessment and payment and not upon distraint."
Flora v. United States, 362 U.S. 145, 175. This quotation is taken out of context, and other courts’
statements make clear that the opposite is true, such as: "Any assertion that the payment of income taxes is
voluntary is without merit. It is without question that the payment of taxes is not voluntary." United States
v. Gerads, 999 F.2d 1255, 1256 (8th Cir., 1993), per curiam). These quotations are collected in "The Tax
Protestor FAQ," created by Daniel Evans, http://evans-legal.com/dan/tpfaq.html.
6
See Klepper and Nagin (1989).

8

evade, but rather why people pay (so much) taxes. Solutions to this puzzle generally
require pushing beyond the standard economic model, in the context of which people
who voluntarily comply are exhibiting nothing short of “pathological honesty.”
I discuss below these attempts to solve the puzzle of apparently voluntary, or
pathological, compliance. Before doing so, I must record my objection to the proposition
that the standard economic model of tax evasion, due to Allingham and Sandmo (1972),
has been discredited. The dismissive argument runs along the following lines. The
average audit rate in the U.S. is less than 2%. With that probability of evasion being
detected, and with the penalty rates in effect, what we know about the degree of risk
aversion from other contexts suggests that compliance should be much, much lower than
it apparently is. The flaw in this argument is that the 2% probability of detection is
certainly a vast understatement for the bulk of income subject to tax. A wage or salary
earner whose employer submits this information electronically to the Internal Revenue
Service, but who does not report that income on his own personal return, will be flagged
for further scrutiny with a probability much closer to 100% than to 2%.7
Thus, this simple argument for the failure of the utility-maximization approach
itself fails. There is, though, some other evidence. I have already referred to the
experimental evidence, such as Spicer and Becker (1980) and Alm, Jackson, and McKee
(1992), in which subjects respond not only to the probabilities and stakes of a tax evasion
game, but also to context provided to them. In contrast, Mason and Calvin (1984), in an
analysis of survey data in Oregon, found that dissatisfaction with the tax system is no
directly related to reported noncompliance, although it changes other attitudes and
beliefs. Cowell (1990, p. 219) reports on other experimental evidence that fails to find
links between perceived inequities in the tax system and non-compliance. Kaplan and
Reckers (1985) found that beliefs about tax morality were more important than beliefs
about the tax fairness of the tax system.
Also worthy of note is the ambitious recent attempt of Scholz and Lubell (1998)
to examine if trust in government affects tax compliance using data from a one-hour inperson survey supplemented by tax return data. They have no direct measure of

7

In addition, to the extent that past years' returns may be audited, the relevant probability is the probability
of audit over a number of years rather than in a single year.

9

noncompliance, but use instead a measure based on answers to twelve questions about
compliance over a three-year period with specific sources of income, general income,
deductions, and overall tax reporting. Their measure of trust in government is the
summed response to two questions: "You can generally trust the government to do what
is right," and "Dishonesty in government is pretty rare." To measure trust in citizens,
they use the survey answers to "what percentage of taxpayers at your income level...pay
less taxes than they legally owe."8 Scholz and Lubell argue that the amount of benefits
from public activities depends on the amount of taxes collected, which in turn depends on
the fraction of honest taxpayers, so that greater trust measured in this way should
correspond to a belief in greater benefits from the collective. This reasoning requires a
set of tenuous assumptions, and may be related to noncompliance as a rationalization.
Scholz and Lubell also control for attitudes about tax fairness and equity, civic
duty, political efficacy, tax duty, opportunity for evasion, and being in a high noncompliance occupation. With these controls, they find that high scores on both trust
measures significantly decrease the likelihood of noncompliance. Surprisingly and
apparently contradictorily, political efficacy (whether the respondent has a “say” in what
the government does and whether it is run "mainly for the benefit of special interests")
increase noncompliance. The authors rationalize this finding by suggesting that political
efficacy may lead to a perceived ability to manipulate the system without risk.
Because of several methodological weaknesses, the Scholz-Lubell study is far
short of being definitive. Overall, there is no compelling evidence to discard the
Allingham-Sandmo model of tax compliance, but there are also compelling reasons to
believe that free riding in other areas is suppressed, and that tax evasion free riding is
suppressed in experimental situations-- to take seriously that tax compliance does
respond to taxpayers' attitudes toward government.9

8

This latter question is obviously much different from the trust question used in most of the other studies
discussed below.
9
Victor Hugo, in Les Miserables, observed the following relationship between tax compliance and
prosperity in 18th Century Paris:
"When the population suffers, when work is lacking, when there is no commerce, the tax-payer resists
imposts through penury, he exhausts and oversteps his respite, and the state expends a great deal of money
in the charges for compelling and collection. When work is abundant, when the country is rich and happy,
the taxes are paid easily and cost the state nothing. It may be said, that there is one infallible thermometer
of the public misery and riches; the cost of collecting the taxes." (Penguin Classic edition, p. 171)

10

In their review of tax compliance research, Andreoni, Erard, and Feinstein (1998)
identify three classes of explanation for why observed evasion is apparently lower than
conventional economic models of tax evasion predict: moral rules or sentiments that
determine the psychic costs of evasion, evaluations of the fairness of the tax code and its
enforcement, and evaluation of government expenditures and corruption. Frey (1997)
links the first two classes of explanation by differentiating between intrinsic and extrinsic
motivation. With intrinsic motivation, taxpayers pay because of “civic virtue;" with
extrinsic motivation, they do so because of threat of punishment. Frey argues that
increasing extrinsic motivation—say with more punitive enforcement policies—“crowds
out” intrinsic motivation by making people feel that they pay taxes because they have to,
rather than because they want to.10 Similarly, in Cullis and Lewis (1997), individuals care
not only about their own consumption, but also value their own compliance with the
social convention of tax compliance and separately the extent of others' compliance with
the norm, either directly or indirectly via pecuniary consequences. Falkinger (1995)
argues that if tax equity strengthens the social norm against evasion, then evasion
becomes more costly in terms of bad conscience (if not caught) or bad reputation (if
caught) in a society with a more equitable system. Moreover, as Andreoni et al. point
out, perceived unfairness can be used to rationalize evasion in one’s self-interest, thereby
decreasing psychic costs.
In Bordignon (1993) there is a relationship between the individual and the
government that involves exchange rather than mere coercion. The taxpayer computes
the terms of trade between his private consumption and the government provision of
public goods, and evades (up to his level of risk aversion or up to the level he feels reestablishes fairness) if he finds these terms unfair. Unfairness in this model reflects
either an inadequate level of goods provision with respect to the required tax payment, an
unfair tax structure, or evasion by other taxpayers. Andreoni et al. add that an individual
can also find unfairness in goods provision due to the provision of the wrong goods—i.e.,
Note that this behavior would produce a Wagner's Law phenomenon in which tax collections as a
fraction of income are higher when income is higher. I am grateful to Jonathan Skinner for bringing this
quotation to my attention.
10
Scholz and Lubell (2001), in an experimental setting, find that the level of cooperation in certain settings
declines significantly when penalties are introduced, suggesting that the increased deterrence motivation
did not compensate for the change in decision frame brought about by the penalties.

11

someone such as Thoreau may avoid taxes because he thinks government policy wrong.
But, as Daunton (1998) points out, this is not a simple matter. Expenditures on warfare
might be tolerated in a patriotic period but rejected during another period characterized
by anti-militarism. Expenditure on welfare might at times be seen as a socially desirable
pooling of risk, and be seen at other times as a source of national decay.
Feld and Frey (1999) link all three ideas with what they call a psychological
contract between the tax authority and citizens, which they believe is the model that
describes taxation in areas with high levels of direct, rather than merely representative,
democracy. They argue that where the relationship between the individual and the tax
authority is seen as involving an implicit contract sustained by trust, individuals will
comply due to high “tax morale.” To sustain citizens’ commitment to the contract and
therefore their morale, the tax authority must act respectfully toward citizens while at the
same time protecting the honest from the free rider. It does this by giving taxpayers the
benefit of the doubt when it finds a mistake, by sanctioning small violations more mildly,
and by sanctioning large and basic violations (e.g., the failure to file a return) more
heavily. In a study of local governments in Switzerland, they find that these policies are
in fact used more in more direct democracies.
They claim that such contracts are stronger—and therefore the authority relies on
the above techniques more heavily—in direct democracies for several reasons. First,
citizens in these areas have selected (or at least, Feld and Frey assume, felt comfortable
with the selection process of) the programs that their taxes support, and therefore should
feel more willing to pay for them (this assumption falls in line with Andreoni et al.’s third
idea). After all, they can express discontent with either tax or spending policy by
changing the laws, so they don’t need to rely on a violation of the psychological contract.
Since the authority knows this, it feels justified in treating citizens as trustworthy.
Of course, an alternative theory could be that in a direct democracy, citizens
simply choose tax policies that involve respect because they prefer them, rather than that
there is a psychological contract in place that makes such policies the most efficient way
of collecting taxes. However, Feld and Frey’s finding that blatant violations of the tax
code are punished more heavily in direct democracies does provide some evidence that

12

citizens in more direct democracies are not simply pushing for leniency but rather
evaluating behavior as upholding or violating a basic contract.
Whether we call this behavior pathological honesty, or alternatively, good
citizenship, the fact is that the cost of raising taxes, and of running the government, is
lower to the extent that taxpayers “volunteer” to comply. It is as if there is a stock of
goodwill, or social capital, the return to which is the more efficient operation of
government. This social capital stock may be reduced by a policy change that decreases
the incentive to be a law-abiding citizen.
It is interesting to note that all of the literature about whether attitudes affect
compliance applies to individual taxpayers, although in most countries the bulk of taxes
are remitted (as opposed to borne, in the sense of ultimate incidence) by businesses,
either because the taxes are levied on business entities or because labor income taxes are
withheld by the employer. Whether a company’s policy would react as an individual is a
fascinating and completely open question, one that is related to the motivations behind
corporate charitable contributions.11
Paying taxes in excess of the remittance that is one's utility-maximizing interest
can be considered a voluntary contribution to government.12 There is a more direct way
to make such contributions--just send money.13 In the United States, people have always
been able to do this, but since 1961 Congress has allowed people to earmark
contributions for reducing the national debt, and has kept records on the amount of
contributions. Moreover, since 1982 the Internal Revenue Service has included
instructions in its tax packet on how to make such a contribution. In the fiscal year 2000,
these contributions totaled $1.855 million, which amounts to about 0.00001% of federal
tax collections in that year and about 0.0008% of financial contributions to charities.
Less than 10% of these gifts are included with federal tax returns. In fiscal year 1996,

11

See, e.g., Clotfelter (1985).

12

The tax payments, or lack thereof, of some taxpayers may reflect "pathological dishonesty," if they
underpay compared to their rational utility-maximizing calculus because of their aversion to government.
13
Some fraction of purchases of U.S. Savings Bonds might be considered to be a contribution to the
government, to the extent that the return-for-risk is lower than a non-government alternative, and this is
known to the purchaser.

13

366 Americans slipped checks totaling just $85,378 to reduce the federal debt inside their
tax returns.14
Slemrod and Oltmans (2000) investigates the aggregate annual amount of such
gifts since 1961, to see if their magnitude is systematically related to attitudes toward
government or objective measures of government expenditure patterns, tax structure, and
the deficit. They do discover such relationships. For example, gifts to government are
higher in years when the national debt is higher, suggesting a need-driven motive for
gifts. Perhaps surprisingly, gifts are higher when the proportion of the population who
endorse the belief that government wastes taxes is higher. This is consistent with donors
embracing the earmarked nature of the gift--to a good use, reducing the debt, rather than
a bad use, wasteful government spending. More generally, the systematic nature of these
gifts is consistent with the notion that the gifts implicit in extraordinary tax compliance
levels may also be related to attitudes and objective measures of government expenditure,
taxation, and deficit policies.
6. Previous Literature on the Relationship between Trust, Government and
Prosperity
It is one thing to hypothesize about the role of trust in government in taxpaying
behavior and the efficient operation of an economy. It is quite another, and more
demanding, task to identify its role empirically. This section briefly reviews some of the
existing literature related to that task, while the next section presents research that
extends our empirical knowledge of the inter-relationship within and, mostly, across
countries.
6.1 Evidence on the Determinants of Taxation and Government Spending
Trust and social capital may provide a clue to explaining one of the most striking
empirical regularities in public finance -- the positive association between a country’s

14

There are also fascinating localized examples of gifts to government. For example, in 2000 the state of
Pennsylvania mailed out 2.5 million income tax rebates to its taxpayers; the rebate was prompted by a large
budget surplus, and was described as an offset to local property taxes. The Associated Press (2000) reports
that hundreds of these checks have been signed over to local school districts. One donor was quotes as
saying that "it's important that schools have more money to meet their needs."

14

tax-to-GDP ratio and its level of affluence, as measured for example by its per capita
GDP. Two classes of explanation have been offered to explain this association.15
The first, called Wagner’s Law, is a demand explanation. It posits that rising incomes
and associated structural changes (such as urbanization) engender a demand for more
government involvement. Another explanation is that affluence is associated with
demographic characteristics (such as literacy and less reliance on agriculture) that
facilitate raising tax revenue, which in turn leads to expanded government activity. Of
course, these explanations are not mutually exclusive, and the research challenge, as in
many settings, is to disentangle the supply and demand explanations for government
expenditure and taxation.16
Professor Musgrave, in his 1969 book Fiscal Systems, noted the high positive
correlation, both across countries and over time, between GDP per capita and the total tax
ratio, as did Richard Goode (1968). Goode suggests that rather than income being the
driving factor, this correlation may result from the positive correlation between per capita
income and other social and economic conditions that make direct taxes acceptable and
effective, such as a high level of literacy, wide use of standard accounting methods,
effective public administration, and political stability. Musgrave himself noted that the
relationship between income and the tax ratio is solely a result of comparing low and
high-income groups of countries, and did not hold within each group of countries. More
recently, Tanzi (1992) investigates the determinants of the share of tax in GDP in 83
developing countries during the period 1978-1988. He finds that, by itself, the log of per
capita income is positively associated with the tax ratio, but the share of agricultural
output in GDP (highly negatively correlated with per capita GDP) explains more of the
variation in tax shares than does per capita income and has a negative sign. When both
variables are included, per capita income no longer has a significant positive effect,
although the negative effect of the agricultural share survives.
6.2 Evidence on the Effect of Trust (and Government) on Prosperity
6.2.1 Trust
15

By the way, the same relationship holds for most countries over time: the tax-GDP ratio has grown as the
country has become richer.
16
See Slemrod (1995) for the problems involved in this enterprise.

15

There is some empirical evidence that trust and civic duty among a country’s
citizens contribute to growth.17 Knack and Keefer (1997) tested the impact of these
attitudes on both growth and investment rates in a cross-section of 29 countries, using
measures of trust and civic norms from the World Values Surveys of 1981 and 1990. To
assess the level of trust in others in a society, they use the WVS question investigated
above. The strength of norms of civic cooperation was assessed from attitudes toward
five particular actions, including the tax evasion question used here already.
Knack and Keefer find that social capital variables exhibit a strong and significant
positive relationship to economic growth. As they note, the causality of this relationship
could go in either direction: trust could be a product of optimism generated by high or
growing incomes, or it could be that trust facilitates prosperity. However, they find that
trust is more correlated with per capita income in later years than with income in earlier
years, suggesting that the causation runs from trust to growth more so than vice versa.
One possible channel through which trust might affect economic outcomes is its
impact on the performance of government. To investigate this, Knack and Keefer
construct an index of how much confidence people profess in various governmental and
societal institutions and find that, controlling for per capita income and education
enrollments, the only significant determinant of government performance is the trust
variable: a trusting citizenry facilitates a successful government. It is, though,
conceivable that the causation is reversed -- that it is the behavior of governments that
influences levels of trust.
Zak and Knack (2001) extend the Knack and Keefer framework by separately
testing for the effect on growth of proxies for the presence of formal institutions, social
distance, and discrimination and for whether their effect remains significantly correlated
with growth controlling for measures of trust. They find that trust is positively and
significantly related to growth even in the presence of measures of formal institutions or
of social distance, but that most of the influence of the latter on growth occurs through
their impact on trust. The one exception is a measure of property rights, which retains its
independent positive association with growth even in the presence of a trust variable.
17

There is also an older literature of cross-country research on national development that argued that
nations whose people generally support government policies progress more rapidly than nations in which
obedience must be coerced. See Almond and Verba (1963).

16

They justify this finding by noting that this index includes government actions against
private agents. In contrast, the trust measure is “likely to be little affected by perceptions
of the trustworthiness of government…” (p. 316)
La Porta, Lopez-de-Silvanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999) find that, across
countries, a one-standard deviation increase in the measure of trust increases judicial
efficiency by 0.7 of a standard deviation and reduced government corruption by 0.3 of a
standard deviation. Putnam (1993) examines cross-regional Italian data and concludes
that local governments are more efficient where there is greater civic engagement.
6.2.2

Government
In recent years there has been an explosion of cross-country studies of the impact

of government taxation and expenditure on prosperity. In contrast to the literature on the
determinants of the size of government discussed above, and to the new analyses
presented later, the prosperity indicator in all these studies is a measure not of the level of
prosperity, but rather of its rate of growth
In the most influential of these studies, Barro (1991a) examines a cross-section of
98 countries for the period 1960-1985 and, among other concerns, investigates the
impacts on economic growth of government expenditures, measured as the ratio to real
GDP of real government consumption purchases less spending on education and defense.
He finds a significantly negative association of this government expenditure variable,
averaged over the period 1970-1985, with real growth from 1960 to 1985. Barro suggests
that one interpretation of these findings is that government consumption introduces
distortions, such as high tax rates, but does not provide an offsetting stimulus to
investment and growth.
Several subsequent studies, most notably Levine and Renelt (1992) and Easterly
and Rebelo (1993) have, however, demonstrated that this negative association is by no
means robust to reasonable alternative formulations. Easterly and Rebelo (1993), using
several different measures of fiscal policy, find that measures of the level of taxes tend to
be insignificant in Barro-style growth rate regressions. They ascribe this finding to the
strong positive correlation between their fiscal variables and the initial (1960) level of per
capita income, making it difficult to disentangle the effects of fiscal variables from those
of the initial level of income--the “convergence” effect discussed in Barro and Sala-i-

17

Martin (1992) and elsewhere. Slemrod (1995) reviews this literature and concludes that
it has not resolved many of the problems with interpreting the estimated coefficient of a
G variable in a growth equation.
7. New Evidence on the Structural Relationship Among Trust, Government and
Prosperity
Although there is a growing and, in some cases, large empirical literature on the
determinants of growth, size of government, and aspects of trust and trustworthiness, it is
fair to say that no empirical analysis has attempted to untangle the structural relationships
among them. This section begins that task. As is inevitable for a first step, it leaves
many open questions. Nevertheless, it is promising in that the data analysis is supportive
of several of the hypotheses raised earlier in this paper.
7.1 Data
The data on trust and trustworthiness come from the 1990 wave of the World Values
Survey (WVS), the purpose of which is to facilitate cross-national comparisons of values,
norms, and attitudes. The survey was conducted, with limited national modifications, in
45 countries. It asked about attitudes concerning work, family, religion, politics, and
contemporary social issues and gathered a limited amount of demographic data as well.
The 25 capitalist countries in the survey for which sufficient other data are available
make up my sample.18 Although the data are subject to the usual reservations about
attitude surveys, and in particular cross-country attitude surveys, the data has been widely
and fruitfully used by political scientists and sociologists, not to mention Knack and
Keefer (1997) and Zak and Knack (2001); for an extensive, albeit incomplete, list of its
use in research, see Inglehart, Basanez, and Moreno (1998).
Along with other variables that are used in the analysis (for a description, see the
Data Appendix), I will use three WVS variables as indicators of trust and trustworthiness.
These come from the following questions:

18

The countries are Argentina, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Chile, Denmark, Finland, France, (West)
Germany, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, (Republic of) Korea, Mexico, Netherlands, Norway,
Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, the United Kingdom, and the United States.

18

Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you can’t
be too careful in dealing with people?
Please tell me whether you think that lying in your own interest can always be
justified, never be justified, or something in between. (scale from 1=never justified to
10=always justified)
Please tell me whether you think that cheating on tax if you have the chance can
always be justified, never be justified, or something in between. (scale from 1=never
justified to 10=always justified)

The weighted mean values are used as country-level measures of trust in others, (lack of)
trustworthiness, and acceptability of tax evasion, respectively.19 The responses are rescaled to lie in a 0 to 100 range.
7.2 Correlations, Without Causation
As background for the empirical exercises, Tables 1 and 2 present correlation
matrices. (Summary statistics are presented in Tables 4 and 5). Table 1 refers to withincountry responses for the United States and West Germany. Among respondents from
each country, trust in others is positively associated with both financial satisfaction and
income. The story is slightly different for tax evasion as a measure of trustworthiness.
The acceptability of tax evasion falls with financial satisfaction in both countries, but
increase with income in Germany and, although not with statistical significance, in the
United States. Trustworthiness as measured by refraining from lying is also positively
correlated with financial satisfaction, but negatively associated with income. This
suggests that the attractiveness of opportunistic behavior follows a "satisficing" pattern:
people of any income who are satisfied with their lot are more likely to abstain from this
kind of behavior.
There is also generally a clear positive association between trust in others and the
two measures of trustworthiness. By far the highest correlation is between the two
measures of trustworthiness (“is lying ok” and “is tax evasion ok?”), suggesting that
whatever mechanism inculcates these norms affects both one's behavior towards people
19

I also ran the same set of models using unweighted country means from the World Values Survey data.
The results are very similar both qualitatively and quantitatively to those reported here.

19

for whom establishing a reputation may have a payoff and one's behavior toward the
government, for which it is unlikely to have a payoff in the private sector. However, in
both countries those who trust or have confidence in government are less likely to find
tax evasion acceptable.20
In both countries more educated people are more likely to trust others, but are also
more likely to find lying and, in Germany only, tax evasion to be acceptable. They
exhibit less confidence in government. Religious people are on average both more
trusting and, particularly, more trustworthy. Those on the right of the political spectrum
have less trust in others in the U.S. but not significantly in Germany and, perhaps
surprisingly, have more trust in government in the U.S.. In the U.S., those with a rightwing political orientation are neither more nor less trustworthy on average to a significant
degree; they are clearly more trustworthy in Germany.
The positive correlation in the U.S. between trust in others and trust in
government is consistent with the finding of Brehm (1998), who argues based on the
1996 National Election Survey data from the United States that there is a strong positive
relationship between social trust and government trust. However, Newton (1999) shows
that the positive correlation between trust in others and trust in government is not a
general result. He finds that among 12 countries in the 1990 World Values Survey that
have both questions, the correlation between trust in government and trust in others is
small and a negative .03. Newton concludes that political trust is not caused so much by
social or economic factors as by political ones, including the record and orientation of the
party in power; for example, right-leaning people will be more likely to express distrust
when the left is in power. Newton (1999) does, though, find that the positive correlation
of social trust with satisfaction with life, age, religiosity, income, and education level is
quite robust across seven developed countries.
Table 2 is a weighted correlation matrix of the country means of the measures of
trust, the measures of trustworthiness, and other country-specific indicators. Because the
number of observations is so much lower, the significance levels are on average much

20

The trust in government question (“How much do you trust the government in [national capital] to do
what is right?”) was asked in only 7 of the 25 sample countries, so it is unfortunately not used in the
analysis that follows.

20

lower compared to the within-country correlations of Table 1, although the correlations
themselves are often much higher in absolute value.
Across countries trust in others is still strongly a phenomenon of affluence.
However, the relationship between financial satisfaction and evasion flips sign in the
cross-country context. While within the U.S. and Germany those who profess to be more
financially satisfied are less likely to condone evasion, across countries more financial
satisfaction is positively correlated with condoning evasion. Across countries, the
correlation between trust in others and the acceptability of evasion reverses sign and
become positive, although the statistical significance is not strong. It is also true that
across countries the relationship between either religion or political orientation changes
notably. Although within the U.S., religious people are both more trusting and
trustworthy, across countries the opposite is true for trust in others, and no clear
relationship exists for the other measures.
For later purposes, one further set of correlations is worth noting. In countries
with a high level of government involvement, people are more likely to find tax evasion
to be acceptable, even though their residents are not notably less trustworthy generally (as
measured by their response to the question about the acceptability of lying in one's own
interest), and are significantly more trusting of others. In fact, the highest absolute
correlants with evasion attitudes, other than the other measure of trustworthiness, are
measures of the country's level of government.
7.3 A Structural Model
7.3.1 Tax Cheating and Size of Government
I begin by investigating a model of the extent of tax cheating and the size of
government that recognizes the interdependence of the two. In what follows I use G to
denote the extent of government involvement in the economy, TC to denote attitudes
toward tax cheating, TW to denote trustworthiness, and TO to stand for trust in others.
Finally, Y will denote a measure of prosperity, measured by the log of GDP per capita.
The two structural relationships are summarized as follows:
(1) TC=TC(G, TW, ZTC)
(2) G=G(Y, TC, ZG)

21

Equation (1) refers to the determination of attitudes toward tax cheating. It is
presumed to depend on the degree of overall trustworthiness in the society, assumed to be
exogenous in this analysis, and on the extent of government involvement and the tax
burden. The only other exogenous variable is the average age of the survey respondents.21
In other studies, age has been found to be negatively associated with the propensity to
evade taxes.
Equation (2) represents the determination of the extent of government
involvement in a country. This may depend, via Wagner's Law, on the level of
prosperity. I hypothesize that it also depends on the extent to which people are willing to
suspend their free-rider impulses and forego tax cheating opportunities; the more people
do so, the lower is the cost of raising resources for government, and the larger
government will be. Included in the vector of explanatory variables, ZG, are standard
indicators of either the demand for or cost of providing government services. In
particular, ZG includes the age dependency ratio, the percentage of the economy that is
agricultural, the extent of illiteracy, and the extent of openness. Some of these variables
may affect the size of government both via the cost of raising revenue and the demand for
government services, so that the interpretation of these variables’ coefficients is
problematic. Finally, in ZG is a dummy variable for whether the country’s legal system
is of either English, Scandinavian, or German (but not French) origin. Following La
Porta, et al (1999) this variable may represent a historical tradition of limiting
government power.
The results of estimating this system using three-stage least squares22 are shown
as Model 1 of Table 3. The equation explaining attitudes toward tax cheating is crisp and
reasonable. It says that tax cheating is lower in countries that exhibit more (notgovernment-related) trustworthiness. However, holding that constant, tax cheating

21

Holding trustworthiness constant, elderly people may have different attitudes toward evasion because
they may have less direct involvement with the income tax system.
22
Joint significance tests on the slope coefficients in each of the first-stage instrumenting regressions were
carried out in each of the three models considered. After adjusting the estimated variance matrices by the
White heteroscedasticity correction, each of the tests displays significance at a 1% level, except for the
equations for G and G-squared in Model 3, which are significant at a 5% level.

22

becomes more acceptable as government grows, to a significant and larger degree. An
older population reduces the average acceptability of tax evasion.
The second column of Model 1 shows the results of estimating a structural
equation explaining the level of government. There is clear evidence of a Wagner’s Law
relationship, as evidenced by the significant and large coefficient on the log level of
income. Holding income (and the ZG variables) constant, though, a more accepting
attitude toward tax cheating does limit the size of government. True, the estimated
relationship does not reach standard levels of statistical significance. Nevertheless, there
is some weak evidence that the strong positive correlation between the size of
government and tax cheating masks the fact that big government induces tax cheating
while, at the same time, tax cheating constrains big government. Certainly, more
research is needed to clarify this structure.
Among the exogenous variables, the openness measure is significantly positive,
corroborating the findings of Rodrik (1998) and Cameron (1978) before him. The
illiteracy variable is also positive, suggesting that it serves more as a measure of the
demand for social services than as a measure of the difficulty of raising revenue. Neither
the age dependency variable nor the agriculture variable is significant. The legal system
dummy variable does enter as hypothesized, in that an English, German or Scandinavian
system of law is associated, although not significantly at conventional levels, with
smaller governments than otherwise.
7.3.2 Tax Cheating, Size of Government, and Prosperity
I next expand the ambitiousness of this exercise by adding to the structural model
an equation determining the level of prosperity, equation (3) below. In its structural
equation, I allow prosperity to depend on the level of government (and the level squared,
to allow that the marginal impact can change sign at a certain level), on trust in others (as
emphasized by Knack and Keefer (1997) and others), and a short vector of exogenous
variables. The two exogenous variables measure the physical capital stock (specifically
the capital-labor ratio) and the human capital stock (measured by the level of illiteracy).

23

Together with the trust in others variable, a measure of social capital, equation (3) posits
that prosperity depends on four kinds of capital—physical, human, social, and public.23
The system now becomes:
(1) TC=TC(G, TW, ZTC)
(2) G=G(Y, TC, ZG)
(3) Y=Y(G, G2, TO, ZY)
Model 2 of Table 3 describes the results of the three-stage-least squares
estimation of this system of three equations. The estimated equation for income is quite
reasonable. More physical capital and more human capital significantly increase real
income per capita. So does more trust in others, although the coefficient only barely
exceeds its estimated standard error. To put the magnitudes in perspective, a one standard
deviation increase in trust in others is associated with a 5.5% higher level of per capita
income. The pattern of influence of government on prosperity takes the form suggested
by Barro (1991a): its marginal effect is positive until a turning point is reached. The
turning point is estimated to be at a government that represents 37.9% of GDP. Note,
though, that the t-statistics are only slightly above one.24
One consequence of expanding the system to three equations is that, compared to
Model 1, the coefficient on tax cheating in the size of government equation essentially
goes to zero, and the absolute size and significance of the other variables declines,
although the qualitative results are unchanged.
Finally, in Model 3 I show the results of replicating Model 2, but replacing the
survey measure of trust with the survey measure of trustworthiness as a determinant of
prosperity. According to this specification, trustworthiness cannot explain variations in
prosperity as well as variations in trust can. However, this change sharpens the evidence
for most of the other hypotheses I am concerned with. In particular, the negative
coefficient of tax cheating on the size of government is restored, and the first-positive,
23

Lack of data does not allow also including a measure of natural resources, or capital.
Joint tests were performed on G and G-squared in Models 2 and 3 to test the hypothesis that government
spending affects prosperity. In both tests the chi-squared statistic with 2 degrees of freedom fails to reach
standard levels of significance.

24

24

then-negative effect of government on prosperity becomes more statistically significant
(with a turning point of 31.5%). This illustrates the fragility of at least some of the
conclusions that can be drawn from these exercises.
7.4 Is It All Just Well-Tossed Spaghetti?
Even without considering trust in government, Robert Putnam despaired that "the
causal arrows among civic involvement, reciprocity, honesty, and social trust are as
tangled as well-tossed spaghetti." (2000, p. 137)25 Clearly there are plausible stories that,
of trust, trustworthiness, attitudes toward tax evasion, size of government, and prosperity,
almost any variable has a direct effect on almost any other variable. Of course, to an
econometrician, a bowl of spaghetti-like causal arrows raises issues of simultaneity bias,
which require defensible “exclusion restrictions” to assert that the estimated coefficient
reflect true causal, structural effects. The specifications I have investigated in this paper
are based on a careful reading of the existing literature and introspection about, to put it
directly, what affects what. In the process of this research I have learned that many of the
findings are not robust to alternative, reasonable, specifications. Some are apparently
more robust than others, as I suggest below. Nor have I even waded into the issues of
data reliability, which are serious issues both with respect to the survey-based measures
of trust and trustworthiness, but also to the measure of government size and other
variables. Nevertheless, I believe that empirical analysis that simply ignores the
interrelationships may be seriously misleading and an important research challenge is to
try to untangle the well-tossed spaghetti. I summarize the insights from this exercise
below.
I find some evidence that both prosperity and government involvement are higher
in more trusting societies. Moreover, holding these measures of trust constant, the
association of government size with prosperity is positive until a level of government
spending somewhere between 31.5% and 37.9% of GDP, after which its marginal effect
is negative.
There is a caveat to this neat story, however. In countries with bigger
governments, there is a breakdown in the trustworthiness its citizens exhibit toward

25

In a similar vein, Messere (1993) characterizes as “fishing expeditions” efforts to relate tax levels and
structure to measures of economic performance.

25

government, as measured by the acceptability of tax evasion. Thus, although a trusting
citizenry allows larger government, the tax burden this entails erodes the rule obedience
taxpayers exhibit toward government. Whether this is the reason that at some high level
further government is associated with less prosperity is an intriguing, but still open,
question.
8

Conclusion: Trust in Public Finance
Not surprisingly, these empirical exercises have uncovered neither the elixir of

prosperity, nor the key to establishing trust among all mankind. Nor have they
established that considering trust, social capital, and community constructs the conceptual
bridge between government expenditure and taxation that Professor Musgrave despaired
that the profession was overlooking.
Even if it were clear that taxpaying behavior depended on attitudes toward
government, the policy implications are not clear. To be sure, these attitudes cannot be
easily changed. Blumenthal, Christian, and Slemrod (2001) reports on the results of a
field experiment in which Minnesota taxpayers were sent one of two letters, one that
detailed the good things that taxes supported (without invoking the free-rider problem),
and the other reporting the high rate of aggregate taxpayer compliance (playing down the
“sucker” syndrome). Taxpayers who received either letter exhibited no significant
increase in income tax compliance compared to a control group of taxpayers that did not
receive either letter. Apparently one-shot exhortations are not successful, a result that
wouldn’t surprise many who are familiar with the marketing literature on this subject.26
One fascinating area for future research is whether our models of the behavioral
response to the tax system fail when the free-rider assumption fails. To put the question
starkly, can social capital explain why people continue to work, save and invest in the
face of the high marginal tax rates in many countries? When social security benefits are
tied to payroll tax payments via a formula, economists (e.g., Feldstein and Samwick
(1992)) have questioned whether the incentive effects need to be adjusted for the
marginal benefits that accrue. More generally, if for most taxpayers their tax payments

26

There is, though, a school of marketing science experts who argue that one-shot advertising is nearly as
effective as multiple communications.

26

are the optimal Allingham-Sandmo payment plus a “gift” to government, will they
respond to taxes as our standard model suggests?
I don’t know the answer to this question, but I do know that is one aspect of a
fundamental methodological question: is the positive theory of taxation a straightforward
application of price theory, or is it something quite different? Consider the taxaugmented relative price term that applies to a commodity in an individual’s budget set,
p*(1+t), where the “t” is the tax wedge inserted by a consumption tax or an income tax
(in the latter case the relative price is usually written as w*(1-t), where w is the wage
rate). Using this notation, the methodological question is whether individuals respond to
the relative price p*(1+t), or whether the response to the “p” part and the “(1+t)” part are
systematically different. In the standard model they are not.
I have argued elsewhere (Slemrod, 2001) that because of avoidance and evasion,
the response to p and the response to (1+t) will be different. The idea is that a change in t
changes the return-risk tradeoff of avoidance and evasion in ways that changes in p do
not, and the former involves the tax avoidance technology and not only taxpayer
preferences. The ideas explored in this paper suggest another reason why the two
responses may be systematically different.27 Taxpayers’ attitudes toward government
affect how they react to (1+t), but not to p.
I am sure that Professor Musgrave would agree that public finance is much, much
more than applied price theory. Indeed, he has written that his fascination with the field
is "rooted in its broad scope, a joining of economics, politics, and social ethics," and that
"the existence of externalities and the need to confront the issues of distribution enrich
social life, the challenge of freedom and with it the human status of its members"
(Buchanan and Musgrave, p. 29 and 49). No one has more eloquently stated the task
before scholars of the public sector.

27

Rosen (1976) and Konig, et al (1995) explore yet another reason, that taxpayers are unaware of their tax
rate.

27

References
Allingham, M.G., and A. Sandmo. "Income Tax Evasion: A Theoretical Analysis."
Journal of Public Economics 1: 323-38.
Alm, J., B. Jackson, and M. McKee. 1992. "Estimating the Determinants of Taxpayer
Compliance with Experimental Data." National Tax Journal 45: 107-14.
Almond, G., and S. Verba. 1963. The Civic Culture. Princeton: Princeton University
Press, 1963.
Andreoni, J., B. Erard, and J. Feinstein. 1998. “Tax Compliance.” Journal of
Economic Literature 36, no. 2: 818-860.
Arrow, K. 1972. “Gifts and Exchanges.” Philosophy and Public Affairs 1, no. 4: 343-67.
Associated Press. 2000. "Taxpayers Return Their Rebates to Help Pennsylvania's
Schools," November 25.
Axelrod, R. 1986. “An Evolutionary Approach to Norms.” American Political Science
Review 80, no. 4: 1095-1111.
Barro, R.J. 1991. "A Cross-Country Study of Growth, Saving, and Government."
National Saving and Economic Performance, eds. B. D. Bernheim and J. B. Shoven.
Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
_____ and D. B. Gordon. 1983. “Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of
Monetary Policy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 12, no. 1 (July): 101-21.
_____ and X. Sala-i-Martin. 1992. "Public Finance in Models of Economic Growth."
Review of Economic Studies 59, no. 4: 645-61.
Blumenthal, M., C. Christian, and J. Slemrod. 2001. “Do Normative Appeals Affect
Tax Compliance? Evidence From a Controlled Experiment in Minnesota.” National Tax
Journal 54, no. 1: 125-38..
Bordignon, M. 1993. "A Fairness Approach to Income Tax Evasion." Journal of Public
Economics 52, no. 3: 345-62.

28

Brehm, J. 1998. Who Do You Trust? People, Government, or Neither? Duke University,
Durham, North Carolina. Mimeographed.
Brehm, J., and W. Rahn. 1997. "Individual Level Evidence for the Causes and
Consequences of Social Capital." American Journal of Political Science 41: 999-1023.
Buchanan, J. M., and R. A. Musgrave. 1999. Public Finance and Public Choice: Two
Contrasting Visions of the State. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Cameron, D.R. 1978. “The Expansion of the Public Economy; A Comparative
Analysis.” American Political Science Review 72, no. 4: 1243-61.
Campbell, D. E. 1995. Incentives: Motivation and the Economics of Information. New
York: Cambridge University Press.
Clague, C. 1993. “Rule Obedience, Organizational Loyalty, and Economic
Development.” Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 149, no. 2: 393-414.
Clotfelter, C. 1985. Federal Tax Policy and Charitable Giving. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.
Coleman, J. 1990. Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard
University Press.
Cowell, F. 1990. Cheating the Government. Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Cripps, M. W., and J. P. Thomas. 1995. “Reputation and Commitment in Two-Person
Repeated Games without Discounting.” Econometrica 63, no. 6: 1401-19.
Cullis, J. G., and A. Lewis. 1997. "Why People Pay Taxes: From a Conventional
Economic Model to a Model of Social Convention." Journal of Economic Psychology 18,
no. 2-3: 305-21.
Daunton, M. 1998. "Trusting Leviathan: British Fiscal Administration from the
Napoleonic Wars to the Second World War." In Trust and Governance, eds. M. Levi and
V. Braithwaite. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Easterly, W., and S. Rebelo. 1994. "Fiscal Policy and Economic Growth: An Empirical
Investigation." Journal of Monetary Economics 32, no. 3: 417-58.
Epple, Dennis. 1998. “Rent Control with Reputation: Theory and Evidence,” Regional
Science and Urban Economics 28, no. 6: 679-710.
Falkinger, J. 1995. "Tax Evasion, Consumption of Public Goods, and Fairness," Journal
of Economic Psychology 16, no. 1: 63-72.

29

Feld, L. and B. Frey. In press. "Trust Breeds Trust: How Taxpayers Are Treated."
Economics of Governance.
Feldstein, M., and A. Samwick. 1992. "Social Security Rules and Marginal Tax Rates."
National Tax Journal 45, no. 1 (March): 1-22.
Frey, B. 1997. "A Constitution for Knaves Crowds Out Civic Virtues." Economic
Journal 107: 1043-53.
Fukuyama, F. 1995. Trust. New York: Basic Books.
Glaeser, E. L., D. Laibson, J. A. Scheinkman, and C. L. Soutter. 1999. “Measuring
Trust.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 65: 811-46.
Goode, R. 1968. "The Tax Burden in the United States and Other Countries." Annals of
the American Academy of Political and Social Science 379: 83-9.
Inglehart, R., M. Basanez and A. Moreno. Human Values and Beliefs: A CrossCultural Sourcebook. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1998.
International Monetary Fund. 1994. Government Finance Statistics Yearbook.
Washington: International Monetary Fund.
Johnston, D. C. "United Way, Faced With Fewer Donors, Is Giving Away Less." The
New York Times, 9 November 1997.
Kahneman, D, J. L. Knetsch and R. Thaler. 1986. "Fairness and the Assumptions of
Economics." Journal of Business 59, no. 4: S285-300.
Kaplan, S. E., and P. M. J. Reckers. 1985. "A Study of Tax Evasion Judgments."
National Tax Journal 38, no. 1 (March): 97-102.
Klepper, S., and D. Nagin. 1989. "The Anatomy of Tax Evasion." Journal of Law,
Economics, and Organization 5, no. 1: 1-24.
Knack, S., and P. Keefer. 1997. “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff? A
Cross-Country Investigation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, no. 4 (November):
1251-88.
Konig, H., F. Laisney, M. Lechner, and W. Pohlmeier. 1995. "Tax Illusion and the
Labor Supply of Married Women: Evidence from German Data." Kyklos 48, no. 3: 34768.
La Porta, R, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1999. "The Quality of
Government." Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, no. 1: 222-79.

30

Levi, M. 1998. "A State of Trust." In Trust and Governance, eds. M. Levi and V.
Braithwaite. New York: Russell Sage Foundation.
Levine, R., and D. Renelt. 1992. "A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth
Regressions." American Economic Review 82, no. 4: 942-63.
Marks, M. B., and E. D. Schansberg. 1997. “Fairness and Reputation Effects in a
Provision Point Contributions Process.” Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 235-51.
Mason, R. and L. D. Calvin. 1984. "Public Confidence and Admitted Tax Evasion.”
National Tax Journal 37, no. 4 (December): 489-96.
Messere, K. C. 1993. Tax Policy in OECD Countries: Choices and Conflicts.
Amsterdam: IBFD Publications BV.
Musgrave, R. A. 1969. Fiscal Systems. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Musgrave, R. A., and P. B. Musgrave. 1989. Public Finance in Theory and Practice.
5th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Book Co.
Newton, K. 1999. "Social and Political Trust in Established Democracies." In Critical
Citizens: Global Support for Democratic Government, ed. P. Norris. Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 1999.
Ostrom, E. 2000. "Collective Action and the Evolution of Social Norms." Journal of
Economic Perspectives 14, no. 3 (Summer): 137-58.
Putnam, R. 2000. Bowling Alone. New York: Simon & Schuster.
Putnam, R. (with R. Leonardi and R. Y. Nanetti). 1993. Making Democracy Work.
Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Rodrik, D. 1998. “Why Do More Open Economies have Bigger Governments?” Journal
of Political Economy. 106, no. 5: 997-1032.
Rosen, H.S. 1976. "Tax Illusion and the Labor Supply of Married Women." The Review
of Economics and Statistics 58, no. 2: 167-72.
Roth, J. A., J. T. Scholz, and A. D. Witte, eds. 1989. Taxpayer Compliance Vol. 1. An
Agenda for Research. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Sandel, M. J. 1998. Democracy's Discontent: America in Search of a Public Philosophy,
Cambridge, Massachusetts and London: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

31

Scholz, J. T., and M. Lubell. 1998a. "Trust and Taxpayers: Testing the Heuristic
Approach to Collective Action." American Journal of Political Science 42, no. 2 (April):
398-417.
Scholz, J. T., and M. Lubell. 1998b. “Adaptive Political Attitudes: Duty, Trust, and
Fear as Monitors of Tax Policy.” American Journal of Political Science 42: 903-20.
Scholz, J. T., and M. Lubell. 2001. “Cooperation, Reciprocity, and the Collective
Action Heuristic.” American Journal of Political Science 45: 160-78.
Slemrod, J. 2001. “A General Model of the Behavioral Response to Taxation.”
International Tax and Public Finance.
_____. 1995. "What Do Cross-Country Studies Teach About Taxes, Prosperity, and
Economic Growth?" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2: 373-415.
_____ and E. Oltmans. 2000. Gifts to Government. University of Michigan, Ann Arbor,
Michigan. Mimeographed.
Spicer, M. W., and L. A. Becker. 1976. "Fiscal Inequity and Tax Evasion: An
Experimental Approach." National Tax Journal 33, no. 2 (June): 171-5.
Steuerle, C. E. 1986. Who Should Pay for Collecting Taxes? Financing the IRS.
Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute.
Summers, R. and A. Heston. "The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set of
International Comparisons, 1950-1988." Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, no. 2: 32768.
Tanzi, V. 1992. "Structural Factors and Tax Revenue in Developing Countries: A
Decade of Evidence." In Open Economies: Structural Adjustment and Agriculture, eds. I.
Goldin and L.A. Winters. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Taylor, M. 1982. Community, Anarchy, and Liberty. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
Zak, P. and S. Knack. 2001. “Trust and Growth.” Economic Journal 111 (April): 295321.

32

