NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SARGENT-WALLACE MEETS KRUGMAN-FLOOD-GARBER, OR:
WHY SOVEREIGN DEBT SWAPS DON’T AVERT MACROECONOMIC CRISES
Joshua Aizenman
Kenneth M. Kletzer
Brian Pinto
Working Paper 9190
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9190
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

We are indebted to Robert Flood for the first line of this title. Joshua Aizenman and Kenneth Kletzer are
Professors of Economics at the University of California, Santa Cruz. Brian Pinto is at the World Bank. This
paper has been written as an input into a book on “Managing Volatility” currently under preparation at the
Bank. The authors acknowledge helpful comments from Zia Qureshi. The views expressed herein are entirely
those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors
or the countries they represent.
© 2002 by Joshua Aizenman, Kenneth M. Kletzer and Brian Pinto. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Sargent-Wallace Meets Krugman-Flood-Garber, or: Why Sovereign Debt Swaps
Don’t Avert Macroeconomic Crises
Joshua Aizenman, Kenneth M. Kletzer and Brian Pinto
NBER Working Paper No. 9190
September 2002
JEL No. F34, F36
ABSTRACT

This paper argues that the frequent failure of the debt swaps is not an accident. Instead, it
follows from fundamental forces driven by the market's assessment of the scarcity of fiscal revenue
relative to the demand for fiscal outlays. It follows from the observation that arbitrage forces
systematically impact prices in asset markets. Ignoring these price adjustments would lead to too
optimistic an assessment of the gains from swaps or buybacks. A by-product of our paper is to
highlight the perils of financial engineering that ignores the intertemporal constraints imposed by
fiscal fundamentals. As a country approaches the range of partial default (either on domestic or
external debt), swaps may not provide the expected breathing room and could even bring the crisis
forward. Our methodology combines three independent themes: exchange rate crises as the
manifestation of excessive monetary injections [Krugman-Flood-Garber], the fiscal theory of
inflation [Sargent-Wallace (1981)], and sovereign debt. The integrated framework derives
devaluation and external debt repudiation as part of a public-finance optimizing problem. We shows
that under conditions similar to those which prevailed in Russia and Argentina prior to their
meltdown, swaps are not just neutral, but could actually make the situation worse and even trigger
a speculative attack. An unsettlingly clear implication of the model is that there may be very few
options left once public debt reaches levels regarded as unsustainable in relation to fiscal
fundamentals. Dollarization only makes matters worse, and pushes the debt write-down option to
the fore.
Joshua Aizenman
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
1156 High St.
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
and NBER
jaizen@cats.ucsc.edu
Kenneth M. Kletzer
Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz
1156 High St.
Santa Cruz, CA 95064
kkletzer@cats.ucsc.edu

Brian Pinto
World Bank
1818 H. St, N.W.
Washington, DC 20433
bpinto2@worldbank.org

2
Introduction
Russia’s 1998 meltdown and Argentina’s, which began in December 2001 and is still
continuing, have a few notable features in common. Both count among the spectacular
macroeconomic crises of the 1990s. In both cases, unsustainable public debt levels and dynamics
eventually became the key issue. Furthermore, in both cases, there was a determined effort to
save a fixed exchange rate, in the Russian case, a soft peg to the U.S. dollar, and in the Argentine
case a constitutionally mandated currency-board based hard peg. Likewise, in both cases, there
were factors that might have obscured the true underlying dynamics of public debt and
contributed to an even bigger debt build-up than might have occurred otherwise. For Russia,
these would include the real appreciation of the ruble over the three years prior to the crisis,
which temporarily reduced the burden of foreign currency denominated public debt, and expected
growth that never materialized.1 Likewise in Argentina, a growing disequilibrium in the real
exchange rate after 1997 and the inclusion of large privatization proceeds as current revenues,
especially in the early part of the 1990s, might have made public debt dynamics look much better
than they were.2
There was yet another point of commonality, the one focused on in this paper: both
countries attempted sovereign debt swaps with the intention of bolstering liquidity and avoiding
meltdown. But even though these swaps, particularly the Russian one, were hailed with
considerable fanfare and became an integral part of IFI led rescue packages, they did not work
and might have even have backfired, as discussed below.3 This paper argues that the failure of
the debt swaps is not an accident. Instead, it follows from fundamental forces driven by the
market's assessment of the scarcity of fiscal revenue relative to the demand for fiscal outlays.
Indeed, under certain conditions debt swaps may hasten the meltdown. The argument outlined in
the paper resembles the one dealing with the limitations of debt buybacks (Bulow and Rogoff
(1988)). It follows from the observation that arbitrage forces systematically impact prices in
asset markets. Ignoring these price adjustments would lead to too optimistic an assessment of the
gains from swaps or buybacks. A by-product of our paper is to highlight the perils of financial
engineering that ignores the intertemporal constraints imposed by fiscal fundamentals. As a

1

Kharas, Pinto and Ulatov (2001) contain a detailed analysis of the Russian meltdown.
On the first point, see Perry and Serven (2002), on the second, Mussa (2002).
3
The Russian swap was greeted with considerable and unqualified euphoria – see Kharas, Pinto and Ulatov
(2001), although there was skepticism voiced about the Argentine swap, which was carried out as a lastditch measure.
2

3
country approaches the range of partial default (either on domestic or external debt), swaps may
not provide the expected breathing room and could even bring the crisis forward.4
Our methodology combines three independent themes: exchange rate crises as the
manifestation of excessive monetary injections [Krugman-Flood-Garber], the fiscal theory of
inflation [Sargent-Wallace (1981)], and sovereign debt. The integrated framework derives
devaluation and external debt repudiation as part of a public-finance optimizing problem. It
allows re-examining some of the dynamics of crises by combining S-W with KFG. We illustrate
the usefulness of this approach by focusing on a narrow issue – the welfare effects of debt swaps.
Yet, the framework can be used to address other policy issues.
The main results of the paper are as follows. First, it shows that under conditions similar
to those which prevailed in Russia and Argentina prior to their meltdown, swaps are not just
neutral along the lines of the Modigliani-Miller theorem, but could actually make the situation
worse and even trigger a speculative attack. 5 This result is developed in the context of a model
that allows for multiple states of nature. “Good states” are those where growth and taxes are
adequate to meet debt service payments, while “bad states” are those where growth and taxes are
not enough and a devaluation is needed to restore fiscal solvency. Public debt levels and the
currency composition are chosen keeping in mind fiscal constraints and inflation aversion, and
are impacted by the initial debt. The usual motive for a debt exchange is the high interest
differential between domestic currency (peso) debt and foreign currency (dollar) debt with a swap
attempting to lower the share of peso debt.6 We show that such swaps actually hurt in bad states
because they lower the base for the inflation tax and require an even bigger devaluation in such
states. The rise in the expected level of devaluation then raises both the interest differential as
4

If fiscal fundamentals are strong and public debt sustainability is not an issue, a debt exchange that
lengthens maturity can be beneficial, as Korea’s experience showed. In March 1998, Korea managed to
lengthen its banks’ foreign debt supported by a government guarantee, a move that is credited with
lowering interest rates and stabilizing the exchange rate. However, the guarantee would not have meant
much if fiscal and public debt conditions were weak. For a description of the exchange see Kim and Byeon
(2001) and of its impact Chopra et al. (2001) Box 2.
5
Simply put, the most basic version of the Modigliani-Miller theorem says that in a world of zero taxes, the
value of a firm depends upon its cash flows and not how these are divided up between debt and equity, i.e.,
the composition of liabilities is irrelevant. In an ex post review of the Russian case, Stanley Fischer, then
first deputy managing director of the IMF, expressed skepticism that a “market-friendly restructuring alone
can fundamentally change a country’s debt dynamics. Such restructurings take place at market prices, and
thus almost by definition, do not significantly change the present value of the country’s debt
obligations….”. See Comments and Discussion, Kharas et al. (2001).
6
The Argentine swap was not a currency swap, but a maturity swap designed to lengthen debt. The
Russian swap was both a maturity and currency swap.

4
well as the shadow exchange rate – quite the opposite of the intended effect. Second, the multiple
state approach used here allows a natural interpretation of IFI-led rescue packages as attempting
to raise the probability of good states at the expense of bad states. It thus provides a way of
integrating first and second generation models with their respective emphasis on fundamentals
and credit rationing on the one hand and multiple equilibria and confidence on the other. Third,
an unsettlingly clear implication of the model is that there may be very few options and only a
limited role for IFIs once public debt reaches levels regarded as unsustainable in relation to fiscal
fundamentals. Dollarization only makes matters worse, and pushes the debt write-down option to
the fore.
The next section presents the Russian and Argentine debt swaps. This is followed by the
development of an analytical model and interpretation of the Russian and Argentine experience in
its context. The last section concludes.
The Debt Swaps
We first present the Russian swap and attendant circumstances. By May 1998, Russia’s
public debt, which was 50 percent of GDP at the end of 1997, was on a clearly unsustainable
course. The marginal composite (ruble plus foreign) real interest rate was 27 percent, while
growth prospects had been downgraded to zero. Tax collections had consistently fallen short of
targets and oil prices were falling. There were in addition several serious fiscal and structural
problems that had not been resolved. Russia’s market indicators took a sharp turn for the worse,
with spreads on its eurobonds and yields on its ruble treasury bills (GKOs) jumping upwards as
the Indonesian political and financial crisis erupted in mid-May. Approximately $11 billion of
foreign exchange resources (reserve depletion plus new borrowings) had been used in the defense
of the ruble from November 1, 1997, when the Asian crisis first spilled over, to end-May 1998,
amounting to 5 percent of post-crisis 1999 GDP. International liquidity had been depleted, with
gross foreign exchange reserves having fallen to only 12 percent of GKOs plus broad money by
May end. Discussions with the IFIs had been in train throughout the year, and towards the end of
June, intensified into negotiations on an emergency package, which was announced on July 13. It
had three components: : (i) fiscal and structural reforms; (ii) a $22.6 billion financing package
including an immediate liquidity injection of $5.5 billion (compared to gross foreign exchange
reserves at the time of about $15 billion); and (iii) a swap out of domestic debt (short-term ruble
treasury bills or GKOs) into long-maturity dollar eurobonds (the “GKO-eurobond swap”). The

5
liquidity injection into reserves and swap were meant to ease liquidity pressures and lower
interest costs, thereby starting a virtuous cycle that by simultaneously relaxing fiscal constraints
and lowering the probability of devaluation, would reduce ruble interest rates and place public
debt on a downward trajectory.
Approximately $40 billion by face value and $32.3 billion by market value at prevailing
exchange rates were eligible under the swap, which was hailed by market analysts as “The Great
Ruble/Dollar Debt Swap” and as the “most positive aspect of the program”.7 Those wanting to
convert would receive an equal amount by market value of 7-year and 20-year dollar eurobonds.
They were asked to bid by quoting a single spread for both eurobonds, but with a benchmark of
US Treasury May 2008 for the 7-year bonds and August 2027 for the 20-year bonds. MOF
announced a minimum spread of 837.5 basis points. The bid results were announced on July 20,
1998. At the maximum spread of 940 bps chosen by MOF, the total face value of eurobonds to be
issued was $6.4 billion, of which $0.5 billion were new money bonds, and $5.94 billion pertained
to the GKO swap.8 The bonds were sold at a steep discount, at a price of 73.8 percent, so that the
proceeds available for GKO redemptions were $4.4 billion (5.94x0.738).
It thus turned out that there was not much demand for the eurobonds – only $4.4 billion
worth of GKOs were tendered, compared to $32 billion of ruble debt maturing over the second
half of 1998. This indicated that the bulk of GKO holders preferred to hold on to 1-4 month paper
yielding 50 percent or more than swapping into long-term dollar-denominated bonds yielding 15
percent, indicating concerns about default risk as well as an implicit assessment that the peg
would last for the next few months. However, the meltdown occurred less than a month later.
The situation began unraveling soon after the swap was completed, with both devaluation
and default risk, measured by a decomposition of GKO yields, jumping up sharply. It was
discovered that there was no demand from long-term buyers for the eurobonds created by the
swap; and the large increase in dollar denominated debt interacted negatively with Russian bank
exposures to Russian government dollar-denominated paper, making them vulnerable to margin
7

MFK Renaissance, “The Great Ruble/Dollar Debt Swap”, Fixed Income Update, July 14, 1998;
Brunswick Warburg, “Does IMF package mark the end of the ruble crisis?” July 14, 1998. However, the
risk of unloading a large volume of Russian dollar debt on to a skittish market adding to pressure from sales
by cash-strapped banks was noted in the MFK Renaissance report.
8
For comparison, the spread on the 10-year Indonesian eurobond was 160 basis points LOWER than that
on the 10-year Russian eurobond the day the swap was completed. Indonesia was at the time in the throes
of a severe political and financial crisis.

6
calls that required they liquidate their holdings of government debt. As GKOs were the most
risky asset, exit intensified, leading to the meltdown.
The Argentine debt swap was similarly concluded after months of market concern about
fiscal fundamentals and even outright default.9 By the end of 2000, public debt stood at 55
percent of GDP but would have been considerably higher if corrected for real exchange rate
overvaluation, as very little debt was peso-denominated. In late 2000, sovereign bond spreads
were 750 basis points above US treasuries and broke through 1000 basis points by March 2001.
Market analysts were openly discussing default by late 2000. A $40 billion IMF package was
negotiated in December 2000 to stave off default and restore market confidence; but growth
faltered and by March 2001 the market appeared to have concluded that the fiscal and debt
situation was not salvageable. While Argentina had little short-term debt, its projected financing
requirements were $22 billion per year over 2001-2005 provided primary fiscal surpluses were
large enough to stabilize the public debt to GDP ratio – and this would have required primary
fiscal surpluses of at least 4 percent of GDP, which was not credible given the track record.
Against this background, a $29.5 billion debt “mega” swap was concluded over June 1-4 2001 to
extend maturities. This voluntary swap, which enabled Argentina to postpone over $16 billion in
debt service payments between 2001 and 2005 – relatively small compared to financing
requirements of $110 billion - was greeted enthusiastically by investors according to press
reports.10 Perhaps the most damaging aspect of the swap was that it was concluded at a spread of
close to 1100 basis points, whereas calculations showed that at spreads of over 1000 basis points
Argentina’s debt dynamics were “virtually hopeless”.11 Indeed, after the swap, meltdown
proceeded as tax collections continued to flag, bond spreads rose even further and bank runs
intensified because of concerns about sustainability of the currency-board-based peg.
Before proceeding to the analytical model, we briefly examine the intuition underlying
the above swaps. The one for the Russian swap is more compelling. With GKO yields at 50
percent or more and eurobonds in the 13-15 percent range, a $20 billion swap from GKOs into
eurobonds would save $7.5 billion per year, or about 2 percent of pre-crisis GDP. This would
mean a substantial lowering of the fiscal deficit as well as a much improved liquidity index. The
9

The discussion here is based on Mussa (2002), Perry and Serven (2002) and de la Torre and Schmukler
(2002).
10
See, for example, FT.com “Argentina buys time for economy”, by Thomas Catan and Vincent Boland,
June 5, 2001. David Mulford, international chairman at Credit Suisse First Boston, was cited as describing
the swap as a new, market-led solution to sovereign debt crises that other governments would be watching.
11
Mussa (2002) page 25.

7
remaining GKO holders would feel more confident that their debt would now be serviced, and
also that their chances of exit into dollars would be better, as there would be a smaller volume of
GKOs competing for the same amount of reserves. As noted above, this seemingly plausible
intuition turned out too good to be true.12
In the Argentine case, there was no prospect of improving the fiscal situation, because
interest rates rose as a result of the swap. Liquidity may have temporarily improved, but public
debt dynamics worsened. An easy way to see this is by looking at the inter-temporal budget
constraint: the sum of primary fiscal surpluses discounted by the difference between the real
interest rate and the growth rate of real output has to at least equal the initial debt to output ratio
as a solvency condition. The rise in the real interest rate as a result of the swap (the price paid
for lengthening maturity) lowers the present value of the primary surpluses. Assuming the
private sector prices the swap so as to at least maintain the debt ratio in a present-value sense, the
only way out is for fiscal retrenchment or a rise in growth. The swap does not help with either in
an obvious manner.
A Simple Analytical Model
The Technical Appendix provides a minimal model, and applies it to the welfare
consequences of swaps. We apply the insight of the fiscal theory of the inflation, emphasizing
the implications of the intertemporal budget constraints in an economy where the inflation tax is
the residual that adjusts to meet the fiscal shortfalls [see Sargent and Wallace (1981)].13 We
integrate Sargent-Wallace’s insight with Krugman-Flood-Garber’s articulation of the conditions
leading to currency crises, paying attention to the complications added by sovereign debt.

12

For a discussion of how the GKO-eurobond swap triggered Russia’s crisis, see KPU (2001).
In their 1981 paper "Some Unpleasant Monetarist Arithmetic", Sargent and Wallace looked at the
effectiveness of monetary policy under a regime where a fiscal authority sets a stream of deficits. Hence, in
their model the fiscal authority (treasury) dominates the monetary authority (the central bank) by imposing
a deficit stream, which must necessarily be financed by the Central Bank or Treasury. The monetary
authority is eventually forced to finance the debt through seignorage. Their analysis gives interesting
results, showing that it may not be possible for the monetary authority to generate seignorage sufficient to
cover the debt if the sequence of deficits is either "too big" or "too long". They also find that the ability of
the monetary authority to control inflation, given these deficits, is drastically reduced. It is possible for tight
money to have little effect now, and result in higher inflation later. One of their simulations even reveals a
case where tight money leads to higher inflation both now and in the future.

13

8
The model is a two period, a small open economy with a single tradable good. The
government can issue short-term debt denominated in domestic or foreign currency. Hence, the
public sector finances the first period’s fiscal outlays by taxes, and by domestic and external
borrowing. The government collects tax revenue to meet its debt repayment obligations and
issues money. Tax revenues in the model correspond to the net revenues available for debt
servicing after covering some top priority fiscal expenditure, i.e., to the primary fiscal balance.
Taxes are implicitly distortionary, and we assume that the output cost of taxation is increasing in
the tax revenue raised for debt servicing. The second period net tax revenue is stochastic. The
inflation rate in the second period is solved as part of a public finance problem, where the
inflation tax responds to the fiscal conditions that the government inherits, and the realized state
of nature.
The public finance problem solved by the policy maker includes the options of partial
defaults on internal debt (inflation) and on external debt (debt repudiation). Both options are
costly. The authorities determine the second period inflation and the extent of foreign debt
repudiation by optimizing a social welfare function. This objective function is representing
social preferences that are decreasing in net tax revenue and in the inflation rate. The government
has preferences towards price stability, which in the open small economy is equivalent to
maintaining a fixed exchange rate.14 Hence, inflation (equivalently, a devaluation) would occur
only if maintaining price stability is too costly.
The government faces an upper bound on its capacity to tax in each state in the second
period. The cost of taxation varies with an exogenous state of nature – raising taxes is more
costly, and the upper bound on feasible tax revenue is lower in worse states of nature. This
formulation is based on the idea that output is subject to stochastic disturbances and that the
marginal cost of tax revenue declines with output. The government enters the first period with a
given stock of short-term debt and can choose to refinance its debt by exchanging domestic
currency bonds for foreign currency bonds. In the second period, the government repays its debt
after uncertainty regarding the state of nature is resolved. In each state of nature, authorities
decide whether to abandon the exchange peg, and, if they do, they also choose the ex post money
supply.

14

Such an objective function may characterize a benevolent administration that maximizes the expected
utility of consumers who demand public services, in an economy where raising taxes is costly.

9
Under sovereign immunity, governments are encouraged to make debt payments by the
possibility of indirect sanctions for not doing so. These sanctions usually take the form of reduced
access to foreign trade or international credit markets. In models of sovereign debt, the costs of
default are limited, so that there are upper bounds on the repayments that a government will
make. These can be state contingent and lead to debt limits. Models of equilibrium debt
renegotiation (for example, Kletzer and Wright [2000] or Bulow and Rogoff [1989]) imply that
debt repayments will be increasing with output. These are game theoretic models with discrete
punishments for devaluation from equilibrium. A very simple way to incorporate the
renegotiation or restructuring of sovereign debt repayments is to add a fixed cost of debt
repudiation. In addition, if the government devalues, it incurs another cost, whether it repudiates
its debts subsequently or not. The government chooses the optimal policies in order to maximize
its objective function, taking into account the costs associated with internal and external defaults
(devaluation and foreign debt repudiation, respectively).
A detailed analysis of the above model is contained in the technical appendix. As some
of the technicalities may obscure the underlying economic forces at work, the text that now
follows presents a simplified framework. Specifically, it ignores sovereign risk and assumes, to
start with, that direct taxes are exogenously given. These simplifications allow us to provide a
sharp illustration of the economic forces as work. The economic insights of this discussion carry
over to the more general case, as articulated in the technical appendix.
Let D denote the real present value of the debt at the end of period 1, and x the proportion
of the outstanding debt issued in domestic currency (pesos) at the end of period 1. The exchange
rate in period 1 is unity and the short-term peso interest rate, i, floats in period 1, so that a debt
swap is a change in x. The foreign price level is constant and equal to one. In the second period
the domestic price level, Ps in state of nature s, rises at the devaluation rate. We assume that
Fisher interest parity holds in equilibrium. The foreign (dollar) risk free interest rate is r. This
means that

(1)

N
1+ i
1
1 + r = E(
) = (1 + i )∑ φ s
= (1 + i ) E (1 / P)
P
Ps
s =1

where there are N states of nature in the second period, occurring with
probability φ s ; 1 ≤ s ≤ N .

10
The second period government revenue in state of nature s is the sum of net taxes ( Ts )
plus seignorage, denoted by σ . Seignorage revenues are expressed as a function of the price
level given the state of nature, σ ( Ps ) , by substituting out for the money supply from money
demand. If the exchange remains fixed in period 2, then σ ( Ps ) = σ s (1) . If Ps > 1 , then the
price level in state s is determined by the devaluation rate, possibly following a speculative
attack. In these circumstances the seignorage revenue may include the international reserves.15
Hence, total fiscal revenue is bounded by
(2)

Ts + σ ( Ps )

We define the state of nature according to the net tax revenue, such that T1 < T2 < ... < Tn (where
the ranking of the states of nature reflects the ranking of net tax revenues, which in turn may
reflect the ranking of productivity and output).
Recalling that x stands for the share of peso debt and applying Fisher parity (1), for a
given debt, D, the fixed exchange rate regime is viable in state of nature s if and only if
(3)


1 
 .
Ts + σ s (1) ≥ (1 + r ) D (1 − x) + x
(
1
/
)
E
P



Or, equivalently,
(4)

i−r

Ts + σ s (1) ≥ (1 + r ) D 1 + x
,
1+ r 


where i and r are linked by (1). In the fixed exchange rate regime, higher expected inflation
increases the cost of debt by the expected inflation premium times the share of domestic currency
debt.
We start the analysis with a useful benchmark case, ignoring sovereign risk. The
aversion to inflation implies that devaluations will take place only in bad enough states of nature.
Hence, the equilibrium is characterized by a threshold state, where for states of nature below the
threshold, lower states are associated with higher devaluations (reflecting greater reliance on the
inflation tax). In states of nature above the threshold, taxes are plentiful, and there is no need to
supplement the tax revenue with the inflation tax (hence the exchange rate remains fixed).

15

With a speculative attack, the precise magnitude of the seignorage revenue depends on the policy of the
central bank. For example, if the central bank will not use any reserves to defend, then σ ( Ps ) equals the

conventional seignorage: the proportionate rise in M needed to achieve money equilibrium at the price
level Ps . On the other hand, if the central bank commits part of its reserves, R0, to defense, then

σ (Ps ) includes the conventional seignorage plus the reserves committed, R0.

11

To illustrate this, let us ignore for the moment the endogeneity of the seignorage revenue,
assuming that σ s ( Ps ) = σ s . We will relax this assumption shortly. Let us denote by j+1 the
threshold state of nature where debt repayment is sustainable under a fixed exchange rate. For
states s, s < j+1,
(5)

i−r

Ts + σ s < (1 + r ) D1 + x
.
1+ r 


The scarcity of fiscal revenue in these states necessitates devaluation, at rates determined by the
fiscal solvency constraint:
(6)


 1 1+ i  
Ts + σ s = (1 + r ) D1 + x 
− 1  , s = 1, …, j.
P
1
+
r

 s


The maximum debt associated with fixed exchange rate regime at the threshold state, j+1, is
determined by
(7)

i−r 

T j +1 + σ j +1 = (1 + r ) D1 + x
.
1+ r 


Henceforth we assume that the debt is set at the maximum level consistent with maintaining the
fixed rate in state j+1. For states above the threshold, s > j+1, the fiscal revenue is plentiful. We
assume that the authorities reimburse this surplus in a lump sum manner. Equations (6) and (7),
plus the Fisher interest parity condition linking i to r provide us with a system of simultaneous
equations that determines uniquely the devaluation rates in states s (s = 1, …, j), and the debt.
The resultant equilibrium is characterized by the following claim—
Claim 1: When seignorage revenues are exogenous, a debt swap that reduces peso debt and
increases dollar debt, i.e., lowers x, increases the devaluation rates in states below the threshold
state j+1, but does not affect the equilibrium aggregate debt level or the threshold state. It
therefore does not impact the probability of devaluation for a given initial debt level, which
j

continues to be given by

∑φ
s =1

j

.

We will illustrate this claim by showing that choosing the appropriate increases in
devaluation in states 1,…, j will suffice to restore fiscal balance in states 1, …j+1 at the initial
debt, leaving the exchange rate pegged in states j+1, …, N.
First, note that equation (6) can be rewritten as

12

1
i−r

Ts + σ s = (1 + r ) D1 + x
 + Dx(1 + i ) − 1 , s = 1, …, j.
1+ r 


 Ps

(6’)

The first term on the RHS is the return to debt holders in the absence of devaluation, and is
exactly the same as the RHS of equation (7). The second term is the capital loss induced by the
devaluation on holders of domestic currency debt. Straightforward addition shows that
j

(1 + r ) D = ∑ φ s (Ts + σ s ) +
s =1

N

∑φ

s = j +1

s

(T j +1 + σ

j +1

) , i.e., D is independent of x.16

Consider now a swap that lowers x. This will help in states s>j+1 because of the
premium paid on peso debt in these states but hurt in bad states ( s ≤ j ) where peso debt suffers a
capital loss. Restoration of fiscal equilibrium in all states can be achieved as follows: applying
the implicit function theorem to the last term on the RHS of (7) shows that if the return on pesos
rises in accordance with the following equation, the incipient surplus in states s>j+1 will be
eliminated:

(8)

∆i =

− (i − r )
∆x ,
x

where ∆x < 0 is the size of the swap. Similarly, noting that the first term on the RHS of (6’)
remains unchanged after peso interest rates rise following the swap as per (8), applying the
implicit function theorem to the second term and using (8) gives:

(9)

∆Ps
(1 + r ) ∆x
= (1 − Ps )
.
(1 + i ) x
Ps

Equation (9) shows two things: first, the size of the increase in devaluation rises with the size of
the swap; and second, the worse the state (the higher Ps is to begin with) the larger the
devaluation needed to restore equilibrium.17

16

This also implies that D is independent of the Ps’s, which are endogenous to x, while maximal D is
independent of x.
17
An alternative way of interpreting the above is as follows: if following the swap, devaluation rates in bad
states are adjusted according to the rule in (9), then peso interest rates will rise in accordance with (8) to
restore equilibrium in all the states 1 to j+1.

13
We now turn to the endogenous seignorage case. Seignorage increases - up to a point
depending upon the inflation elasticity of money demand - with devaluation. Therefore, more
resources are available in the “bad” states and imposing the same structure as earlier, it follows
that (1 + r ) D =

j

∑ φ s (Ts + σ s ( Ps )) +
s =1

N

∑φ

s = j +1

s

(T j +1 + σ j +1 (1)) , i.e., the sustainable level of D can

go up. Suppose now that a swap is engineered, i.e., x is lowered. In this case, if for the same
swap size, the devaluation rule in (9) is applied, surpluses will develop in states 1 to j because
seignorage will increase. Alternatively, if a lower rate of devaluation is used, peso interest rates
will rise by less than indicated by equation (8) so that a surplus develops in j+1. By continuity, D
can rise as x falls. But notice that this also means higher expected inflation, i.e., EPs rises.
Thus, replacing high nominal interest rate peso debt with low nominal interest rate dollar
debt is a mixed blessing – it increases debt capacity, but also increases the expected devaluation.
This in turn would trigger higher domestic interest rate and higher demand for foreign currency in
period one. If the supply of international reserves is limited, it may also trigger a speculative
attack in period one. In the context of the Flood-Garber-Krugman model, this will be the case if
the swap increases the shadow exchange rate above the pegged exchange rate in period 1. More
specifically, suppose a Cagan demand for money:
(10)

log M − log S = −η[ E (log Ps ) − log P] ,

where M denotes the relevant fundamentals (supply of money and output), η is the semi elasticity
of the demand for money, and S is the first period price level. The shadow exchange rate in such
an economy would be
(11)

1
η
~
log S =
log M +
E (log Ps ) .
1+η
1+η

Suppose that prior to the swap, the shadow exchange rate was marginally below unity (= the fixed
exchange rate). Attempts to swap domestic currency with foreign currency debt may increase the
expected future price to levels leading to the eventual collapse of the fixed exchange rate in

~

period 1, as would be the case if accomplishing the swap would imply S > 1 . The above
discussion may be summarized as follows:
Claim 2: Allowing seignorage revenues to vary with the rate of inflation gives a determinate
solution for the share of peso debt. When total debt D is relatively low, the peg may be
sustainable in all states of nature and all debt can be in pesos. However, once D crosses a certain
threshold, further increases in D are associated with falling shares of peso debt and higher

14
devaluation rates in states of nature associated with low tax revenue. In this case, a swap of peso
debt for dollar debt (lowering x) will raise total debt, but at a cost – higher expected devaluation.
Large enough increases in expected devaluation could trigger a speculative attack in period one. 18
An Illustrative Model for Claims 1 and 2
Exogenous Seignorage (Claim 1)
We illustrate Claim 1 with the help of a simple example, with N = 2 and j = 1. In this
case, letting π 1 ≡ P1 − 1 and noting that P2 = 1, (6) and (7) reduce to:
a.


xπ 1 

T1 + σ 1 = (1 + r ) D1 − φ2
1 + φ2π 1 


b.


xπ 1 

T2 = (1 + r ) D1 + φ1
1 + φ2π 1 


(12)

where it is assumed seignorage is zero when the exchange rate remains fixed. For a given
inflation and aggregate debt, higher peso debt share leads to a fiscal surplus in state 1, and fiscal
deficit in state 2 because the impact of devaluation in state 1 is proportional to the share of peso
debt and works in opposite directions in the two states. A higher devaluation (inflation rate) in
state 1 reduces the value of debt in that state at a rate proportional to the difference between the
actual and expected inflation (= the probability of state 2 times state 1 inflation); but increases the
value of the debt in state 2 at a rate proportional to expected inflation (= the probability of state 1
times state 1 inflation).
For a given domestic currency debt x, system (12) solves for the devaluation rate in state
1 and total debt. Figure 1 characterizes the solution. The upward sloping bold curve traces the
association between devaluation in state 1 and the total debt that solves the fiscal constraint in
state 1 (equation 12a). Higher devaluation in that state induces greater capital loses to peso bond
holders, generating a fiscal surplus, increasing the total debt associated with fiscal balance in state
1. The downward sloping curve traces the association between devaluation in state 1 and the total
debt that satisfies the fiscal constraint in state 2 (equation 12b). This is the state where the
exchange rate remains fixed. Higher devaluation in state 1 will increase expected inflation and the
nominal interest rate, increasing thereby the fiscal cost in state 2 associated with peso debt.
Hence, it will induce a drop in the total debt associated with fiscal balance in state 2. The
18

This is bad news for highly dollarized economies such as Argentina. They can borrow more provided the
good state probability is high; but once this changes, there may be a much bigger inflationary collapse than
with less dollarization – or if this is excessively costly, an outright default.

15
equilibrium inflation and the debt are at the intersection of the curves. Panel a corresponds to the
case where x =1, whereas panel b corresponds to x = 0.5. Reducing the domestic currency debt
share shifts both curves to the right: at a given debt, the lower share of domestic currency induces
a fiscal deficit in state 1, requiring greater devaluation in order to regain fiscal balance. The
opposite happens in state 2 – the drop in the share of domestic debt reduces the capital losses due
to expected devaluation that does not materialize in state 2, leading to fiscal surplus. Fiscal
balance in state 2 is regained at a higher inflation. The two curves shift to the right at the same
rate, implying a new equilibrium with the same debt level, but substantially higher devaluation
rate in state 1 (inflation more than doubles from about 0.25 to about 0.56).
The intuition behind the above results follows from the inequality:
(13)

1+ i
< 1+ r < 1+ i ,
P1

which basically says that ex post payments on peso debt in state 1 are less than those on dollar
debt (same in both states) which in turn is less than ex post payments on peso debt in state 2.19
This inequality is key to explaining why debt swaps do not work when solvency is a concern.
Endogenous seignorage (Claim 2)
In equation (12) a, σ 1 is replaced with σ 1 (π 1 ) , which is concave in π 1 , representing a
seignorage Laffer curve. Linearizing around an existing fiscal equilibrium and assuming a swap
size of ∆x < 0, we get:

(14)

where

σ 1' Dφ 1 π 1 ∆x
(1 + r ) Dπ 1 ∆x
and ∆D =
,
∆π 1 =
1 + φ 2π 1 λ
1 + φ 2π 1 λ

λ = −σ 1' (1 +

φ1 xπ 1
D(1 + r ) x
< 0. It follows from (14) that consistent with
)−
1 + φ 2π 1
(1 + φ 2π 1 ) 2

Claim 2, both bad state inflation and total debt go up to restore equilibrium when a swap that
lowers peso debt ( (∆x < 0) is engineered.20 Consistent with Claim 1, total debt remains the

(1 + r ) P1
.
φ1 + (1 − φ1 ) P1

19

This follows directly from Fisher interest parity, namely, 1 + i =

20

We assume that inflation is less than the seignorage maximizing rate.

16
same and ∆π 1 rises to − π 1 (1 + φ 2π 1 )

∆x
for a swap of the same size when seignorage is
x

exogenous ( σ 1' = 0 ).21
We now illustrate Claim 2 with the help of a two state example (see the Appendix for the
general case). Suppose that the second period output is:

1 − ε
Ys = 
1

Pr φ1
Pr φ2

, φ1 + φ 2 = 1 .

Seignorage is assumed to be given by a quadratic function22
(15)

σ s = kYs [π s − 0.5

(π s ) 2
];
b

where the inflation rate in state s is defined by π s = Ps − 1 . Seignorage is maximized at
(16)

πm =b

To start, let us assume that the tax rate is exogenously set at t0 . In these circumstances, tax
revenue is proportional to productivity, and T1 = T2 (1 − ε ) . Suppose taxes are enough to repay
debt in state of nature 2 without devaluation (hence, j =1). If T2 (1 − ε ) > (1 + r) D , the tax
revenue suffices to cover the debt in state 1, and there is no need to devalue [set seignorage and

π 1 = 0 in (12 a)]. For debt levels above the tax revenue in state 1 [ T2 (1 − ε ) < (1 + r )D) ], and


for T2 > (1 + r ) D 1 +



φ1π 1 
 , all the debt can be domestic currency denominated [set x = 1 in
1 + φ2π 1 

(12 b)]. The inflation rate in state 1 is determined by the requirement of fiscal sustainability in
state 1:
(17)

T2 (1 − ε ) + k (1 − ε )[π 1 − 0.5


If T2 < (1 + r )D 1 +




π1 
(π 1 ) 2
.
] = (1 + r ) D 1 − φ2
b
1 + φ2π 1 


φ1π 1 
 , then x = 1 is not feasible -- it would impose a too high fiscal cost
1 + φ2π 1 

in state 2 – recall inequality (13). In these circumstances, x and π1 are determined by the
following system:
21

22

This expression is exactly the same as equation (9) above, using P1 = 1 + π 1 and noting that

(1 + r ) /(1 + i ) = (1 + φ 2π 1 ) /(1 + π 1 ) .

To simplify the example, we ignore the seignorage associated with output growth.

17


φπ 
(π 1 ) 2
ε
ε
π
T
(
1
)
k
(
1
)[
0
.
5
] = (1 + r ) D 1 − x 2 1 
−
+
−
−
 2
1
1 + φ2π 1 
b



(18) 
.

T2 = (1 + r ) D 1 + x φ1π 1 


1 + φ2π 1 

Notice that higher inflation in s=1 reduces the debt repayment in that state. In contrast, higher
inflation in s = 1 increases the debt repayment in the state where the pegged exchange rate is
maintained [s = 2]. Solving this system yields that, in the range of D associated with 0 < x < 1 ,
(19)

π 1 = b − b 2 + 2b

T2 (1 − φ1ε ) − (1 + r ) D
.
φ1 (1 − ε )k

−
The inflation is characterized by

+

− +

π 1 = π 1 [T2 ; (1 + r ) D; k ; ε ] .

Figure 2 captures a simulation of this quadratic example. The solid upward sloping curve
reports the association between total debt (D) and inflation. The dotted, downward sloping curve
reports the association between the debt and the share of domestic currency debt, x. For low debt,
the inflation rate is zero in all states of nature. For debt above 0.163 and below 0.203 the
inflation rate in state one increase with the debt, and the entire debt is domestic currency
denominated. Higher expected inflation increases the cost of serving the domestic currency debt
in state 2. At a critical debt [about D = 0.203], the inflation in state 1 and the debt are high
enough to “bump” the fiscal constraint in state 2 for x = 1. Increasing the debt above that
threshold requires lowering the share of the domestic currency debt and higher inflation. Above
that threshold, the marginal impact of debt on inflation is larger than below the threshold. At debt
level of about 0.236 the inflation in s = 1 reaches the level maximizing seignorage revenue in that
state (π = 1), reaching the debt ceiling associated with j = 1. Allowing for foreign currency debt
increases the debt ceiling, yet it comes with a cost – a rapid increase in inflation.
Our model can be readily extended to allow for endogenous determination of taxes.
Specifically, the second period utility in state s can be approximated by
(20)

 

0.5(t s ) 2
2
Y0 (1 + δ s )1 − 0.5c m (π s ) +
+ dχ  ,
λ

 

where χ is the indicator function, having a value of one if devaluation takes place in state s, and
zero otherwise; 0.5c m measures the welfare cost of inflation as a fraction of the GDP; and δ s is
the productivity shock in state s. This specification recognizes that devaluation is associated with

18
a cost d, in addition to the direct costs of inflation [see Obstfeld (1996) for further discussion].
The actual tax rate and inflation rate in state s are determined by maximizing the second period
utility subject to the budget constraint. For our two state of nature example discussed above, in
the range associated with x < 1 in state s = 1, the budget constraints are




(π 1 ) 2 
φπ 
−
+
−
(
1
)
[
0
.
5
] = (1 + r ) D 1 − x 2 1 
ε
π
Y
t
k
1
 0
1
1 + φ2π 1 
b 




.


Y (1 − ε )t = (1 + r ) D 1 + x φ1π 1 
2


 0
1 + φ2π 1 


(21)

The authorities determine the tax rate and the inflation in s = 1 ( t1 ; π 1 ) by maximizing (20)
subject to the appropriate budget constraint (the first line in 21). The resultant association
between the inflation and the tax rate in s = 1 is positive and non-linear:

(22)

t1

π1
1 − (π 1 / b )

=

k / cm

λ

.

The resultant equilibrium is similar to the one described in Figure 2, with the modification that in
state 1 the tax rate and the inflation rate are endogenously determined.
Balance sheet surprises
Revisiting equation (12) for the endogenous seignorage case, we note that a rise in state 1
inflation will have three effects: (i) state 1 seignorage will increase; (ii) so will peso interest rates;
and (iii) the size of the capital loss (gain to the government) on peso debt for given D and x will
rise. Letting FS1 denote state 1 fiscal surplus (LHS of (12) a. with endogenous seignorage minus
RHS), its derivative with respect to state 1 inflation is:
(23)

∂FS1 / ∂π 1 = σ 1' + (1 + r ) Dφ 2 x[

1
(1 + φ 2π 1 ) 2

].

The first term on the RHS captures (i) above, while the second term is the net effect of (ii) and
(iii). Given the concavity of σ 1 (.), it is obvious from (23) that the level of state 1 inflation that

19
would maximize state 1 fiscal surplus will exceed the seignorage maximizing level because of the
additional capital loss on peso debt. Now suppose that there is unanticipated fiscal cost
associated with a devaluation (and hence inflation). This can be thought of as a bailout induced
by political pressure, forcing the government to support the banking system to make its balance
sheet whole. Let β(π1) denote the size of the resultant fiscal cost. We assume reasonably that the
size of this unanticipated balance sheet problem increases linearly with state 1 inflation, as for
any given balance sheet mismatch, the situation would be worse with a larger devaluation. In
Figure 3, Γ(π 1 ) depicts the sum of seignorage revenues and the capital loss on peso debt and

β (π 1 ) the fiscal cost of the balance sheet problem. Even though π 1 maximizes seignorage plus
the capital loss, the government will want to avoid a “free-fall” of the exchange rate above

(1 + π 1 ) because of the balance sheet problem. If now it turns out that FS1 (π 1 ) <0, devaluation
will not suffice to restore fiscal solvency in state 1 and in this case, a default and debt
restructuring may become inevitable. In this case, if the private sector is expecting state 1
inflation to exceed π 1 (because it does not anticipate the magnitude of the balance sheet
problem), the period 1 differential interest differential (i − r ) would be very high and a swap to
lower peso debt might appear attractive; but it will only make matters worse (because

∂FS1
> 0 ), increasing the need for a debt reduction or default.
∂x
Interpretation of Russian and Argentine Experience
The debt swaps in Russia 1998 and Argentina 2001 took place in the following
circumstances: (i) market perceptions of default risk were high and debt rollovers were a
problem. Bond spreads were in excess of 700 basis points for the few months preceding the
swap, and the swaps were concluded at spreads of slightly less than 1000 basis points (Russia) or
exceeding it (Argentina). Such spreads have almost invariably portended eventual crisis – a large
devaluation at least as in Russia 1998, Brazil 1999, Turkey 2001, Argentina 2001, if not default
as well as in Russia and Argentina; (ii) public debt was on an unsustainable course and growth
was flagging; and (iii) the IFIs were putting together rescue packages with a combination of
fiscal-structural reforms and liquidity enhancing loans. In other words there was a determined
effort to overcome negative market sentiment and save the fixed exchange rate peg.

20
We return to Figure 2 to interpret the Russian and Argentine experience. Ignoring the
balance sheet problem for the moment, Figure 2 has a straightforward interpretation: when total
debt is low, currency composition may not matter and all the debt can be held in pesos. However,
as debt grows fiscal solvency in the bad state (low growth and taxes) may become a problem and
beyond a point like A in Figure 2, a bad state devaluation will be needed to restore solvency in
that state. This will raise peso interest rates, an effect that will be offset by higher seignorage plus
capital losses on peso debt through devaluation (which we shall refer to collectively as the
inflation tax) should the bad state materialize, but reduce the good state fiscal surplus because the
exchange rate remains pegged in this state. The shadow exchange rate will rise. As debt
continues to rise and reaches the point B in Figure 2, the fiscal surplus in the good state
disappears because of the growing peso-dollar interest differential. Beyond B, solvency requires
both a fall in the share of peso debt, and a faster rate of devaluation in the bad state because the
base of the inflation tax shrinks. This further widens the peso-dollar interest differential. If a
swap is attempted in these circumstances, it will push inflation towards the seignorage
maximizing rate and could precipitate the collapse of the fixed peg. Hence, the authorities may
find it more attractive to dilute the burden of public debt by levying a capital tax on holders of its
debt. A partial default would reduce expected inflation.
Consider now a case where D is very high and x is small, i.e., public debt is high and
dollarized as in the case of Argentina so that the base for the inflation tax is low. In this case a
currency swap (lowering peso debt) may not help much, as it would rapidly raise bad state
inflation – which might explain the debate over “pesifying” dollar liabilities in Argentina.23 It is a
way of raising the base of the inflation tax and lowering expected inflation. If at the same time
there is a balance sheet problem, then the only way to restore fiscal solvency might be through a
debt write down. In the Russian case, D was also high, but x at 0.3 was also relatively high. With
a very high ruble-dollar interest differential, a swap appeared attractive, but according to the
model would only make matters worse by increasing bad state inflation and hence the interest
differential. It would also raise the shadow exchange rate and trigger a speculative attack. While
there were other factors also at play in Russia – such as the liquidity injection to reserves in the
form of senior IFI loans and the interaction of the swap with bank balance sheets as discussed
above - the developments after the swap conform to the predictions of our model.

23

See for example de la Torre and Schmukler (2002).

21
A puzzle that remains is why creditors let debt levels go up to such high levels in the first
place. As noted above, there were factors at play both in Argentina and Russia which made
public debt dynamics look much better than they actually were. Another possibility is that the
probability of a bad state went up, in Russia’s case because of the East Asian crisis and falling oil
prices, and in Argentina’s case because of contagion from both Russia and Brazil. This would
lower what are regarded as sustainable public debt levels and raise both the size of expected
devaluation and domestic interest rates. This may strengthen the motivation for a swap out of
domestic debt; but this will only make matters worse for the bad state to which a higher
probability is now assigned thereby hastening meltdown.
Concluding Remarks
Our model tries to explain why debt swaps do not work when fiscal fundamentals are
weak in spite of their intuitive appeal. In so doing, it sheds light on the fundamental nature of the
macroeconomic crises that Russia and Argentina experienced. The model combines in a simple
way the inter-temporal budget constraint of the government with the arbitrage-based pricing of
peso and dollar debt in the context of a pegged exchange rate. It shows that attempts to lower the
share of high-yielding peso debt would help in good states where taxes are adequate to service
debt and the peg remains intact; but hurt in bad states where taxes need to be augmented by the
inflation tax and a devaluation is needed to restore fiscal solvency. In other words, instead of
protecting the peg, the swap increases the expected rate of devaluation which in turn could hasten
its abandonment. The first part is analogous to the Sargent-Wallace argument, whereby tighter
money actually raises expected inflation given an underlying fiscal imbalance and growing
indebtedness. The second part flows from the observation that the increase in domestic interest
rates linked to the rise of the expected rate of devaluation lowers the demand for money, raising
the shadow exchange rate. If this rises sufficiently fast and exceeds the level of the fixed peg, it
will prompt a speculative attack a la Krugman-Flood-Garber.
So then why are swaps included as part of rescue packages? We note two possibilities:
first, there may be a belief that an interest rate arbitrage is available, i.e., that Fisher parity does
not hold. Second, the government may believe that as a result of the IFI rescue and reforms
package it can dramatically lower the probability of a bad state. In other words, the reduction in
the share of peso debt is accompanied by a fall in the probability of the bad state so that expected
devaluation does not go up and peso interest rates could even fall, setting of a virtuous cycle of

22
higher growth and falling interest rates.24 Our paper argues that the chances this will happen
given high public debt and bad fiscal fundamentals are low at best. But these are precisely the
circumstances in which countries that undertake the swap as a last resort, hoping to avoid a
meltdown. Consequently, our model implies that swaps may have harmful effects precisely in the
circumstances when they tend to be implemented as part of a rescue package. The very fact that
the government’s inter-temporal budget constraint is binding means the market has already
factored in the possibility of correcting the fiscal fundamentals and found them inadequate. In
these situations, attempting to shore up liquidity by a combination of liquidity injections from the
IFIs (which means a matching increase in public debt, and more senior debt at that) and debt
swaps then only worsens further the fiscal situation in the eyes of the private sector. Indeed, it
may also raise the specter of moral hazard: IFI entry is the best time to exit.25 The overall
conclusion is that there is not much IFIs can do when default risk reaches a certain point, and
non-market based debt restructuring may be the only option.
Our model abstracted from several important issues. Among the topics left for
extensions:
•

Adding non-traded goods. This will allow us to understand the impact of real exchange rate
adjustments on the exposure to crisis, and to evaluation the balance sheet effects of swaps.

•

Adding periods, in order to investigate the intertemporal dynamics leading to a crisis.

•

Moral hazard associated with swaps may be added by introducing an IFI loan that goes into
reserves; it does not change the net debt position of the government, but could worsen the
fiscal situation if reserves carry a lower interest rate than IFI loans and “demote” other loans
if IFI loans are senior. This extension will provide a linkage between our model and the third
generation models of crises.

24
25

This follows directly from Fisher interest parity.
This point is made forcefully in the Russian case of 1998 by Kharas et al. (2001).

23
Appendix
This appendix extends the model of debt swaps to the case in which the government
chooses its fiscal, financial and monetary policies to maximize a social welfare function. It first
presents some completion of the analysis in the text. As before, the government collects tax and
seignorage revenues to meet its debt repayment obligations, and we abstract from other aspects of
fiscal policy, such as public non-interest expenditures. Taxes are implicitly distortionary, and the
output cost of taxation is assumed to be increasing in tax revenue raised. Authorities also have an
objective function representing social preferences that is decreasing in net tax revenue and in the
inflation rate. The cost of taxation varies with an exogenous state of nature, representing the idea
that output is subject to stochastic disturbances and the marginal cost of tax revenue declines with
output. The government will also be allowed to default on debt (but sovereign default is costly).
1. The general model of debt swaps
We begin with the mechanics of debt exchanges in the basic model and develop our
analysis by extending the model. For now, the government cannot default on foreign currency
debt and has already reached its capacity to repay. There are two dates and N states of nature in
the second period, such that T1 < T2 < ... < TN .
Fisher interest parity,
(a1)

N
1+ i
1
1 + r = E(
) = (1 + i )∑ φ s
= (1 + i ) E (1 / P) ,
P
Ps
s =1

holds in equilibrium, and the budget constraint for the government in state s in period 2 is given
by
(a2)

Ts + σ ( Ps ) ≥ (1 + r )b + (1 + i )

B
,
Ps

where b is the outstanding stock of dollar debt and B is the outstanding stock of peso debt. We
rewrite this constraint to obtain the expressions used in the text, as
(a3)



1
 ,
Ts + σ s ( Ps ) ≥ (1 + r ) D (1 − x) + x
P
E
(
1
/
P
)
s



where D=b+B and x is the proportion of outstanding debt issued in domestic currency at the end
of period 1. When these inequalities are binding, they solve for the minimum state-contingent
devaluation necessary to maintain government solvency, so that they give the solution for a
government that is inflation-averse and is constrained not to default.
For the exogenous seignorage revenues case, the j+1 conditions,
(a4)



1
 , for s = 1, …, j,
Ts + σ s = (1 + r ) D (1 − x) + x
Ps E (1 / P) 


and



1
,
T j +1 + σ j +1 = (1 + r ) D (1 − x) + x
Ps E (1 / P) 

determine the j+1 variables, P1 ,..., Pj , and D given x. Calculating total expected revenues, we
(a5)

have
j

(a6)

(1 + r ) D = ∑ φ s (Ts + σ s ) +
s =1

N

∑φ

s = j +1

s

(T j +1 + σ

j +1

),

24
so that D is independent of x. Changing x only affects the post-devaluation price levels and not
the capacity of the government to service its debt or avoid devaluation.
For the case of endogenous seignorage revenues, the conditions for solvency are
(a7)



1
 , for s = 1, …, j,
Ts + σ s ( Ps ) = (1 + r ) D (1 − x) + x
P
E
(
1
/
P
)
s



(a8)



1

T j +1 + σ j +1 (1) = (1 + r ) D (1 − x) + x
Ps E (1 / P) 


(a9)

(1 + r ) D = ∑ φ s (Ts + σ s ( Ps )) +

and
j

s =1

N

∑φ

s = j +1

s

(T j +1 + σ j +1 (1)) .

These, now j+2 equations in j+2 variables, solve for x as a function of D. A decrease in x leads to
a rise in Ps for s less than j+1. This increases seignorage revenues on the left-hand side of
equation (a7) as long as σ s ' ( Ps ) > 0 . Equation (a9) shows that this allows an increase in D
subject to the no-default constraint. In this case, the nominal interest rate does not increase by as
much as in the exogenous seignorage case, so that equation (a8) will continue to be satisfied with
a lower x and higher D. When D is maximized, σ s ' ( Ps ) = 0 , for at least one state s less than
j+1.
2. Endogenizing fiscal and monetary policy
Policy objectives for the government can be introduced as marginal costs of distortionary
taxes and inflation. The social costs of distortionary taxes and of inflation are assumed to be
additively separable and are represented by the two functions, ws (Ts ) and v s ( Ps ) , respectively,
where ws ' (Ts ) and v s ' ( Ps ) are each positive and increasing in their respective arguments. For
any given values of T and P, respectively, these marginal costs are assumed to be decreasing in s.
There will also be an upper bound on the tax revenue that the government can raise in any state,

Ts . For convenience, we assume that lim ws ' (Ts ) = ∞ . To represent the government's
Ts →Ts

incentive to keep the exchange rate fixed in some states, a fixed cost, d, to depreciating at any rate
is also adopted.
The government chooses it contingent policy to minimize its loss function,
N

(a10)

∑φ
s =1

s

min{ws (Tˆs ), min{ws (Ts ) + v s ( Ps ) + d }} ,
Ts , Ps

subject to the constraints
(a11)



1

Ts + σ s ( Ps ) ≥ (1 + r ) D (1 − x) + x
Ps E (1 / P) 


(a12)


1 
,
Tˆs + σ s (1) ≥ (1 + r ) D (1 − x) + x
E (1 / P ) 


and

for s=1,…, N, given D.
The first-order conditions are

25

(a13)
(a14)
(a15)

v' s ( Ps )
, for s = 1,…, j,
σ s ' ( Ps )
ws ' (Ts ) = ws ' ' (Ts ' ) = ws '' ' (Tˆs '' ) , for s, s’ = 1,…, j, and s’’ = j+1,…,N,
ws ' (Ts ) =



1
 , for s = 1,…, j,
Ts + σ s ( Ps ) = (1 + r ) D (1 − x) + x
Ps E (1 / P ) 


and


1 
 , for s = j+1,…,N,
Tˆs + σ s (1) = (1 + r ) D (1 − x) + x
E (1 / P) 

j
N
1
1
+ ∑ φ s . The solvency condition, equation (a9) also holds in this
where E ( ) = ∑ φ s
P
Ps s = j +1
s =1
(a16)

equilibrium. Condition (a14) is tax smoothing; note that conditions (a13) and (a14) imply that the

v' s ( Ps )
, is also smoothed across all states s = 1,…, j. The
σ s ' ( Ps )
choice of state j is determined by comparing w (Tˆ ) to w (T ) + v ( P ) + d for states j and j+1

marginal cost of the inflation tax,

s

s

s

s

s

s

where Tˆs is the tax revenue required if the price level is fixed equal to one and Ts is the tax
revenue required when the price level exceeds one and satisfies the first-order condition (a13).
Seignorage revenues are not maximized in any state in equilibrium here; that is, σ s ' ( Ps ) > 0 .
This optimization problem solves for the probability that the exchange rate peg lasts
N

through the second period,

∑φ

s = j +1

s

, the allocation of debt across currencies, x, and the trade-off

between conventional taxes and inflation taxes conditional on abandoning the exchange rate peg.
This solution implicitly assumes that the shadow exchange rate in period 1 is less than one so that
the peg can be maintained with positive probability in period 2. We can also observe that the
upper bound for outstanding debt, D, is reached when j+1=N, although this will exceed the
optimal debt level in the general case.
3. Sovereign defaults
Under sovereign immunity, governments have the incentive to make debt payments
because they face the possibility of indirect sanctions for not doing so. These sanctions usually
take the form of reduced access to foreign trade or international credit markets. In models of
sovereign debt, the costs of default are limited, so that there are upper bounds on the repayments
that a government will make. These can be state contingent and lead to debt limits. Our model
already incorporates upper bounds on the willingness of the government to raise taxes for debt
repayments given by the Ts . It is also realistic to bound seignorage revenues from above.
Models of equilibrium debt renegotiation (for example, Kletzer and Wright [2000] or
Bulow and Rogoff [1989]) imply that debt repayments will be increasing with output. These are
game theoretic models with discrete punishments for deviation from equilibrium. A very simple
way to incorporate the renegotiation or restructuring of sovereign debt repayments is to add a
fixed cost of debt repudiation, f. Under this assumption, the government is willing to raise
revenues through either conventional distortionary taxes or seignorage for debt service that satisfy
(a17) ws (Ts ) ≤ f ,
under the fixed exchange rate regime, or

26
(a18) ws (Ts ) + v s ( Ps ) ≤ f ,
under the floating exchange rate regime. If the government devalues, it incurs the cost d, whether
it repudiates its debts subsequently or not. These inequalities impose upper bounds on Ts that are
state-contingent and increasing with the state of nature under the fixed rate. Under a float, the
bound is also increasing when the government’s first-order condition for taxes and seignorage is
satisfied, ws ' (Ts ) =

v' s ( Ps )
.
σ s ' ( Ps )

If the outstanding debt is sufficiently large, actual debt repayments will be state
contingent under sovereign risk. For example, under a revocable fixed exchange rate, the gross
yield on debt would be state contingent and given by
(a19) Ts = (1 + rs ) D
where ws (Ts ) = f and the level of debt satisfies
(a20)

N

N

s =1

s =1

(1 + r ) D = ∑ φ s (1 + rs ) D = ∑ φ s Ts .

Under the float, the constraint



1

Ts + σ s ( Ps ) = (1 + rs ) D (1 − x) + x
P
E
(
1
/
P
)
s


v' s ( Ps )
.
holds for ws (Ts ) + v s ( Ps ) = f and ws ' (Ts ) =
σ s ' ( Ps )
(a21)

Condition (a21) is written for the case that foreign currency and domestic currency debt
payments are renegotiated in proportion to face value. In the case that repayments to domestic
currency debt are unilaterally reduced with no default on foreign currency debt, post-devaluation
inflation is lower and the repayment constraint for state s is given by
(a22)

Ts + σ s ( Ps ) = (1 + r ) D(1 − x) +

(1 + rs ) xD
.
Ps E (1 / P)

The possibility that only foreign debt is renegotiated (realizes state-contingent yields) is
analogous.
The presence of sovereign risk will change the effects of debt swaps if the sovereignty
immunity constraints are binding in at least some states of nature. Consider a case in which the
sovereign immunity constraints are binding in states such that the government abandons the peg
(for simplicity, we will let this be all such states), so that ws (Ts ) + v s ( Ps ) = f and

v' s ( Ps )
for each of these states. A swap of domestic currency debt for foreign
σ s ' ( Ps )
currency debt will not lead to an increase in Ps for each of these states, but, instead, equation
ws ' (Ts ) =

(a21) implies that less debt will be repaid in renegotiation. That is, rs must fall because the term,



1
 (1 − x) + x
 , rises as Ts + σ s ( Ps ) remains constant. For states s = j+1,…., N, the
Ps E (1 / P) 


1 
 , for any given rs .
swap reduces payments to creditors, (1 + rs )D (1 − x) + x
E (1 / P) 

However, the constraints for these states include

27


x
,
Ts + σ s (1) ≥ (1 + rs ) D (1 − x) +
Ps E (1 / P) 

which implies that rs , for s = j+1,…, N, can increase without violating the sovereign immunity
(a23)

constraints so that the foreign currency value of debt repayments is unchanged in any state of
nature. The debt swap has no effect on the real value of repayments in this case and provides no
benefits.
It does not matter if the sovereign immunity constraint is binding or not for any state, s =
j+1,…, N for this conclusion to hold. If, however, the constraint does not bind for some state s =
1,…, j, then the debt swap leads to an increase in the price level, Ps , in this state. The result
parallels the case of a debt swap without the possibility of sovereign default (since the default
constraint does not bind). A swap then leads to a rise in the shadow exchange rate and tightens
the sovereign immunity constraint so that it might bind after the swap. An alternative assumption
is that it is costly for the government to renegotiate its debt and that these costs are rising in the
amount of debt repayment reduction achieved. In this case, a debt swap will lead to an increase
in both Ts and Ps in states for which the government depreciates.

28
References
Bulow, Jeremy L. and Kenneth Rogoff. 1988. “The buyback boondoggle,” Brookings Papers on

Economic Activity 2: 675-98.
Chopra, Ajai, Kenneth Kang, Meral Karasulu, Hong Liang, Henry Ma and Anthony Richards.
“From Crisis to Recovery in Korea: Strategy, Achievements and Lessons.” Asia and
Pacific Department, IMF.
de la Torre, Augusto, and Sergio Schmukler. 2002. “Argentina’s Financial Crisis: Floating
Money, Sinking Banking,” draft, The World Bank.
Flood, Robert, and Peter Garber. 1984. “Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes: Some Linear
Examples.” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 17, pp. 1-13.
Kharas, Homi J., Pinto, Brian, and Ulatov, Sergei. 2001. “An Analysis of Russia's 1998
Meltdown: Fundamentals and Market Signals,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
2001, Issue 1.
Kim, Woochan and Yangho Byeon. 2001. “Restructuring Korean Banks’ Short-Term Debts in
1998.” Draft.
Kletzer, Kenneth Miles, Jr.; Wright, Brian D. 2000. “Sovereign debt as intertemporal barter.”

American economic review, v.90:3, June, pp. 621-639.
Krugman, Paul. 1979. “A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises.” Journal of Money, Credit

and Banking, vol. 11, pp. 311-325.
Mussa, Michael. 2002. “Argentina and the Fund: From Triumph to Tragedy,” Institute for
International Economics, Washington DC.
Obstfeld, Maurice, “Models of Currency Crises with Self-Fulfilling Features”, European

Economic Review, April 1996, p. 1037-47.
Perry, Guillermo, and Luis Serven. 2002. “The Anatomy of a Multiple Crisis: Why was
Argentina Special and What Can We Learn From It,” The World Bank.
Sargent, Thomas J., and Neil Wallace. 1981. “Some Unpleasant Monetaristic Arithmetic.”

Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Fall 1981, 1-17.

29

D

Π1
Panel a, x = 1

D

Π1
Panel b, x = 0.5
Figure 1
Exogenous seignorage, inflation in state s = 1 and total debt, for a give share of domestic
currency debt (x).
The simulation corresponds to the case of N =2, j =1, T2 = 0.2, T1 = 0.16, r =0, φ1 = 0.6.

30

x; π1

π 1 ( D)

A

B

D
x(D)
D

Figure 2
The association between inflation in state s = 1 & the share of domestic currency debt (x) with
aggregate debt, D.
The simulation corresponds to the case of N =2, j =1, b=1, k = 0.2, T2 = 0.25, r =0,
φ1 = 0.85.

ε =0.35,

31

β (π 1 )

Γ (π 1 )
π1

π1 π1

Figure 3
Balance sheet surprises and swaps

