NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

VERTICAL INTEGRATION AND DISTANCE TO FRONTIER
Daron Acemoglu
Philippe Aghion
Fabrizio Zilibotti
Working Paper 9191
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9191
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

This paper is prepared for the Papers and Proceedings of the European Economic Association. We are grateful
to Pol Antras and the participants in the European Economic Association conference in Venice for useful
comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion and Fabrizio Zilibotti. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Vertical Integration and Distance to Frontier
Daron Acemoglu, Philippe Aghion and Fabrizio Zilibotti
NBER Working Paper No. 9191
September 2002
JEL No. L22, O31, O33, O38, O40, L16
ABSTRACT

We construct a model where the equilibrium organization of firms changes as an economy
approaches the world technology frontier. In vertically integrated firms, owners (managers) have
to spend time both on production and innovation activities, and this creates managerial overload, and
discourages innovation. Outsourcing of some production activities mitigates the managerial
overload, but creates a holdup problem, causing some of the rents of the owners to be dissipated to
the supplier. Far from the technology frontier, imitation activities are more important, and vertical
integration is preferred. Closer to the frontier, the value of innovation increases, encouraging
outsourcing.
Daron Acemoglu
Department of Economics
MIT, E52-380B
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
daron@mit.edu
Fabrizio Zilibotti
University College London
Gower Street
London WC1E 6BT
f.zilibotti@ucl.ac.uk

Philippe Aghion
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Littauer Center 309
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
and University College London
p_aghion@harvard.edu

1

Introduction

A view dating back at least to Gerschenkron (1962) sees considerable diﬀerences in the
organization of firms and the economy in general between technologically advanced societies and those that are technological followers. In economies that are technologically
relatively backward, there are more long-term relationships between firms and banks,
larger, perhaps more vertically integrated, firms, less competition, greater state intervention, and generally more “rigid” institutions.
In Acemoglu, Aghion and Zilibotti (2002) (henceforth AAZ) we formalize this notion,
and build on it to analyze a range of issues related to technological progress and economic growth. We point to a fundamental trade-oﬀ facing all economies, that between
exploiting the experience of already existing firms, entrepreneurs and managers, versus
achieving greater selection, by weeding out less successful firms and managers. The
first strategy, which we dub investment-based growth strategy, maximizes investment by
channeling money to existing firms and managers, but sacrifices innovation. The alternative, the innovation-based strategy, encourages innovation at the expense of exploiting
the experience of existing endeavors, and corresponds to a more fluid and competitive
market. We argue that because innovation becomes more important relative to imitation
as a country approaches the world technology frontier, closer to the frontier selecting
highly-skilled managers and entrepreneurs, and the right matches between firms and
activities, becomes more important. As a result, the economy naturally progresses from
an investment-based equilibrium, where insiders are protected, to an innovation-based
equilibrium, where there is greater selection and termination of less successful firms and
entrepreneurs. We show how encouraging the investment-based strategy can increase
the growth rate at early stages, but an economy might end up in a non-convergence trap
if it does not switch out of the investment-based strategy.
The current paper is part of the same research program, and explores the relationship between an economy’s distance to the world technology frontier and the internal
organization of the firm. Based on the same ideas as in AAZ, we show that there are
greater incentives for firms to be vertically integrated in economies farther away from
the frontier. The broader aim of this research program is to investigate how a country’s
distance to the world technological frontier impacts on the type of contracts firms sign
with managers, outside financiers, and suppliers, and conversely how these contracts
1

may aﬀect economic growth.1
In this paper, we build on Grossman and Hart (1986), who oﬀer a theory of vertical
integration as mitigating the holdup problems between firms and their suppliers. By
changing asset ownership, and therefore the outside options of various parties, vertical
integration aﬀects how ex post rents will be shared and via this channel, it shapes the
investment incentives of various parties. To this framework, we add issues of managerial
overload, also analyzed in Aghion and Tirole (1997). In our story, the benefits of vertical
integration is that the parent company does not have to share rents with suppliers, as it
will conduct most of its activities in-house. The cost of vertical integration, on the other
hand, is that managerial overload (modeled as convex costs of eﬀort) reduces investments
in certain activities, and especially in innovation-related activities. Building on the same
ideas as in AAZ, we argue that innovation activities become more important as the
economy approaches the world technology frontier. Therefore, at some point it becomes
worthwhile to incur the costs of sharing the rents with others, in order to benefit from
greater innovation by outsourcing some of the production activities.
Admittedly, this story and our model are simple, and they are merely meant to be
illustrative. Yet, we believe that there are important interactions between the internal
organization of the firm, contracting, and more generally, the organization of production,
on the one hand, and an economy’s stage of development–its distance to the world
technology frontier. We present this model to encourage future work in this area.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the macroeconomic part of the
model and derives the dynamic equation for aggregate productivity. Section 3.1 derives
the equilibrium investments in scale and innovation under vertical integration and nonintegration (outsourcing). Section 3.2 analyzes how firm owners’ decisions whether or not
to vertically integrate depends upon the country’s distance to the technological frontier.
Section 3.3 shows how persistent integration may lead to non-convergence traps.
1
Other than AAZ, this paper is most closely related to the recent literature on growth and contracting, including Acemoglu and Zilibotti (1999), Martimort and Verdier (2001), Francois and Roberts
(2001), and Tong and Xu (2001). For example, Martimort and Verdier (2001) and Francois and Roberts
(2001) show how a high rate of creative destruction may discourage long-term relationships within firms.
Here, we emphasize the trade-oﬀ between scope and innovation incentives, in a growth model where
the importance of innovation (our equivalent of creative destruction) increases as a country approaches
the technological frontier. This paper also relates to recent work on vertical integration decisions in
international trade, e.g., Grossman and Helpman (2002) or Antras (2002).

2

2
2.1

Basic setup

Agents and production

The economy is populated by a continuum of non-overlapping generations of one-period
lived agents. Each generation consists of a mass 1 of “capitalists” who hold initial
property rights over “production sites”, and a mass 1 + L of workers that can also be
employed as managers. Each worker is endowed with one unit of labor which she supplies
inelastically with no disutility. All individuals are risk neutral.
There is a unique final good which serves as numeraire and is produced competitively
using labor and a continuum of intermediate inputs according to:
Z
1 1−α 1
(st (v) At (ν))1−α xt (ν)α dν],
yt = L [
α
0

(1)

where st (v) At (ν) is the productivity in sector ν at time t, xt (ν) is the flow of intermediate good ν used in final good production again at time t, and α ∈ [0, 1]. st (v) will be
the component of productivity coming from firm-specific investments, and At (ν) is the

state of technology in this sector, determined by imitation and innovation activities.
In each intermediate sector ν, one intermediate producer can produce 1 unit of intermediate good with leading-edge productivity At (ν), using 1 unit of final good as capital.
Firm-specific investments and productivity improvements are decided at the beginning
of the period. Ex post each intermediate good producer faces a competitive fringe of
imitators that forces her to charge a limit price: pt (ν) = χ. Hence, profits for each
intermediate sector firm is π t (ν) = (pt (ν) − 1) xt (v). Substituting for the limit price
and the profit-maximizing choice of xt (v), we have equilibrium monopoly profits as:
π t (ν) = δst (v) At (ν) L

(2)

1

where δ ≡ (χ − 1) χ− 1−α is a measure of the degree of competition in the economy, and

is monotonically increasing in χ. When χ, or equivalently δ, is high, which in turn may
be due to technological reasons or to government regulation, there is less competitive
pressure, and prices and monopoly profits are higher.
Now define
At ≡

Z

1

At (ν) dν

(3)

0

as the average productivity in the country at date t, At the productivity at the world
3

frontier (with all countries having a state of technology At ≤ At ), and
at =

At
Āt

(4)

as an (inverse) measure of the country’s distance to the technological frontier.
2.2

Productivity growth

Before production takes place at any date, intermediate firms can increase productivity,
either by imitating frontier technologies or by innovating upon existing technologies in
the country. Imitation is automatic, but innovation requires investments and skills on
the part of entrepreneurs/managers, and the success of innovation will vary between
firms and over time. More specifically, we assume:
At (ν) = η Āt−1 + γ t (ν) At−1 ,

(5)

γ t (ν) = γ + x (v) .

(6)

and that

In this equation, we can interpret xt (v) as the probability that an innovation in sector
v at time t is successful. If so, there is innovation in the amount 1 + γ. Otherwise, there
is a smaller innovation, of size γ. These innovations build on the knowledge stock of
the country, thus they multiply At−1 . The first term in (5), on the other hand, reflects
imitation from the world technology frontier, hence the term Āt−1 .
Let us focus on a symmetric equilibrium where all intermediate firms in the same
country will choose the same innovative intensity xt (ν) = x. Then, dividing both sides
of the above equation by Āt−1 , and integrating over ν, we obtain a simple linear equation
describing how the state variable at = At /At evolves over time, namely:
at =

¡
¢
¢
1 ¡
η + γ + x at−1 ,
1+g

(7)

where g is the growth rate of world technology frontier.2

Equation (7) is a simpler version of the productivity growth equation in AAZ. The
basic analysis in AAZ boiled down to comparing various equilibrium organizational
choices, aﬀecting the η and x terms in (7). Relying on experience increases η at the
2

That the firm-specific investment, s, does not contribute to technological progress is inessential for
the results.

4

expense of x, whereas choosing the innovation-based strategy increases x at the expense
of η. As the economy approaches the world technology frontier, a, increases, and selection and innovation become more important. This in turn tilts the balance towards
organizational choices that favor selection and innovation. In AAZ, the major decision
was whether or not to terminate less successful firms and managers. Here we will look
at a complementary decision, that of whether to vertically integrate certain production
activities or to outsource them (and in addition, the vertical integration decision here
will only aﬀect x and not η, but see footnote 7).
3
3.1

Distance to frontier, vertical integration, and convergence

A simple model of vertical integration versus outsourcing

We now analyze the vertical integration decision of (intermediate sector) firms. These
firms (or their owners/the capitalists) can either choose a “vertically integrated” structure, in which they carry out both the production and innovation activities. Alternatively, they can contract out either part of the production activities or innovation
activities. Here, because of page limits, we focus only on the case of outsourcing production activities. The basic idea is that investment in the scale of production and
innovation both require eﬀort, and perhaps more important time and focus. In the
vertically-integrated structure, this creates managerial overload. Outsourcing mitigates
the managerial overload, but at the same time, it creates a holdup problem:3 a new
agent is brought in, who will share some of the rents with the owner, thereby reducing
the owner’s income for given eﬀort, and via this channel, also his incentives to invest.
We model managerial overload by introducing a convex cost of eﬀort; the more eﬀort
the manager (or the owner) exerts, the higher is the marginal cost of further eﬀort. More
formally, consider the following cost function for eﬀort in the case of vertically-integrated
3
Following Grossman and Hart (1986) and the incomplete contracts literature, we assume that no
ex ante contract can induce an enforceable division of surplus; sharing of profits must rely entirely upon
ex post bargaining. In addition, here we do not consider the case where the owner does not outsource,
but hires the supplier as an employee. Presumably, to the extent that this employee makes important
investments for the firm, he will have ex post bargaining power, but would still need to be monitored by
the owner. This makes the organizational form where the supplier is hired as an employee of the firm
an intermediate organization between our vertically-integrated structure and outsourcing. We leave a
comparison of outsourcing to vertical integration with and without hiring additional agents to future
work.

5

firm:
Ct (s, x) =

½

kĀt−1 if s + x ≤ T
.
∞ otherwise

This cost function specifies that there is a constant fixed cost kĀt−1 (which grows with
the state the world technology to ensure balanced growth), and there is 0 marginal cost
of eﬀort until s+x reaches T , and thereafter, the marginal cost is infinite. Hence, we have
an L-shaped–thus extremely convex–marginal cost curve. The intuitive motivation for
this function is that the manager (owner) has a total available time of T , and expanding
the scale of production takes 1 unit of time, and innovation activities also take 1 unit
of time. Once these activities take up all the available time, the manager can no longer
increase his eﬀort.
We assume that
η + γ ≥ T > γ.

(A1)

The first part of the assumption ensures that the owner has “scarce” time, so that
the trade-oﬀs emphasized here are more interesting. The second part is important in
making sure that there will be suﬃcient innovation from devoting time to innovationtype activities, for example by outsourcing.
The maximization problem of the owners of integrated firms is straightforward:
choose (s, x) to maximize
π t (ν) = δst (v) At (ν) L − Ct (s, x) = δLs(η + (γ + x)a)Āt−1 − Ct (s, x),
where the second equality makes use of the fact that all firms will choose the same x
and s, and substitutes for At (ν) using (4) and (5).
Assumption (A1), i.e., the scarcity of managerial time, then immediately implies that
the optimum x must be equal to zero.4 In other words, in the vertically-integrated firm,
eﬀort overload discourages innovation. The optimal scale of production is then simply:
s = T . This, in turn, yields an equilibrium level of utility for the ownerthing equal to:

4

¡
¢
UtV I = uV I (a)Āt−1 = δLT (η + γa) − k Āt−1 .

(8)

The first order condition for an interior solution yields:
s=

η + γa + T a
.
2a

A suﬃcient condition for s ≥ T , and hence for x = 0, is η + γ ≥ T , which is ensured by assumption
(A1).

6

Now consider the case where production activities are outsourced to an independent
supplier (we refer to this as the non-integration case). The supplier’s cost function is
½
βkĀt−1 if s ≤ T
s
.
C (s) =
∞ otherwise
In other words, the supplier also has total time T , which he simply allocates to productive activities, and incurs a fixed cost βk Āt−1 , which is a fraction of the fixed cost of
production incurred by the vertically-integrated firm. Once these production activities
are outsourced, the cost function of the owner is:
½
φkĀt−1 if x ≤ T
x
.
Ct (x) =
∞ otherwise
Therefore, the owner can now allocate all her time to innovation activities, and incurs a
fixed cost of production φkĀt−1 . We assume that φ ≥ 1/2, so the owner incurs a fixed

cost at least half as large the fixed cost in the vertical-integrated case (this assumption
simplifies some of the comparisons below, and is not essential). We also assume that
suppliers can still work as workers, so even in the case with outsourcing, the total labor
force working in the intermediate sector is equal to L.
Following Grossman and Hart (1986) and the incomplete contracts literature, we

assume that scale and productivity decisions are ex post unverifiable by third parties
and therefore cannot be contracted upon ex ante. Thus the owner and the supplier must
rely on ex post bargaining to determine how profits will be shared between them. This
creates a standard holdup problem: ex post some of the rents have to be shared with the
supplier. To simplify the discussion, we assume that both the owner and the supplier
have an outside option equal to zero (i.e., once productive activities are outsourced, and
investment decisions are taken, the owner can no longer carry out productive activities
if there is disagreement). Assuming equal bargaining power between the owner and the
supplier over the ex post surplus, each party obtains 1/2 of the ex post surplus from the
relationship, namely:5
1
δLs(η + (γ + x)a)Āt−1 .
2
Then, for given scale s, the firm will choose her innovation intensity x as follows:
1
max δLs(η + (γ + x)a)Āt−1 − C x (x),
x 2
5

Throughout we assume that this surplus is large enough to cover the fixed cost for the supplier.

7

while taking the innovation intensity x is given, the supplier will invest in the scale of
production so as to:
1
max δLs(η + (γ + x)a)Āt−1 − C s (s).
s
2
The corresponding equilibrium investments in scale and innovation are simply equal to:
sNI (a) = T and xNI (a) = T.

(9)

Notice that in this case, the non-cooperative nature of the game between the supplier
and the owner does not create underinvestment, since the marginal cost of investment is
0. In a more general model (in particular without the L-shaped marginal cost curve), underinvestment would occur and also discourage outsourcing. Given (9), the equilibrium
ex ante utility for the firm is equal to:
µ
¶
1
NI
NI
δLT (η + γa + T a) − φk Āt−1 .
Ut = u (a)Āt−1 =
2

(10)

Assumption (A1) immediately implies that:
duV I
duNI
>
.
da
da
That is, the larger a, i.e., the closer the country is to the technological frontier, the
higher the value of innovating and therefore the higher the private benefit of outsourcing.
Intuitively, outsourcing becomes privately more costly for the owner as a increases, since
greater a implies greater output, which is being shared with the supplier. On the other
hand, as a increases, innovation becomes more important, and the value of outsourcing
increases. Assumption (A1) ensures that the second eﬀects dominates the first.
3.2

Distance to frontier and vertical integration

We now determine the equilibrium integration decision as a function of the country’s
distance to the technological frontier (measured by a). The owners (capitalists) decide
whether to remain integrated or outsource production activities. Therefore, to determine
the equilibrium organizational form we need to compare uV I (a) given by (8) to uNI (a)
given in (10).6
6

Because production activities are outsourced to suppliers who have no wealth, contracts requiring
upfront payments from suppliers to owners are not possible. Contracts where potential suppliers promise
ex post payments are ruled out by our incomplete contracts assumption.

8

First, suppose that a = 0, then:
uN I (0) =

δLT
η − φk < uV I (0) = δLT η − k
2

(11)

(recall that φ ≥ 1/2). Thus in economies far away from the world technology fron-

tier, owners prefer to remain vertically integrated: innovation is relatively unimportant
compared to imitation in these economies, so outsourcing has little benefits, and high

private costs because of the holdup problem. This result holds despite the fact that
from a technological point of view, outsourcing is superior to vertical integration: there
is no opportunity cost for the supplier (as he still works in production), and there can
be greater investments in innovation. Nevertheless, from the owner’s point of view,
outsourcing has private costs, since the supplier shares some of the rents.
Setting uV I (av ) = uN I (av ) from (8) and (10), yields the critical threshold
av ≡

η − (1 − φ) k/δL
.
T −γ

(12)

For all a < av , equilibrium organizational form is vertical integration, and for a > av ,
there will be outsourcing. The threshold av is typically less than 1, so that there will be a
switch to outsourcing before reaching the technology frontier. Notice that av less than 1
is more likely when the fixed production cost k is high, competition is high (i.e δ is small),
or a η is small. More generally, straightforward diﬀerentiation shows that ∂av /∂δ > 0
and ∂av /∂η ≥ 0, thus vertical integration is more likely in less competitive environments
and in sectors where imitation is relatively more important. Less competition creates

greater rents, increasing the holdup cost of outsourcing part of the activities. Also when
imitation is more important, the innovation benefits of outsourcing are less pronounced
relative to the rent sharing costs.
Proposition 1 In economies with distance to frontier a < av , the equilibrium organizational form is vertical integration, and when a > av , firms switch to outsourcing, where
av is given by (12). Greater competition, i.e., lower δ, and less scope for imitation, i.e.,
lower η, reduce av and make outsourcing more likely.
3.3

Vertical integration, growth, and non-convergence traps

So far we have discussed the eﬀect of the state of technology, and the growth process, on
equilibrium organizational forms. Next we analyze the eﬀects of organizational forms, in
9

particular of integration/outsourcing decisions, on the equilibrium growth rate. Consider
first an economy with at < av , where equilibrium organizational form is vertical integration. Then, using equation (5), we can characterize equilibrium productivity growth
as:
at+1 =

η + γat
.
1+g

(13)

In contrast, in a country with at > av , owners will outsource production activities, so
innovations take place at the rate γ + xNI (a) = γ + T . As a result, the law of motion of
productivity relative to the frontier is:
at+1 =

1
(η + (γ + T ))at ).
1+g

(14)

Comparing (13) and (14), we see that the economy with outsourcing always grows faster.7
This reflects the fact that from a technological point of view, outsourcing is superior,
and in equilibrium vertical integration emerges because owners do not want to share the
rents with suppliers.
Near the frontier, the maximum growth rate of the economy must be the same as
that of the frontier, thus we must also have
η + γ + T = 1 + g.

(A2)

Given (A2), equation (14) implies that an economy with outsourcing always converges
towards the world technology frontier, i.e., (γ + T )/ (1 + g) < 1.
An economy with vertically integrated firms, on the other hand, not only grows at a
slower rate than an identical economy with outsourcing, but may also stop converging
towards the world technology frontier. To analyze this, first observe that (13) intersects
the 45o line at:
atrap =

η
< 1.
1+g−γ

(15)

¡
¢
That η/ 1 + g − γ < 1 immediately follows from assumption (A3). When at = atrap ,

an economy with vertical integration stops growing. Therefore, a vertically-integrated
economy will be stuck in a non-convergence trap at atrap .
7

It is straightforward generalize this model, so that vertically integrated firms are more successful
in imitation, i.e., they have ηV I > ηN I . In this case, somewhat more reminiscent to AAZ, at the early
stages of development, an economy with vertical integration will grow faster than an economy with
outsourcing, while closer to the frontier, outsourcing will produce faster growth.

10

This does not, however, establish that an equilibrium with a non-convergence trap
exists. It might indeed be the case that an economy switches out of vertical integration
before atrap . Therefore, the condition for an equilibrium non-convergence trap is that
atrap < av where av is given by (12).
When atrap < av , economies that start with a0 < av will always stay with vertically
integrated firms, and never converge to the technology level of the world frontier, whereas
economies with a0 > av grow faster and converge the world technology frontier. Since
av is increasing in δ, such traps are more likely in less competitive economies (e.g., in
economies where government policy discourages entry). Conversely, in economies with
atrap < av , government policy, for example by increasing competition, i.e., reducing δ,
may prevent non-convergence traps.

11

References
[1] Acemoglu, Daron, Aghion, Philippe and Fabrizio Zilibotti (2002), “Distance to
Frontier, Selection, and Economic Growth”, NBER Working Paper 9066.
[2] Acemoglu, Daron and Fabrizio Zilibotti (1999), “Information Accumulation in Development” Journal of Economic Growth, vol. 4, pp. 5-38.
[3] Aghion, Philippe and Jean Tirole (1997), “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations”, Journal of Political Economy, 105, pp 1-29.
[4] Antras Pol (2002), “Trade, Contracts and the Structure of the Firm” MIT mimeo.
[5] Francois, Patrick and Joanne Roberts (2001), “Contracting Productivity Growth”
CentER Working Paper No.35, Tilburg University.
[6] Gerschenkron, Alexander (1962) Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective,
Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA.
[7] Grossman, Sanford and Oliver Hart (1986), “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership:
A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration”, Journal of Political Economy, 94,
691-719.
[8] Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman (2002) “Integration versus Outsourcing in
Industry Equilibrium” Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol 107, pp. 85-120.
[9] Martimort David and Thierry Verdier (2001), “Monopolies life cycle, bureaucratization and Schumpeterian growth ”, London : Centre for Economic Policy Research.
[10] Tong, Jian and Chenggang Xu (2001), “Endogenous Financial Institutions, R&D
Selection and Growth”, Mimeo London School of Economics.

12

