NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ABORTION LEGALIZATION AND ADOLESCENT SUBSTANCE USE
Kerwin Kofi Charles
Melvin Stephens Jr.
Working Paper 9193
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9193
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

We have benefited from discussions with John Bound, John DiNardo, Doug Staiger, and David Thatcher. We
are grateful to Arthdale Brown and Pawan Khera for research assistance. We would like to thank the Heinz
School for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Kerwin Kofi Charles and Melvin Stephens Jr. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Abortion Legalization and Adolescent Substance Use
Kerwin Kofi Charles and Melvin Stephens Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 9193
September 2002
JEL No. I12, J13
ABSTRACT

We assess whether in utero exposure to legalized abortion in the early 1970's affected
individuals’ propensities to use controlled substances as adolescents. We exploit the fact that some
states legalized abortion before national legalization in 1973 to compare differences in substance
use for adolescents across birth cohorts in different states. We find that persons exposed to early
legalization were, on average, much less likely to use controlled substances. We also assess how
substance use varies with state level birth rates and abortion ratios. Overall, our results suggest that
legalization lowered substance use because of the selective use of abortion by relatively
disadvantaged women.
Kerwin Kofi Charles
Department of Economics
and Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
kcharles@umich.edu

Melvin Stephens Jr.
H. John Heinz III School of
Public Policy and Management
Carnegie Mellon University
4800 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15213
and NBER
mstep@cmu.edu

1.

Introduction
This paper examines how the legalization of abortion in the early 1970s affected

the tendency of children born during those years to drink, smoke, and use illicit
substances as teenagers. Recent work on legalization's effects has focused on early life
outcomes (Gruber, Levine and Staiger (1999)) as well as one later life activity - the
propensity to commit serious crime (Donohue and Levitt (2001) and Joyce (2002)).1 Not
only has a single later life outcome been studied, the two papers on legalization and crime
reach dramatically different conclusions, making the impact of abortion reform on later
life outcomes an open question. Our study focuses on a different outcome, about which
there is likely independent interest and which, as we outline later, is ideal for assessing
abortion legalization’s later life effects.
Two main theoretical reasons have been posited for why abortion legalization
could have affected later life outcomes like substance use and crime. One is the
mechanism of selection - specifically, whether relatively disadvantaged women were
more or less likely to have abortions after legalization. The early life circumstances of
the average child born after legalization should have risen if they were and should have
fallen otherwise.2

If a person’s early life environment affects later life outcomes,

selective use of abortion should have changed the incidence of bad teenage outcomes for
persons born after abortion reform.

1

There has also been work by Angrist and Evans (1999) on how abortion legalization affected human
capital acquisition and labor market outcomes for potential mothers exposed to abortion reform.
2
Selection of the first type could occur if adjusted their fertility to ensure that children are born when the
mother's (or family's) economic position is most favorable. The second type of selection could occur is
disadvantaged women lack the means to pay for abortions, or if they live relatively further from providers
than their better off counterparts.

1

The second mechanism does not depend on selection. Even if the fraction of
children in a given cohort born into disadvantaged circumstances was unaffected by
abortion availability, more abortions after legalization would have lowered the number of
people at risk to engage in the relevant behavior. This reduction in the cohort size could
affect the rate of use within a cohort because of how the costs that drug dealers face may
change, how the distribution networks may operate, and how peer effects influence youth
behaviors.3
Several authors have shown that legalization was indeed associated with dramatic
increases in the number of abortions (e.g., Bauman, Anderson, Freeman, and Koch
(1977), and Levine, Kane, Staiger, and Zimmerman (1996)).4

With respect to the

selective use of abortion, Levine et al. (1996) find that relatively disadvantaged groups
such as teenagers, nonwhites, and unmarried women were more likely to have abortions
after legalization.

But they also find that older women, who tend not to be

disadvantaged, were also more likely to have abortions after legalization. Moreover,
even though groups like teenagers are more likely to be disadvantaged, there might have
been systematic selection in the types of teenagers who had abortions. Hence, the
conclusion that there was selective use of abortions by the disadvantaged may be tenuous.
Gruber, Levine, and Staiger (1999) study how legalization affected the
circumstances into which a child was born. They show that children who would have
been born but for abortion legalization would have been more likely to be born into
poverty, to die in infancy, to receive welfare and to live in a single parent family. The

3

Jacobson (2001) discusses these and other reasons why cohort size might affect the rate of use.
The association between abortion availability and fertility has been found by many other authors. See
Blank, George and London (1994), and Levine, Trainor and Zimmerman (1996), and Kane and Staiger
(1996).
4

2

improvement in the average early life circumstance of children born after abortion
legalization supports the idea that there was positive selection (relatively more use by the
disadvantaged) of abortion.5
Did the improvement in average childhood circumstances after legalization
translate into better later-life outcomes for these children? Donohue and Levitt (2001)
examine the relationship between legalization and the dramatic nationwide reduction in
serious crime such as homicide, violent crime and property crime, which began in the
early 1990s. There is a strong prima facie case that legalization had a causal effect on
crime reduction. Crime began to fall abruptly and sharply in 1992, just as first cohorts
born after legalization entered the prime crime-committing age range of 18-24. The
reduction began earlier than 1992 in the five states that liberalized abortion prior to the
Roe decision. 6 Finally, the nationwide reduction continued through the early nineties, as
the fraction of people aged 18 to 24 in any year who were born after legalization grew.
In their formal analysis, Donohue and Levitt relate changes over time in a state's
abortion ratio (the proportion of abortions to live births) to crime within the state in the
1990s. They estimate a large effect: fully one-half of the reduction in crime can be
explained by changes in the abortion ratio. This effect is larger than policy initiatives
such as increased policing. Their evidence makes a compelling case for the notion that
abortion legalization, presumably by virtue of its impact on the number and fraction of

5

Other research finds a similar association between abortion access and improvements in birth outcomes.
See for example, Grossman and Jacobowitz (1981), Grossman and Joyce (1990) and Currie, Nixon and
Cole (1993).
6
In 1970, four states explicitly legalized abortion by repealing state abortion laws. These states were New
York, Washington, Alaska and Hawaii. A State Supreme Court ruling in late 1969 which held that
existing anti-abortion laws were unconstitutional meant that, as of 1970, California was a state with “de
facto” legalization.

3

children born into disadvantaged circumstances, had a causal effect on subsequent
criminal behavior.
Joyce (2001) also examines the relationship between legalization and crime. He is
critical of Donohue and Levitt's analysis, and dubious of their conclusion that legalization
lowered subsequent criminal activity. Joyce’s main criticism centers on Donohue and
Levitt's use of changes in the abortion ratio over time as their main source of variation.
He argues that information on abortions may be unreliable, and that even if reliable, need
not correlate neatly with unintended fertility.7 In addition, Donohue and Levitt’s abortion
ratio summarizes the number of abortions that occur within a state, which might be quite
different from abortions had by women who live in the state.
Joyce uses an empirical strategy, previously employed by Gruber, Levine and
Staiger (1999) and Angrist and Evans (1999), which exploits the fact that five states
effectively legalized abortion three years before national legalization. The staggered
nature of abortion legalization means that from 1970 to 1972, and only for those years,
women in the five “repeal” states were exposed to legalized abortion while women in
every other state were not. Joyce compares crime outcomes for people born in the 19701972 interval, across repeal and non-repeal states. He finds no evidence of a difference
in crime between them, and concludes that relationship Donohue and Levitt find between
crime and abortion ratios is spurious.8

7

One explanation for this is that there may have been a correlation between the availability of abortion in a
state and the use of contraceptives, or even the likelihood of engaging in sexual activity, for people in a
state.
8
Though they do not emphasize these results, Donohue and Levitt also use the repeal state/non repeal state
comparison to study legalization and crime. Overall, their results from this exercise were mixed. Donohue
and Levitt argue that the comparison of early versus late legalizers is not a useful approach in their context
because the early legalizers have only a three year “head start”. Since they study crime among a broad
band of age cohorts, it is, in their view, difficult to identify any effect on overall crime.

4

Because these studies of the subsequent criminal behavior of the cohorts exposed
to abortion legalization gives mixed results, understanding whether the impact of abortion
reform carries over to later life outcomes is an open, and important, topic to analyze.
Here, we focus on adolescent use of controlled substances.9 Like serious crime, use by
adolescents of controlled substances, particularly illicit narcotics, is likely a function of
the person’s childhood circumstances.

Thus, any effect of abortion on early life

environment should be manifested later in substance use.10 Also, particular features of
available data on substance use make it a very interesting subject for the study of this
effect.
One of these features is that national substance abuse trends among adolescents
displayed a very different time series pattern to those for serious crime. Whereas crime
began a sharp decrease in the early nineteen nineties, Figure 1 shows that the fraction of
U.S. 12th graders who report using controlled substances such as tobacco, alcohol and
illegal substances like marijuana and cocaine started to trend upwards at around the same
time. The figure shows only use patterns for use within the past month, but the patterns
for having ever used the substances or for having used them within the past year are very
similar. The pattern in Figure 1 is exactly the opposite of the first order relationship one
might expect if legalization affected adolescent substance use. In light of these trends,
formal evidence consistent with an effect of abortion would be quite convincing.

9

Though this paper is about substance use and not crime, it should be noted that strictly speaking, a minor
who uses any of the substances we study is engaged in criminal activity, albeit of a decidedly less serious
variety than the types studied by Joyce and Donohue and Levitt. Also, substance use may be a gateway
into serious criminal activity. For example see Markowitz (2000), Parker and Auerhahan (1998) and
Baumer et al (1998).
10
The relationship between background and family conditions has been documented by numerous authors.
In Risky Behavior Among Youth: An Economic Analysis, Gruber ed., papers by Cook and Moore (alcohol),
Gruber and Zinman (Smoking) and Pacula et al (marijuana use) estimate an a significant relationship
between these factors and use.

5

The most interesting aspect of studying substance use is that available data on this
behavior permit a much sharper test of the effect of legalization than is possible with
available crime data. Recall that the selection effect emphasized in the literature ought
to have affected the rate at which people, born after legalization, engage in or manifest
some negative outcome. Both Donohue and Levitt and Joyce, in their respective studies,
use the Unified Crime Report data, compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
These data measure all reported violent crime, property crime, and homicide.

But

because crime reports are not disaggregated by the age of the offender, they cannot be
used in a proper test of abortion legalization: examining the impact on criminal activity
by specific birth cohorts.
The other measures used in the crime studies to help get around this problem have
equally serious limitations. One measure is the arrest rate, which is age-disaggregated.
But the fact that a given number or fraction of people of a certain age are arrested for a
particular type of crime in a year is, at best, a highly imperfect indicator of the number or
fraction of persons of a given age who commit the particular crime in the year – the
outcome of interest. Arrest rates depend on the actions of police, and are not conviction
rates. Indeed, even if every arrested person were an offender, arrest rates by age might
still systematically mis-measure criminal behavior by age if the capacity to escape arrest
varies with age. Donohue and Levitt and Joyce also look at age-disaggregated crime
victimization data. The limitations of these data for testing the prediction of the effect of
legalization on criminal behavior are obvious. Crime victims are not criminal offenders,
and even if they were, it is not clear how the ages of the two groups would line up. 11

11

Joyce also examines data from the FBI’s Supplemental Homicide Reports.

6

There are none of these problems with substance use data. As we discuss in detail
below, we are able to examine the proportion of persons, from specific birth cohorts, who
use controlled substances in a given year, at a particular age. In addition, because we use
data from multiple years, there is little risk that our estimates conflate aging and time
effects, as is possible with analyses similar to ours, but which use data from a single year.
Gruber, Levine, and Staiger (1999), for example, in their analysis of the effect of
legalization on early life outcomes, use data from the 1980 Census. The use of these data
means that children born at different years are of different ages when observed in the
data, making it difficult to separate aging and time effects.12
Using several generations of 12th graders from the Monitoring the Future Survey,
we classify adolescents by whether they were born in one of the states that legalized
abortion before nationwide legalization in 1973.

For 12th graders born in the same

cohort, we then compare substance use between those born in repeal and other states. For
cohorts born when abortion was legal in only the repeal states, we find that people born
in those states were significantly less likely to use controlled substances, particularly the
most serious like illegal narcotics, than persons from their birth cohorts born in other
states. In addition, we find no evidence of differences in substance use by whether the
person was born in a repeal state or not for cohorts born after national legalization.
We also examine how the probability of substance use was associated with
changes in the birth rate to delineate between the impact on drug use due to selective use
of abortion and that due to reductions in cohort size. When we isolate variation in birth
rate due only to abortion legalization using an instrumental variables approach, we find

12

Gruber, Kane and Staiger attempt to carefully deal with this potential problem by adding state-specific
trends.

7

that increases in birth rates are associated with increased probabilities of substance use.
Since all the variation in birth rates in these results are induced by the abortion reforms,
and since we find relatively sharp, cohort-specific changes in substance use as birth rates
change, the results suggest a role for a selection effect above and beyond an effect due
only to changes in cohort size.
We briefly discuss evidence about the abortion ratio and substance use, as there
has been much controversy about the use of this ratio in the literature. We illustrate some
problems with the abortion ratio, and explain why we are apprehensive about using it to
identify the relationship of interest. It is noteworthy, however, that despite its problems
the results from the abortion ratio essentially support the paper’s main result: that in utero
exposure to abortion legalization was associated with a reduction in the tendency to use,
or to have ever used, controlled substances for 12th grade adolescents.
In the next section we describe our empirical framework and the data in greater
detail. Section 3 presents results from the differential timing of abortion reforms in the
early legalizing states and national abortion legalization.

In Section 4 we present the

results using birth rates. Section 5 briefly discusses results when the abortion ratio is the
regressor of interest and Section 6 concludes.

2.

Data and Empirical Framework
We use data from several waves of the Monitoring the Future (MTF) data set.

The MTF is a repeated cross-sectional national survey that, since 1975, has collected
information each spring from high school seniors about their behaviors and attitudes.
MTF also surveys 8th and 10th graders although data collection for these two student

8

groups did not commence until 1991. Our analysis focuses on the annual 12th grade
surveys because the late date at which data collection began for 8th and 10th graders
makes it impossible to assess their substance prior to abortion legalization. The focus on
different generations of 12th graders means that we have a sample, drawn from different
birth cohorts, who are (approximately) the same age when observed. Each cross-section
of MTF 12th graders consists of about 16,000 students from 130 schools (Johnston,
O'Malley, and Bachman (2001)).13 All of our analyses are weighted using the sampling
weights provided with the study.
Information about the use of five types of controlled substances is available in the
MTF. Information about three types comes directly from the 12th graders’ responses: use
of cigarettes, use of alcohol, and use of marijuana. Information on other types of illicit
substance use, such as cocaine, heroin, and amphetamines, is also collected in MTF. We
use two composite measures constructed by the MTF staff. One indicates the use of any
illicit drug; the other denotes use of any illicit drug excluding marijuana. For each of
these five substances, we study two indicators of use. One indicates whether the student
reports having ever used the substance at some point during his or her lifetime. The other
measure, which likely better captures more habitual use, indicates whether the student
used the substance within the past thirty days.
There is limited demographic data available in the MTF. We know the student's
gender, whether the student is white, and the educational attainment of the student’s

13

One limitation of the data is that MTF does not sample high school dropouts. However, to the extent
that dropouts are likely to be children born into relatively disadvantaged circumstances, their absence from
the data biases us against finding evidence for the predicted effect of legalization.

9

parents.14 Students who give missing responses for any of these demographic data are
dropped from our analysis.15
Ideally, we would like to know each student’s place and date of birth. The public
use version of MTF does not include state identifiers, but we made a restricted analysis
data agreement with MTF that enabled us to merge the student's state of residence as of
the survey date onto the dataset.

These state of residence identifiers are the only

indication of student location available. Our analysis therefore assumes that the students'
state of residence is the same as their state of birth – an assumption that is likely correct
for the vast majority of the sample.
Students’ birthdays are reported in the survey. We use this information to create a
“year-of-birth” variable for each student which measures whether the student was
exposed to legalized abortion in utero. Persons born in the early part of any year were in
utero during the previous calendar year. Persons born in the latter half of any year were
in utero during the calendar year of their birth.

To line up children by their in utero

exposure, we code each MTF student’s “year-of-birth” as year t ∗ if the student was born
between July 1 of year t ∗ and June 30th of year t ∗ + 1. 16

Our analyses control for time-varying state-level factors that likely affect
substance use. We use state cigarette and beer taxes, the fraction of the state’s population
that resides in a dry county, state per capita income, and state unemployment rate.
Information on state cigarette taxes, including the federal cigarette tax, is from the

14

Roughly 75% of our sample is white, 12% are African-American, 6% are Latin-American, and 2% are
Asian-American.
15
These exclusions result in a loss of nearly 10% of the observations. Additional results not shown here
indicate that the results are not affected by deleting these observations.
16
Constructing the year-of-birth variables this way also helps us align the students’ years of birth with state
abortion ratios, which we discuss in detail later.

10

Tobacco Institute's The Tax Burden on Tobacco.17 The state tax on a case of twenty-four
twelve-ounce beers was obtained from the Beer Institute's Brewer's Almanac. An
estimate of the number of a state's residents residing in dry counties was also obtained
from the Brewer's Almanac. Dividing these estimates by inter-censal estimates of the
total population in a state taken from the Census Bureau, we create the fraction of the
state population residing in dry counties for each year. Information on each state's annual
per capita income was obtained from the Bureau of Economic Analysis, and state adult
unemployment rates were obtained from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. All dollar figures
are converted to 1999 dollars using the CPI-U.

3.

The Impact of Early vs. Late Legalization of Abortion

Setup
Our first set of results exploits the fact that the “repeal” states legalized abortion
three years prior to nationwide legalization in 1973. We estimate the model:
Useijt = β1 ( Repeal j ∗ D7072 ) + β 2 ( Repeal j ∗ D7476 ) +

β 3 D7072 + β 4 D7476 + β 5 X it + β 6 Γ jt + β 7δ j + β 8τ t + β 9Coh i + ε ijt .

(1)

where Useijt is an indicator variable which equals 1 if student i in state j in year t uses
the particular substance. The variables X it and Γ jt are, respectively, the vectors of
individual and time-varying state-level controls described above. The terms δ j and τ t
are, respectively, state and survey year fixed effects whose inclusion in the model
accounts for unobserved differences over time or across states which may be correlated

17

Phil DeCicca graciously provided us these data. See DeCicca et al (2001) for the details of data
construction.

11

with the variables of interest.

The binary variables D7072 and D7476 are year-of-birth

dummies which indicate whether the person was born in the years 1970-1972 (as we have
defined year of birth above) or was born in the years 1974-1976, respectively. We also
include Coh i terms for each birth cohort to capture any additional differences across
these cohorts. The variable Repeal j in (1) denotes whether the person’s state is one in
which abortion was effectively legalized in 1970.18
The interactions between the two year-of-birth dummies and the repeal variable
are the variables of interest in (1). The first interaction asks: Among persons born in
1970-1972, was adolescent substance use higher when they were high school seniors for
those whose mothers were exposed to legalized abortion? The second interaction term
asks: Among persons born in 1974-1976, whose mothers were all exposed to legalized
abortion, was there a difference in adolescent use for those who happened to be born in
states which had legalized abortion early? The fact that the data allows us to focus on
substance use for people born in very specific birth cohorts, all at the same stage of life is
a major strength of our analysis.
If abortion access affected substance use through either of the mechanisms
described above, we would expect that among people who were born in 1970-1972, those
from repeal states should have been less likely to use controlled substances as adolescents
since only they were exposed to legalized abortion. The coefficient β1 should thus be
negative. By contrast, all individuals born in 1974-1976 were exposed to legalized

18

The use of state fixed effects in equation (1) precludes the use of a main effect for the Repealj variable.

12

abortion because of national legalization in 1973. We would thus expect that β 2 should
be zero.
To estimate (1) we analyze cohorts of 12th graders born over the interval 1966 to
1976. We exclude two birth cohorts: people who are born in years 1969 and 1973. For
these two cohorts it is not possible to say precisely what abortion regime prevailed during
the time the person was in utero. With this modification, people in the sample were
either exposed to legalized abortion in utero or not, and their exposure either arose
because they were from a repeal state or not. Limiting our sample to these birth cohorts
leads us to use individuals in the MTF spanning the survey years 1983-1999.19

Basic Results
Table 1 presents the results for whether students, as of their senior year in high
school, report ever having used each of the five controlled substances. Means of the
dependent variable as well as sample sizes are reported at the bottom of Table 1 for each
dependent variable.20 Due to concerns about drawing correct inferences in models such
as these, the reported standard errors allow for arbitrary correlation for individuals within
the same state over time (Bertrand, Duflo, and Mullainathan 2002). The table shows that
the demographic controls are all statistically significant determinants of substance use.
Boys are more likely to have ever used all controlled substances, except tobacco.
Controlling for family background, whites are more likely to have ever used. Increased
parental education, both mother’s and father’s, reduces the likelihood of having ever used

19

Nearly 99% of our sample is taken from the 1984-1995 surveys. Notice that these survey years
correspond to the years when the birth cohorts are roughly 18 years of age.

20

Sample sizes vary across dependent variables since students do not answer all substance use questions.

13

the substance by 12th grade across all categories of use, except for ever having drank
alcohol.
Evidence about the effect of the time-varying state controls on ever having used
any of the substances is mixed. The beer tax significantly lowers use of marijuana, any
illicit drug and any illicit drug except marijuana, but has no significant effect on cigarette
use and drinking. The cigarette tax does not affect whether 12th graders have ever used
any of the substances.

The fraction of a state’s population residing in a dry county as

well as the state’s per capita income both lower use for all of the substances although
these estimates are not statistically significant in any regression.

Finally, the state

unemployment rate only significantly affects the most serious substance category – illicit
drugs except marijuana.
The results show that for all of the more serious substances – marijuana, all illicit
substances, and illicit substances excluding marijuana – 12th graders who were exposed to
legalized abortion in utero because their states were early legalizers were significantly
less likely to have ever used.

Not only are the effects strongly statistically significant,

but they are economically meaningful as well. For example, 32% of students overall
report ever having used an illicit drug other than marijuana. The estimated coefficient of
–0.045 therefore implies a fifteen percent reduction in the likelihood of ever having used
associated with in utero exposure to legal abortion. For the less serious categories –
cigarette smoking and drinking alcohol – the estimated effect on the interaction the same
sign as for other substances, but are not significant.
The estimated effect for being born in a repeal state in 1974-1976 is not
statistically different from zero in any of these “ever used” regressions.

14

For these

students who were all born after abortion was nationally legalized, there is no difference
in the behavior of adolescents from repeal and non-repeal states. This result is precisely
what one would expect given that students from both sets of states from these birth
cohorts were exposed to legal abortions when in utero.
Table 2 presents the results for whether the student used substance within the last
thirty days - the dimension of use that probably better captures habitual use. For all of
the variables, the signs of the coefficients as well as their significance levels are virtually
identical to the ever used results. The point estimates indicate a lower likelihood of
recent substance use for the cohorts born in repeal states when only these states allowed
abortion, with the strongest results occurring for the two most serious substance
categories.

Again, these results seem sensible; any effect of abortion exposure should

affect most seriously the use of illegal drugs, and less dramatically substances like
tobacco and alcohol which a large number of teens are likely to have recently used,
irrespective of their backgrounds. In addition, as with the ever used results, we find no
difference in the likelihood of recent use for persons born after 1973 between the two
groups of states.
Overall, the results in Tables 1 and 2 are very consistent with the argument that
early legalization, which exposed a subset of individuals to legalized abortion in utero,
impacted the substance use of these individuals when they become adolescents. People
born in repeal states in the three years of the “treatment” are less likely to use controlled
substances as adolescents than are others in the same birth cohort who were born in states
where abortion was illegal. There are no differences in outcomes for people born in the
two types of states after national legalization, suggesting the differences in outcomes for

15

people born in the “treatment” years is attributable to the different abortion regimes
which existed in the two types of states in only these three years.

Robustness Tests
How sensitive are the results in Table 1 and Table 2 to alternative model
specifications? The framework in (1) is a difference-in-difference estimator, with three
distinct periods: the “before” period, when no person in utero in any state was exposed to
legal abortion; the “during” period, when only persons in the repeal state were exposed to
abortion; and the “after” period, when both the repeal and non-repeal states had legal
abortion due to the national law change. The operating hypothesis within this framework
is that, while there may be differences in factors that affect substance use between repeal
and non-repeal states, these differences remain fixed across the three periods. The
possibility that this hypothesis might not hold is why we control for time-varying statelevel factors. We assess the sensitivity of the results to the inclusion of these state-level
controls, as well as the state, survey year, and cohort fixed effects.
Table 3 presents the estimated interaction effects from different versions of the
model (1). The results in Panel A of the Table drop the survey year and cohort fixed
effects from the model.21 The results in the Panel show that not accounting for secular
trends in substance use, which equally affect all 12th graders in a given year, does not
change the estimated coefficients from those previously shown for the baseline
regressions in Tables 1 and 2.

21

While there is not an exact one-to-one correspondence between the survey year and cohort fixed effects,
these coefficients exhibit a similar pattern when only one of these sets of effects is included in the model.
Therefore, we only present the results when both sets of these effects are excluded.

16

Panel B of Table 3 presents the results from excluding the state fixed effects from
the model. In order to stay within the difference-in-difference framework, we include the
binary variable Repeal j that takes the value one if the student resides in an early
legalizing state and zero otherwise. In this specification, which does not account for
permanent, unobserved differences across states that affect adolescent substance use, the
results differ somewhat from those in the baseline model. The point estimates and
significance of interaction terms in the “during period”, when only repeal states have
legalized abortion, are essentially unchanged – except that the estimated effect for
marijuana is somewhat larger. The interactions for the “after” time period are different
than the baseline results, none of which were statistically different from zero. Without
fixed state controls, both alcohol “after” interactions are (weakly) significant as is the
coefficient for recent use of illicit drugs except marijuana. Thus, dropping the state fixed
effects has minor qualitative impacts on the results.
The third set of results drops the demographic and time-varying state controls
from the baseline specification. Again, the results show that people born in repeal states
in the during period (1970-1972) were less likely to use than were people born at the
same time in other states. The estimated effects are quite similar (if not slightly larger in
magnitude) to the baseline regressions. The results for the interactions in the after period,
however, are dramatically different than both the baseline ever used and recently used
results. When observable controls are dropped from the analysis, virtually all of the
“after” interactions are large and statistically significant.
In Table 4, we explore why excluding the time-varying state controls might lead
to significant coefficients for the after period. We focus on the time-varying state

17

variables, as the demographic controls remain essentially constant across different waves
of the survey.

The entries on the left of the table are the average of the time-varying

state controls, by repeal and non-repeal state, encountered by students during their 12th
grade year.22 The entries on the right show the difference-in-difference of these means
between repeal and non-repeal states for people born across different pairs of time
periods. If it were the case that the difference in the time-varying factors encountered by
students born in the two types of states remains the same irrespective of when these
students were born, the difference-in-difference terms would all equal zero.
The table shows that this condition is violated dramatically for all of state
controls, across all pairs of time comparisons.

For example, the average state

unemployment rate confronted by students in the “after” period from repeal states versus
those from non-repeal states is 2 percentage points higher than the comparable difference
for students from repeal and non-repeal states born in the “before” period. To the extent
that increased unemployment lowers student demand for drugs, the failure to control for
this difference may impart a negative omitted variables bias for the estimated interaction
term in the after period. Similar difference-in-difference results are evident for the other
state controls, all of which will likely impart a negative bias on β 2 . Thus, Table 4
strongly suggests the need to include these time-varying state controls.
In all likelihood, the results in Table 4 explain why, if the regressions do not
control for time-varying state characteristics, we find greater substance use for people
born in repeal states in the period when abortion was legal nationally. When the timevarying state controls are added, as is done in the baseline specification, the differential
22

These averages are across the individuals in our dataset, not simply across the states in question.

18

effect for people born after 1973 vanishes.

Had the difference in use for people born

from 1970-1972 only been due to changes in observable factors rather than to abortion
legalization in the repeal states, we would not expect the estimated effect of
Repeal j ∗ D7072 to be different than zero when the state-level controls are included. The
fact that these interaction effects are not impacted by the inclusion of the state-level
factors suggests that the estimated effects are truly due to differential abortion exposure.

4.

Analysis Using Birth Rate Variation

The results in the previous section showed that children who were exposed to
legalized abortions in utero because of early legalization were, on average, less likely to
use controlled substances as adolescents. As we previously mentioned, abortion access
could affect teen use through two mechanisms: an effect attributable purely to the fact
that birth cohorts are made smaller by abortion, or the fact that the composition of cohorts
changes after legalization because of greater use of abortion by relatively disadvantaged
women (positive selection). In this section we analyze whether there is any evidence of a
selection effect above and beyond a pure cohort size explanation for the results in the
previous section.
Jacobsen (2001) argues that if fixed costs to selling illicit drugs are large, then an
increase in the number of potential users in a cohort may lower drug prices due to
economies of scale in distribution. In addition, if network effects play a role in acquiring
or experimenting with drugs (i.e., it is easier to obtain drugs the larger your extended
network of friends), then larger cohort sizes will increase the likelihood of teen substance
use. Interestingly, all of these effects likely operate not only on the cohort that is smaller

19

because of abortion, but also on surrounding birth cohorts. Students do not interact
strictly within their own birth cohort, and drug dealers probably do not organize their
sales on a cohort-by-cohort basis. Thus, the effect of legalization attributable purely to
changes in cohort sizes should have created an externality that lowered use in the
surrounding birth cohorts as well. By contrast, the effect of legalization attributable to
the selection mechanism operates mainly for the particular cohort that is smaller as result
of abortion. It follows that sharp changes in substance use corresponding to sharp
changes in birth rates associated with legalization are suggestive of an effect of selection
above and beyond a pure cohort size effect.
We can relate use to birth rates using the equation
Useijt = α1 Rate j + α 2 D7072 + α 3 D7476 + α 4 X it + α5Γ jt + α 6δ j + α 7τ t + α 8Coh i + ν ijt

(2)

where Rate j is the birth rate of the student’s state (the number of live births per hundred
women). In (2), the coefficient α1 measures how the probability that a teen from a given
cohort uses controlled substances, is affected by the birth rate in his state when he was in
utero. Unfortunately, the OLS coefficient on the birth rate in (2) does not estimate how
birth rate changes induced by legalization affect use, since birth rates change over time
for other reasons.
We are able to “tease out” the changes in the birth rates due to abortion
legalization using the regression
Rate j = γ 1 ( Repeal j ∗ D7072 ) + γ 2 ( Repeal j ∗ D7476 )
+ γ 3 D7072 + γ 4 D7476 + γ 5 X it + γ 6 Γ jt + γ 7δ j + γ 8τ t + γ 9Coh i + uijt .

(3)

Equation (3), in which the year-of-birth/repeal state interactions are used as instruments
for the birth rate, isolates the portion of the birth rate variation due to the changes in

20

abortion laws. When we subsequently use the predicted birth rate rather than the actual
birth rate to estimate (2) by Two Stage Least Squares (TSLS), the coefficient α1
measures the impact of birth rates on substance use due solely to abortion legalization.
For the TSLS approach to tell us anything about whether legalization’s effect on
use derives in part from a selection effect, early legalization in the repeal states had to
affect birth rates. Table 5 shows the results for the first stage equation, (3). We present
results with and without the time-varying state controls for those students who responded
to the ever smoked question.23 The results without observable state controls in column 1
show that from 1970-1972, birth rates in repeal states were more than 3 births per
hundred women of childbearing age smaller than in the rest of the country. The effect is
strongly statistically significant. In the period after national legalization, birth rates
converged swiftly so there was no difference in birth rates between the two types of
states. These results are nearly identical to those found by Levine et al (1996) who use a
similar specification.24

The estimates that include all of the regressors used in the

analysis in column 2 yield comparable results. We present this second set of results to
highlight that the F-test for the excluded instruments shown at the bottom of Table 5 is
large enough to avoid concerns about finite sample biases that may contaminate TSLS
estimates (E.g., see Bound, Jaeger, and Baker 1995).
Table 5 shows that there were sharp changes in birth rates in repeal and nonrepeal states which correspond neatly with the changes in legalization in the two sets of

23

There are virtually no differences in the results if we restrict the sample to those who respond to
questions for the different dependent variables.

24

Note that Levine et al perform their analysis at the state level while our analysis is perform at the
individual level using our sample of MTF respondents. In addition, they use the log of the birth rate as the
dependent variable rather than the level of the birth rate the level of the birth rate.

21

states. Whether, in turn, part of the mechanism by which these legalization-induced
changes in birth rates affected substance use operated through a selection effect above
and beyond a pure cohort size effect, is indicated by the TSLS estimates. Specifically, if
there was a selection effect, we would expect the TSLS estimates to show sharp changes
in substance use which correspond to the changes in birth rate shown in Table 5. Notice,
this evidence is different from the evidence of changes in use shown in the previous
section, where we merely looked at categorical measures of legalization and there was no
discussion of whether birth rates changed in a manner consistent with abortion access.

Results
Table 6 presents the OLS and TSLS results for the effect of birth rate on the
probability that an adolescent used controlled substances using the same sample as in
Section 3. In the OLS regressions, the birth rate has no effect on the probability of
adolescent substance use for any of the controlled substances, in either category of use
(ever or past 30 days). However, the point estimates are generally positive, as expected.
As we argued above, these estimates contain variation in birth rates having nothing to do
with legalization and thus do not answer the desired question.
The TSLS estimates where we instrument for birth rate using the abortion law
reforms show a different outcome. Recall that these estimates isolate the variation in
birth rate attributable to the abortion reforms. For the probability that a 12th grader has
ever used a substance, the TSLS estimates are statistically significant only for the illegal
drug except marijuana category. The point estimates for ever having used marijuana or
any illegal drug are positive, but not statistically significant. There is no effect on the

22

probability of ever using marijuana or tobacco attributable to the changes in relative birth
rates due to abortion legalization.
In many ways, the “ever use” dimension of use and some of the controlled
substances, are not ideal for testing abortion’s effects. For example, alcohol and tobacco
are prominently and approvingly portrayed in film and other media, and are probably
easily procurable during adolescence. Moreover, it may be that virtually all teenagers try
these substances at least once as a rite of passage. If we do focus on the “ever use”
dimension of use, the best substance on which to focus may be illegal drugs such as
cocaine and amphetamines. Given their serious nature, they are the substances for which
we would most expect legalization, operating through either the selection or cohort size
effect, to matter. For these most serious substances, we estimate an increase in the
probability of use attributable to the sudden and dramatic changes in birth rates following
the abortion law changes.
For substance use in the past month, the TSLS estimates show that the increases
in the birth rate due to legalization are associated with statistically significant increases in
the probability of recent use for every substance except alcohol and marijuana. Even for
these two substances, there is an estimate increase in the probability of recent use
although the effects are not strongly significant. For each of the other categories, and
especially for recent use of illegal drug except marijuana, we find large and strongly
significant effects.
The TSLS results show that substance use changes sharply with legalizationinduced birth rates change. This evidence is different from that presented in the previous
section, which showed only that substance use changed sharply with categorical measures

23

of legalization. Legalization could have sharply changed some other factor, and it could
be this other factor that accounts for that earlier evidence. The TSLS results show how
use changed with changes in birth rate arising from legalization. These results indicate
that above and beyond any pure cohort size effect on substance use following
legalization, there was likely also a selection effect associated with these fertility
reductions as well. Had there been no selection effect at all we would not expected the
sharp patterns in the TSLS estimates. Our evidence is consistent with Gruber, Levine and
Staiger (1996), who find cohort specific relative improvements for people from repeal
states for early life outcomes, which also suggests a role for selection.
Our TSLS estimates imply that a 1 in 100 reduction in the birth rate stemming
from legal abortion was associated in a 1 percentage point reduction in the probability of
recent adolescent use of the illegal narcotics excluding marijuana.

Relative to the mean

rate of recent use found at the bottom of Table 2, this estimate represents a 10 percent
reduction in the probability of use. One implication of this result is that the children who
would have been born expect for legalization would have had a probability of using
illegal narcotics which exceeded the use of people actually born by more than 10
percent.25 Furthermore, these results indicate that the patterns for national substance use
depicted earlier in Figure 1, which began an upward trend in the early 1990’s may have
trended upwards even more had there been no abortion legalization.

25

This calculation follows from the well-known results that the average of a variable (in this case the
probability of use) rises only if the marginal change in the variable is greater than that average.

24

5.

Estimates from Abortion Ratio Variation

We noted earlier that the only later life outcome that has been previously studied
is crime. Although we follow the other studies in the literature that focus on the impact
of abortion legalization through the birth rate, we briefly discuss the abortion ratio in the
context of our outcome variables because of the attention it has received in the crime
studies. We discuss only the abortion ratio by state of residence – both because serious
questions have been raised about the ratio by state of occurrence, and because the results
for this other measure are virtually identical.26
Table 7 presents two sets of results. In the first panel, we present OLS and TSLS
results for the effect of the abortion ratio on substance use. We show only the results for
use within the past month. The OLS regression and TSLS regressions are identical to
equations (2) and (3), except that we replace the birth rate in these equations with the
abortion ratio. The second panel of Table 7 shows the first stage results. In these
models, the “state of residence” abortion ratio equals the number of abortions had by
women who live in a state, divided by the number of live births to women in that state.
Total live births are measured from the year from July 1 to June 30, ensuring that the
denominator corresponds to the same set of pregnancies as the numerator.
The first panel of the table shows that the estimated OLS effect of the abortion
ratio on substance use is not significant for any of the controlled substances, except illicit
drugs other than marijuana. For ease of interpretation, the abortion ratio has been divided
26

Joyce (2001) criticizes the abortion ratio by state of occurrence because it includes abortions by people
who do not live in the state. This consideration is a potentially important one in the years immediately
preceding Roe v. Wade, since women from states that had not legalized abortion could travel into states in

25

by 1000 in all of the regressions presented in the Panel A of Table 7. The TSLS
estimates, by contrast, are all negative which means that increases in the abortion ratio
are associated with lower use among 12th graders who were exposed to this greater
abortion activity in utero. In addition, the results are strongly significant for any illicit
drug except marijuana and weakly significant for drinking and all illicit drug use.
Given these results, which are very consistent with the analogous results for birth
rates presented in Table 5, why do we not emphasize the abortion ratio estimates? The
answer is evident in the Panel B of Table 7. These first stage regressions show that the
abortion ratio was higher in repeal states during the years when abortion was illegal in
other states, as expected. However, the ratio continued to be higher in repeal states, even
after abortion had been nationally legalized.
The elevated abortion ratio in repeal states relative to the rest of the country even
after national legalization is why we do not emphasize the abortion ratio results, and is
the crux of Joyce’s criticism of Donohue and Levitt. If the only effect of legalized
abortion was that it lowered birth rates, the first stage evidence for the abortion ratio
should track that for the birth rate results presented earlier and there should be
convergence in abortion ratios after national legalization.

The fact that there are

relatively more abortions in repeal states after national legalization raises the question
about what treatment the abortion reform variables actually identify. It is clear the
abortion ratio is does not only capture changes in unintended fertility – the assumption on
which our technique hinges. With that in mind, it is very interesting that the abortion
ratio results are qualitatively similar to both sets of our results.

which the abortion laws had been repealed to have the procedure performed. Ted Joyce graciously
provided us with the “state of residence” abortion data used in our analysis.

26

6.

Conclusion

This paper studies the impact of abortion legalization on the use of controlled
substances for people exposed to legalization in utero.

Comparisons of teenage

substance use for people born in states which legalized abortion early to use for youths
from the same cohorts but from states both during the time when abortion was only legal
in a subset of states and then again once abortion was nationally legalized show that in
utero exposure to legalized abortion is associated with diminished substance use,
especially of illegal narcotics.
We relate teen substance use to state birth rates and find no association in the
simple correlation between these variables.

However, when we focus only on that

portion of the variation in birth rates attributable to the abortion reforms, we find the
lower birth rates reduced teen substance use, but only for the very specific cohorts
exposed to legalized abortion. That there is no effect for cohorts born just before or just
after these particular cohorts indicates that the results derive at least in part from a
selection effect which applied only to these specific cohorts, and not simply from cohort
size effects which we do not expect to apply with the same cohort specificity.
Our paper undertakes none of the many philosophical and moral questions raised
by abortion legalization and availability. Nor does our examination of the effect of
abortion exposure on substance use address any of the other economic costs or gains
associated with legalization. It would thus be wrong to read our results as supportive of
abortion legalization in particular, or greater abortion availability in general.

However,

we believe that policy questions about abortion should be informed by credible estimates

27

of the policy’s various effects.

Research that examines additional later life outcomes

attributable to the reforms in abortion laws, both within the United States as well as in
other countries, is needed to provide a more complete picture of the impact of such laws.

28

Bibliography

Angrist, Joshua D. and William Evans, 1999, “Schooling and Labor Market
Consequences of the 1970 State Abortion Reforms,” in Polachek, Solomon W., ed.
Research in Labor Economics, Volume 18 75-113, 75-113.
Baumer, E., J.L. Lauritsen, R. Rosenfeld, and R. Wright, 1998, “The Influence of Crack
Cocaine on Robbery, Burglary, and Homicide Rates: A Cross-City Longitudinal
Analysis,” Journal of Research on Crime and Delinquency, 35, 316-340.
Beer Institute. Brewers' Almanac. New York, NY: United States Brewers Foundation,
Various Years.
Bertrand, Marianne, Esther Duflo, and Sendhil Mullainathan, 2002, “How Much Should
We Trust Differences-in-Differences Estimates?” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper, #8841.
Blank, Rebecca, C. C. George, and Rebecca A. London, “State Abortion Rates: The
Impact of Policies, Providers, Demographics, and Economic Environment, “ Journal of
Health Economics, Vol. 15. (Fall 1996), 513-53.
Bound, John, David A. Jaeger, and Regina M. Baker, “Problems with Instrumental
Variables Estimation When the Correlation Between the Instruments and the
Endogeneous Explanatory Variable is Weak,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 90(430). (June 1995), 443-50.
Brown, Sarah S. and Lean EiseNational Bureau of Economic Researchg, 1995. The Best
Intentions: Unintended Pregnancy and the Well Being of Children and Families,
Washington, D.C. National Academy Press.
Currie, Janet, Lucia Nixon and Nancy Cole, 1996, “Restrictions on Medicaid Funding of
Abortion,” Journal of Human Resources, 31, pp. 159-188.
Donohue, John and Steven Levitt, 2001, “The Impact of Legalized Abortion on Crime”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116(2), 379-420.
Grossman, Michael and Steven Jacobowitz, 1981, “Variations in Infant Mortality Rates
Among Counties in the United States: The Roles of Public Policies and Programs,”
Demography, XVIII(4), 695-713.
Grossman, Michael and Theodore Joyce, 1990, “Unobservables, Pregnancy Resolutions,
and Birth Weight Production Functions in New York City,” Journal of Political
Economy, 98 (5), Pt. 1, 983-1007.

Gruber, Jonathan and Phillip Levine and Douglas Staiger, 1999, “Abortion Legalization
and Child Living Circumstances: Who is the Marginal Child?”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics; 114(1), 263-91.
Gruber, Jonathan eds. 2001. Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis.
University of Chicago Press.
Jacobson, Mireille, 2001, “Baby Booms and Drug Busts: Trends in Youth Drug Use in
the United States, 1975-2000,” Unpublished Manuscript, Harvard University.
Johnston, Lloyd D., Patrick M. O'Malley, and Jerald G. Bachman. 2001. National Survey
Results on Drug Use from the Monitoring the Future Study, 1975-2000 Volume I:
Secondary School Students (NIH Publication No. 01-4924). Bethesda, MD: National
Institute on Drug Abuse.
Jones, Elise F. and Jacqueline D. Forrest, 1992 “Underreporting of Abortion in Surveys
of U.S. Women: 1976 to 1988,” Demography, 24, 113-126.
Joyce, Theodore, 2001, “Did Legalized Abortion Lower Crime?” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper, #8319.
Kane, Thomas and Douglas Staiger, 1996, “Teen Motherhood and Abortion Access”,
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2), 467-506.
Levine, Phil, Douglas Staiger, Tom Kane, and David Zimmerman, 1996 “Roe v. Wade
and American Fertility, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper, # 5615.
Markowitz, Sara, 2000, “The Role of Alcohol and Drug Consumption in Determining
Physical Fights and Weapon Carrying by Teenagers,” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper #7500.
Parker, R and K. Auerhahan, 1998, "Alcohol, Drugs and Violence," Annual Review of
Sociology, 24, 291-311.
Sklar, June and Beth Berkov, 1974, “Abortion, Illegitimacy, and the American Birth
Rate,” Science, 1985 , September 13.
Tobacco Institute. Tax Burden on Tobacco. Richmond, VA: Tobacco Institute.
Various Years.

Table 1. Reduced Form Estimates of Effect of in utero Legalized Abortion Exposure on Whether
Ever Used Controlled Substance
Controlled Substance
Variable

Smoke

Drink

Marijuana

Any
Illicit Drug

Any Illicit Drug
Except Marijuana

Repeal*D_7072

-0.017
(0.015)

-0.009
(0.008)

-0.038
(0.015)

-0.033
(0.014)

-0.045
(0.011)

Repeal*D_7476

-0.010
(0.026)

-0.021
(0.019)

-0.008
(0.033)

-0.012
(0.035)

-0.022
(0.025)

D_7072

-0.044
(0.022)

0.028
(0.017)

-0.035
(0.025)

-0.040
(0.024)

-0.060
(0.020)

D_7476

-0.101
(0.038)

0.052
(0.021)

-0.170
(0.034)

-0.181
(0.033)

-0.159
(0.030)

Male

-0.008
(0.010)

0.007
(0.003)

0.064
(0.008)

0.037
(0.007)

0.001
(0.004)

White

0.113
(0.008)

0.069
(0.005)

0.079
(0.017)

0.085
(0.015)

0.104
(0.009)

Mother HS Grad

-0.027
(0.006)

0.007
(0.006)

-0.025
(0.011)

-0.029
(0.010)

-0.034
(0.007)

Mother Some College

-0.031
(0.005)

0.016
(0.006)

-0.011
(0.012)

-0.017
(0.010)

-0.028
(0.008)

Mother College Grad

-0.035
(0.007)

0.005
(0.005)

-0.034
(0.012)

-0.043
(0.011)

-0.049
(0.009)

Father HS Grad

-0.032
(0.005)

0.004
(0.003)

-0.019
(0.007)

-0.023
(0.006)

-0.024
(0.004)

Father Some College

-0.037
(0.005)

0.011
(0.004)

-0.023
(0.007)

-0.020
(0.006)

-0.023
(0.005)

Father College Grad

-0.055
(0.005)

-0.003
(0.004)

-0.032
(0.007)

-0.036
(0.007)

-0.036
(0.006)

Cigarette Tax
(in dollars)

-0.005
(0.071)

-0.017
(0.043)

0.058
(0.057)

0.051
(0.054)

0.043
(0.046)

Beer Tax
(in dollars)

-0.029
(0.027)

-0.009
(0.017)

-0.120
(0.036)

-0.087
(0.033)

-0.049
(0.032)

Fraction Dry

-0.199
(0.326)

-0.139
(0.189)

-0.066
(0.351)

-0.178
(0.334)

-0.050
(0.466)

State Per Capita Income
(in $10,000)

-0.012
(0.048)

0.040
(0.035)

-0.042
(0.073)

-0.038
(0.075)

-0.047
(0.059)

State Unemployment Rate

-0.0014
(0.0029)

0.000004
(0.001787)

-0.0008
(0.0042)

-0.0023
(0.0041)

-0.0092
(0.0039)

State Fixed Effects?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Survey Year Fixed Effects?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Cohort Fixed Effects?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Mean of Dependent Var

0.65

0.89

0.44

0.51

0.32

R-squared

0.02

0.045

0.043

0.035

0.028

126,504

117,260

126,116

124,699

124,699

N

Regressions are weighted using MTF sampling weights.
Standard errors allow for arbitrary clustering within a state. See text for additional details.

Table 2. Reduced Form Estimates of Effect of in utero Legalized Abortion Exposure on Whether
Used Controlled Substance Within Last Month
Controlled Substance
Variable

Smoke

Drink

Marijuana

Any
Illicit Drug

Any Illicit Drug
Except Marijuana

Repeal*D_7072

-0.020
(0.013)

-0.030
(0.016)

-0.013
(0.011)

-0.024
(0.013)

-0.034
(0.010)

Repeal*D_7476

0.008
(0.027)

-0.013
(0.033)

0.006
(0.024)

0.005
(0.029)

-0.003
(0.015)

D_7072

-0.094
(0.023)

-0.005
(0.025)

-0.018
(0.015)

-0.012
(0.017)

-0.014
(0.013)

D_7476

-0.192
(0.040)

-0.070
(0.034)

-0.048
(0.022)

-0.048
(0.024)

-0.029
(0.018)

Male

-0.008
(0.009)

0.081
(0.006)

0.057
(0.004)

0.049
(0.004)

0.019
(0.002)

White

0.127
(0.009)

0.170
(0.011)

0.049
(0.010)

0.059
(0.010)

0.038
(0.004)

Mother HS Grad

-0.022
(0.007)

0.015
(0.007)

-0.005
(0.006)

-0.009
(0.007)

-0.011
(0.004)

Mother Some College

-0.031
(0.008)

0.020
(0.008)

0.000
(0.007)

-0.005
(0.008)

-0.009
(0.004)

Mother College Grad

-0.032
(0.008)

0.023
(0.010)

-0.008
(0.007)

-0.013
(0.008)

-0.015
(0.004)

Father HS Grad

-0.019
(0.007)

-0.006
(0.005)

-0.013
(0.006)

-0.013
(0.006)

-0.013
(0.004)

Father Some College

-0.027
(0.008)

-0.005
(0.008)

-0.007
(0.006)

-0.010
(0.005)

-0.014
(0.004)

Father College Grad

-0.035
(0.009)

0.001
(0.007)

-0.007
(0.005)

-0.011
(0.006)

-0.015
(0.004)

Cigarette Tax
(in dollars)

-0.008
(0.071)

-0.019
(0.058)

0.007
(0.037)

0.000
(0.035)

0.004
(0.019)

Beer Tax
(in dollars)

-0.031
(0.025)

-0.014
(0.040)

-0.088
(0.027)

-0.085
(0.034)

-0.036
(0.025)

Fraction Dry

0.050
(0.328)

-0.795
(0.333)

-0.446
(0.291)

-0.403
(0.275)

0.097
(0.254)

State Per Capita Income
(in $10,000)

-0.018
(0.050)

0.012
(0.059)

-0.050
(0.054)

-0.036
(0.061)

-0.015
(0.050)

State Unemployment Rate

-0.0030
(0.0028)

-0.0031
(0.0038)

0.0023
(0.0029)

-0.0013
(0.0032)

-0.0058
(0.0038)

State Fixed Effects?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Survey Year Fixed Effects?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Cohort Fixed Effects?

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Yes

Mean of Dependent Var

0.30

0.60

0.19

0.22

0.10

R-squared

0.026

0.061

0.029

0.028

0.017

126,389

116,751

125,674

122,867

122,867

N

Regressions are weighted using MTF sampling weights.
Standard errors allow for arbitrary clustering within a state. See text for additional details.

Table 3. Robustness of Results in Tables 1 and 2
Controlled Substance
Smoke

Drink

Marijuana

Any
Illicit Drug

Any Illicit Drug
Except Marijuana

Repeal*D_7072

-0.016
(0.015)

-0.002
(0.008)

-0.034
(0.017)

-0.030
(0.016)

-0.044
(0.010)

Repeal*D_7476

-0.004
(0.025)

-0.037
(0.024)

0.002
(0.035)

-0.006
(0.036)

-0.028
(0.023)

Repeal*D_7072

-0.022
(0.013)

-0.021
(0.016)

-0.013
(0.013)

-0.024
(0.014)

-0.035
(0.011)

Repeal*D_7476

0.023
(0.026)

-0.010
(0.035)

0.011
(0.024)

0.006
(0.028)

-0.011
(0.015)

Repeal*D_7072

-0.020
(0.012)

-0.022
(0.007)

-0.049
(0.027)

-0.039
(0.022)

-0.044
(0.011)

Repeal*D_7476

-0.019
(0.017)

-0.043
(0.014)

-0.032
(0.024)

-0.023
(0.026)

-0.028
(0.019)

Repeal*D_7072

-0.025
(0.009)

-0.053
(0.023)

-0.027
(0.019)

-0.038
(0.018)

-0.037
(0.008)

Repeal*D_7476

0.004
(0.016)

-0.048
(0.027)

-0.016
(0.020)

-0.023
(0.021)

-0.022
(0.013)

Repeal*D_7072

-0.022
(0.010)

-0.012
(0.005)

-0.049
(0.021)

-0.041
(0.017)

-0.050
(0.010)

Repeal*D_7476

-0.032
(0.020)

-0.042
(0.019)

-0.058
(0.026)

-0.051
(0.027)

-0.060
(0.022)

Repeal*D_7072

-0.027
(0.007)

-0.036
(0.019)

-0.027
(0.014)

-0.040
(0.013)

-0.042
(0.009)

-0.043
(0.017)

-0.034
(0.015)

Robustness Test
A. Drop Survey Year And Cohort Fixed Effects
Ever Use?

Use in Past Month?

Interaction Terms

B. Drop State Fixed Effects
Ever Use?

Use in Past Month?

C. Drop Demographic and Time-Varying State Controls
Ever Use?

Use in Past Month?

Repeal*D_7476

-0.021
-0.057
-0.032
(0.020)
(0.032)
(0.014)
The regressions from which these estimates come are identical to the regressions in Tables 1 and 2, except for the specific modification noted.
Data from multiple waves of Monitoring the Future. See text for additional details.
Regressions are weighted using MTF sampling weights.
In Panel A, survey year and cohort fixed effects are dropped. However, the year of birth main effects D_7072 and D_7476 remain in the analysis.
In Panel B, state fixed effects are dropped. However, the dummy variable Repeal, which is 1 if the student resides in a repeal state and 0 otherwise, is included.

Table 4. Difference-in-Differences of Time-Varying State Controls
Compare Repeal versus Non-Repeal States and by Period of Birth.
"Before" is "Prior to 1970", "During" is 1970-1972, "After" is 1974-1976.
Mean by Birth Interval

Difference in Difference

Variable
Before

During

After

Dur-Bef

After-Dur

After-Bef

6.7
(0.01)
7.0
(0.01)

5.9
(0.01)
5.8
(0.01)

8.0
(0.01)
6.0
(0.01)

0.3
(0.02)

1.9
(0.02)

2.3
(0.02)

0.0006
(0.000009)
0.0557
(0.0005)

0.0007
(0.000009)
0.0430
(0.0004)

0.0005
(0.000009)
0.0447
(0.0004)

0.0127
(0.0007)

-0.0018
(0.0006)

0.0110
(0.0007)

17.3
(0.1)
73.4
(0.4)

26.8
(0.2)
67.9
(0.3)

52.1
(0.1)
58.2
(0.3)

15.0
(0.5)

35.1
(0.5)

50.1
(0.4)

23.4
(0.1)
26.4
(0.1)

40.8
(0.1)
27.8
(0.1)

49.8
(0.1)
32.1
(0.1)

16.0
(0.2)

4.7
(0.2)

20.7
(0.2)

218.6
(0.2)
189.9
(0.1)

231.9
(0.1)
194.6
(0.1)

23.9
(0.3)

8.5
(0.3)

32.5
(0.2)

-698
(31)

-390
(31)

State Unemployment Rate
Repeal
Non-Repeal

Fraction Dry Population
Repeal
Non-Repeal

Beer Tax in cents ($1999)
Repeal
Non-Repeal

Cigarette Tax in cents ($1999)
Repeal
Non-Repeal

Cigarette Price in cents ($1999)
Repeal
Non-Repeal

168.1
(0.1)
163.3
(0.1)

State Income Per Capita ($1999)
Repeal

26,231
28,105
27,258
(14)
(13)
(16)
Non-Repeal
22,641
24,206
24,057
308
(16)
(17)
(15)
(31)
The data in this table are drawn from multiple data sources. See text for additional details.
Standard errors are in parenthesis.

Table 5. First Stage Results. Effect of Early Legalization on Birth Rate
(1)

(2)

Repeal*D_7072

-3.51
(0.81)

-1.89
(1.00)

Repeal*D_7476

-0.27
(1.49)

1.59
(1.33)

Demographic and Time-Varying State Controls?

No

Yes

State Fixed Effects?

Yes

Yes

Survey Year Fixed Effects?

Yes

Yes

Cohort Fixed Effects?

Yes

Yes

F-test on excluded
instruments (p-value)

16.2
(0.000)

8.1
(0.001)

Variable

Standard errors allow for arbitrary clustering within a state.
Regressions are weighted using MTF sampling weights.
Data from multiple waves of Monitoring the Future. See text for additional details.

Table 6. Estimates of Effect of Birth Rate on Subsequent Adolescent Substance Use

Smoke

Drink

Marijuana

Any
Illicit Drug

Any Illicit Drug
Except Marijuana

OLS

0.001
(0.001)

-0.0001
(0.001)

0.001
(0.002)

0.001
(0.002)

0.002
(0.001)

TSLS

0.004
(0.007)

-0.002
(0.003)

0.011
(0.009)

0.009
(0.008)

0.011
(0.006)

OLS

0.002
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

0.0001
(0.001)

0.0004
(0.001)

0.002
(0.001)

TSLS

0.009
(0.006)

0.008
(0.006)

0.006
(0.004)

0.009
(0.005)

0.011
(0.003)

Ever Use?

Use in Last Month?

The table shows the effect of the birth rate on use where the birth rate is the number of live births per thousand women of childbearing age.
All regressions contain demographic and time-varying state controls as well as state, survey year, and cohort fixed effects.
Regressions are weighted using MTF sampling weights.
Standard errors allow for arbitrary clustering by state.

Table 7. Abortion Ratio, Early Legalization, and Adolescent Substance Use

A. Effect of the State of Residence Abortion Ratio (Divided by 1000) on Use Within the Past Month

Smoke

Drink

Marijuana

Any
Illicit Drug

Any Illicit Drug
Except Marijuana

OLS

-0.002
(0.053)

-0.006
(0.068)

-0.002
(0.039)

-0.013
(0.038)

-0.111
(0.048)

TSLS

-0.106
(0.080)

-0.174
(0.095)

-0.065
(0.070)

-0.128
(0.078)

-0.189
(0.062)

B. First Stage Results of the Effect of Early Legalization on the State of Residence Abortion Ratio
(1)

(2)

Repeal*D_7072

168.6
(19.2)

220.9
(15.8)

Repeal*D_7476

150.4
(32.8)

263.0
(32.0)

Demographic and Time-Varying State Controls?

Yes

No

State Fixed Effects?

Yes

Yes

Survey Year Fixed Effects?

Yes

Yes

Cohort Fixed Effects?

Yes

Yes

F-test on excluded
instruments (p-value)

39.7
(0.000)

121.6
(0.000)

The Abortion Ratio is the number of abortions by women from a state per the number of live births to women from that state.
The OLS and TSLS results in the Panel A use the abortion ratio divided by 1000 for ease of interpretation.
All regressions contain demographic and time-varying state controls as well as state, survey year, and cohort fixed effects.
Standard errors allow for arbitrary clustering by state. Regressions are weighted using MTF sampling weights.

Figure 1. Fraction of 12th Graders Who Used a Controlled Substance in Past Month
Smoked in Last 30 Days
50%

Percentage

40%

30%

20%
1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

1998

1999

Year

Drank Alcohol in Last 30 Days
80%

Percentage

70%

60%

50%

40%
1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

Year

Used Marijuana in Last 30 Days
50%

Percentage

40%

30%

20%

10%
1976

1977

1978

1979

1980

1981

1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

Year

Used Any Illicit Drug in Last 30 Days

Percentage

40%

30%

20%

10%
1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

Year

Used Any Illicit Drug (Except Marijuana) in Last 30 Days

Percentage

20%

10%

0%
1982

1983

1984

1985

1986

1987

1988

1989

1990

1991
Year

1992

1993

1994

1997

1998

1999

