                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               FLEXIBILITY AND JOB CREATION:
                                   LESSONS FOR GERMANY


                                           James J. Heckman


                                          Working Paper 9194
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9194


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




I thank Christina Gathmann of the University of Chicago for her comments and insights into the Germany
economy. Pedro Carneiro provided additional useful comments. Thomas Bauer of IZA, Horst Siebert of the
University of Kiel, Joachim Wagner of the University of Lüneburg, Rainer Winkelmann of IZA, and Klaus
Zimmermann of IZA all provided very helpful information for which I am grateful. This paper was presented
in a lecture at the Daimler-Chrysler center in Berlin, Germany, July 3, 2001. The views expressed herein are
those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by James J. Heckman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Flexibility and Job Creation: Lessons for Germany
James J. Heckman
NBER Working Paper No. 9194
September 2002
JEL No. L5, J3, H2

                                          ABSTRACT

       This paper examines the performance of the German economy and the role of the regulation
and welfare state policies in affecting its performance. While the German economy is still strong,
incentives in place are likely to impair future German competitiveness and productivity.



James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 E. 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu
   I know from life and from history that … often, the outward and visible material
signs and symbols of happiness and success only show themselves when the process of
decline has set in. The outer manifestations take time like the light of the star up there,
which may in reality be already quenched when it looks to be shining brightest
(Thomas Buddenbrooks to his sister Tony in Buddenbrooks, Part 7, Chapter 6).




                                          3
1. Introduction
The German economy lacks the robustness and vitality it possessed in the Erhard era. It is
still a strong economy, competitive in medium-high technology trade, but it could be
stronger. Unemployment is high, employment growth is low, and its competitive position
in world trade is weak in areas of high technology, such as computers, communication
technology, and biotechnology.
   Germany’s poor competitive position in high technology is a symptom of two
interrelated factors. First, weak incentives to invest in skill (human capital) and venture
capital, produced by the current level of regulation, taxation and bureaucratization.
Second, the inability of the German system to respond to change rapidly. The new
economy of the twenty-first century is characterized by variability and the need for
flexible responses. This variability creates opportunity, but only for those able to respond
quickly and with efficiency. It creates a demand for highly skilled labor and venture
capital to respond to the new opportunities. The social system in Germany impedes rapid
responses and hence thwarts the German economy from making use of the opportunities
created by the new economy.
   To understand the problems that beset the German economy and the possible solution
to these problems, it is important to understand the causes of these problems more clearly
and to distinguish the short-run from the long-run problems. In my view, it is the
incentives in place that have long run consequences that are the most worrisome because
they affect the way Germany will perform in the next generation. By the miracle of
compound interest, large growth rates produce large wealth levels for future generations
while low growth rates produce low wealth levels. Germans should be worried about
these rates, although most political discussions focus only on the short run targets.
   The immediate problem facing Germany and much of Europe is that of high
unemployment rates. Thirty years ago, German unemployment rates were the envy of the
world. They were one fifth of the U.S. unemployment rate, which was the same then as it
is today. Thirty years later, German unemployment is roughly twice that of the U.S. rate.
More generally, European unemployment has increased to extraordinarily high levels
over the past 20 years. Something has changed and that something is not specific to



                                             4
Germany, but is common to many countries in Europe. Understanding that common
factor, or set of factors, is the topic of a lot of recent research in economics. Despite
appearances to the contrary, there is more agreement among economists than might first
meet the eye.      Contrary to public perception, professional economists who study
European unemployment and the German economy agree on the basic forces underlying
the high persistent unemployment in Germany and much of Europe.
     There is a substantial body of empirical evidence pointing to the fact that incentives
matter and that firms, individuals, and nations respond to them. Germans who remember
the rigid incentives of the former East German economy do not have to be reminded
that weak incentives can stifle productivity, investment, and effort. Less dramatically,
incentives in Western economies to collect unemployment or disability benefits have
been shown to have substantial effects in inducing people not to work and to go into
beneficiary status. All economists looking at the empirical evidence accept this and the
further point that the work disincentive effects of these programs are large. Disincentives
imposed on firms such as minimum wages, union-imposed wage floors, or entry
regulations have substantial effects especially when the minimums are binding. Studies
from France, Latin America and Puerto Rico, where minimum wages are often a
substantial fraction of average wages, as they are in Germany, have shown substantial
disemployment effects of wage floors. Yet in the public discussion of employment
creation these disemployment effects are minimized or ignored entirely.
       Incentives motivate economic life. It is important to understand how the modern
welfare state affects these incentives in order to understand why welfare states perform
the way they do.
       When the American economy is compared to the German and other European
economies, it is not hard to reach the conclusion that it is something about incentives in
the welfare state that gives rise to the differential performance of these two types of
economies. This chapter is about those incentives, how they affect economic
performance, and how incentives might be changed to improve that performance. I want
to consider the economic consequences of these incentives in both the short and the long
run. Elections are won on short-term performance, so politicians focus on short-run




                                            5
problems. However, as a detached scholar, I want to direct attention to the long-run
issues: Nations prosper or founder on their long-run performance.
       I make four main points and present empirical evidence to back them up, using
references listed at the end of the chapter.
1.     The incentives in European and German welfare states distort resource allocation
and impair efficiency. The best estimates of the welfare cost of government activity—
what economists call deadweight burden—is 40 pfennigs for each mark raised by
government activity, and some would place the cost even higher. These costs arise from
the distortions in economic activity induced by the fiscal system. Much more than the
direct cost of taxation is involved.
       Centralized bargaining and regulation of business entry, banking practices, and
employment all contribute to the burden. The levels of these disincentives are higher in
Europe than in America, and this contributes to higher unemployment, lower
employment growth, and a lower level of effort in the society. Such disincentive effects
are much discussed in academic circles but they seem never to make their way into
popular discussions of policy issues.
       The benefit of the current system is alleged to be the universal social insurance it
provides. According to this argument, the efficiency cost of taxation and regulation is to
be set against the benefit of greater equity and security (Agell, 1999). A closer look at
how the system works in Germany and many other European countries shows that it
produces security and even wage gains for protected insiders at the cost of inequity, job
loss, and income losses for outsiders who are only partially protected by social insurance.
Far from promoting social justice at the price of efficiency, it provides security for some
at the cost of exclusion for others.
2.     The inefficiency and distortions created by the modern welfare state cannot
explain the growth in European and German unemployment over the past 20 years. The
edifice of the welfare state was in place 30 years ago, and arguably the incentives then
were less favorable employment at that time than they are now (Ljungquist and Sargent,
1998; Blanchard and Wolfers, 2000). A vast empirical literature over the past 25 years
has documented the distortions created by the welfare state. Many European governments
reduced the worst of those incentive features in response to this literature but typically



                                               6
only by modest amounts. The reforms in Europe and Germany only partly close the
incentive gap with America.
       What is it then that accounts for the rise in European unemployment? This is the
second major topic of this chapter. A growing body of evidence points to the fact that the
world economy is more variable and less predictable today than it was 30 years ago when
the modern European welfare state with its high levels of taxation and regulation was
established. This variability is associated with the entry of many countries into world
trade; with the creation of new financial markets and markets for goods; and with the
explosion in technology, especially in computers, information technology, and
biotechnology. This variability is associated with the onset of skill-biased technical
change proceeding at an uneven and unpredictable pace that is still transforming the
workplace and making traditional methods of production and management obsolete.
Many empirical studies have shown that skill-biased technology is at work in advanced
countries as well as Third World economies. These developments contribute to enormous
increases in productivity in many industries and create new trading opportunities. At the
same time, they lead to more variability and unpredictability in economic life. This
variability is a source of wealth for those who can adapt to it. Figure 1 contrasts the
distribution of outcomes in the less variable old economy with the distribution of
outcomes in the new world economy.
       The manifestations of the new variability are legion: rising wage inequality in
markets favoring skilled workers in freely functioning labor markets, the large scale
increase in merger activity, and patenting that occurred in the early 1980s at the time of
the rising wage inequality and the growth in volatility in trade and in some financial
markets. The world has become more open and more fluid and at the same time many
traditional methods and organizations have become obsolete.
       We live in an era of creative destruction. The new order grows out of the old by
destroying the old ways of producing goods and trading. This is an era of greater risk and
greater return. The modern welfare state even at its newly “reformed” level is maladapted
to this new world economy because it discourages risk taking and efficient adaptation by
providing “social insurance” to preserve the status quo at precisely the time when many
old economic practices are no longer productive. This explains why so many of the



                                            7
piecemeal reforms implemented in many welfare states around the world have apparently
failed and have been associated with rising unemployment. These reforms would have
promoted employment and reduced unemployment in a former era. In this modern era of
change they do not go nearly far enough to make the reformed economies flexible enough
to respond to the new and changing world economy. The world has been changing too
fast for European politicians and policy makers keep up, and Europe will now have to run
to keep in place.
      An economic order that was well adapted to the more stable and predictable
economic environment of the 1950s and 1960s has become dysfunctional in the late
twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. The problem of unemployment in Germany is
not due solely to the fact that the cost of labor is too high, although that is a problem
(Bertola, 2000). It is also due to the inability of the economy to adapt to change and to
exploit the opportunities and challenges of the new economy. The opportunity cost of
security and preservation of the status quo—whether it is the status quo technology, the
status quo trading partner, or the status quo job—has risen greatly in recent times.
3.     The opening up of world trade and the increased competitiveness that flows from
it means that now, more than ever before, uniformity in the prices of traded goods
dictates labor market outcomes. Benefits given to workers are costs to firms and must be
paid for in terms of lower wages or less employment. Something has to give in costs
because market prices are set internationally and, increasingly, capital markets are
uniform around the world. Thus nonwage mandates to workers nominally paid by firms
must be borne by the workers themselves. Higher wages achieved by unions or by
minimum wage statutes must lead to substitution against labor—fewer jobs—if firms are
to remain competitive.
4.         Hallmark features of the new economy are diversity, heterogeneity of
opportunities, and value of local knowledge. One feature of the dynamics of the new
order is that many idiosyncratic opportunities arise as potential trading partners and
potential production partners seek each other out.
        The old economics focused on stable technologies where broad aggregates such
as capital and labor were assumed to be homogeneous. The economics of the modern era
focuses on models of matching and sorting of heterogeneous individuals into trading and



                                             8
production units in the face of uncertainty about the suitability of any particular trading or
production arrangement. This is a new model of the economy that features the unique and
the relation specific. It is a model of marriage that emphasizes the value of partners that
know each other in making the decisions to produce or trade and the value of divorce
when circumstances change.
         It is a model of the gains to trade among idiosyncratic individuals. The new model
emphasizes the value of local knowledge and the benefit of exploiting local knowledge
about particular possibilities and circumstances that are not widely known. The new
economy emphasizes that one person’s gain is not another person’s loss and that
economic efficiency is enhanced by allowing those equipped with local knowledge to act
on it.
         A striking example of the benefits of local knowledge is the reform of British
unionism. When the locus of bargaining was shifted from the national and industry level
to the firm level, the face of British unionism changed for the better (Pencavel, 2000).
Firms and workers in Britain are now allowed to respond to the local opportunities and
conditions that characterize their particular situation and can more freely adapt to those
conditions than they could when national wage setting arrangements were in place.
National or industry bargaining diverted the attention of workers away from the
economic realities of their own productive situation and toward the redistributive
possibilities that flow from the application of uniform rules across diverse industrial or
national units. Not only does the implementation of local bargaining exploit local
information and hence promote productivity but it also inhibits the application of
monopoly and rent seeking that occurs when bargaining units become more expansive.
Unionism per se is not a cause of inefficiency. Rather it is monopoly unionism using its
power to redistribute resources and divert productive activity that leads to great harm.
         In addressing these issues, I distinguish between long- and short-run problems and
separate long-run solutions from short-run solutions that may be of no value, or even
harmful, in the long-run.




                                              9
2. German Unemployment and Wages
The facts about German unemployment are well known. Unemployment is high and has
been rising over the past 20 years (Bertola, 2001; Bean, 1994; Nickell, 1997). Lower than
American employment 30 years ago, it is now much higher. See Figures 2, a and b, which
compare OECD Europe with NorthAmerican overall unemployment rates. Figure 3
charts the temporal evolution of the German unemployment rate, which has been in the
middle of the OECD pack. German unemployment, like most European unemployment,
is largely made up of individuals suffering long spells. The unemployed are essentially
removed from the labor market (see Figure 4). American unemployment is typically of
much shorter duration and is associated with people changing jobs as opportunities
appear and dissolve.
       The rise in the unemployment rate in Germany is not due to an increase in
employment or labor force participation rates. Prime age male employment rates are
similar in the United States and in much of Europe. Overall employment rates in Europe
and Germany are lower, a topic to which I return later. Unemployment rates are low
among German youth (see Figure 5).
       European unemployment is structural, not cyclical (Bertola, 2001) (see Figure 6).
By this I mean that European—and German—employment is not amenable to the
classical demand management policies of macroeconomics, although a few diehard
Keynesians still push that line. The factors at work that produce higher levels of German
unemployment are due to the economic fundamentals of incentives, technology, and
labor supply.
       One structural feature unique to Germany is the problem of the integration of East
Germany. It is in fact remarkable that German unemployment rates are only in the middle
of the European pack given the special circumstances of the East German case. Arguably,
Germany would have one of the lower European unemployment rates were it not for the
integration.
       It is well documented that East German labor productivity was substantially lower
than that in West Germany, and this difference was not due solely to differences in the
technology between the two regimes. It is widely acknowledged that mandated wage
parities between the regions contributed to unemployment and disemployment in the East



                                           10
and that they still play a substantial role in inhibiting employment growth in the former
East German regions. These parities coupled with the work disincentives in the social
insurance system account for the 2-1 ratio of East-West unemployment rates.
         In understanding the problems of the East, it is important to account for the
cohort-specific nature of the problem. In the eastern regions, there are substantial
numbers of middle age workers educated and trained to work with an obsolete
technology who cannot adapt to the new technology. Adapting these workers to the new
social order is prohibitively expensive, although in 1989 official German policy was
predicated on the belief that it was easy to retrain such workers.
         One very well-established finding from the empirical literature in economics
(Heckman, 2000; Heckman, et al., 1999) is that publicly supported job-training programs
for displaced adult workers are ineffective. The economics of skill investment reveal that
it is more efficient to invest in the young and the able than to invest in the middle-aged
and the less able, where the returns to training have consistently been shown to be
negligible.1 Competent empirical studies of these retraining programs for displaced
Easterners have shown them to be failures (see Eicher and Lechner, 2000). In the short
run, these policies reduce unemployment by making the unemployed persons trainees. In
the long run, they are ineffective. Collecting the revenue to pay for these programs
distorts the economy and diverts resources away from more socially useful opportunities.
         This evidence, as well as the evidence from around the world, suggests that the
East German problem is a cohort-specific one. A whole cohort of older workers caught
up in the change is not well adapted to the modern technology, and training programs will
not absorb them into the productive mainstream. Their children can be educated to be
productive workers but they themselves cannot be. Two strategies for coping with this
problem are: (1) to subsidize their employment and attach the workers to the economy
with dignity by reducing the costs of these workers to firms while giving them an
acceptable wage, or (2) to put them on the dole. Current overstated wage parities have
forced option (2) onto the eastern Germany economy. These parities and the whole issue
of wage subsidies should be examined carefully.


1
  They have fewer incentives to invest in new skills because of their shorter working lives and because it
takes skill to produce skill (Heckman, 2000).


                                                     11
       In designing any such subsidies, it is necessary to make them cohort specific.
They are a short-run solution to a short-run problem. The fathers and mothers should be
subsidized but the children should be educated. If the children are subsidized, they will
have no incentive to acquire skills.
       The East German case is a dramatic example of a more general observation that
characterizes markets in transition around the world. When new technology and
opportunities become available, as they did in East Germany or in Argentina when it
opened its markets to the new economy, it is the younger, more-educated, and more-able
workers who benefit from the transition and the older, less-able, and less-educated
workers who suffer the most. In Argentina, educated workers who would have been
company presidents under the old regime were unemployed under the new one. The
economic fundamentals suggest lower wages for such workers. A more humane social
policy would pay them higher wages but subsidize firms for employing them. Economic
policy must recognize the problem of the transition as an important feature of modern
economies undergoing change.
       The same forces are at work in all economies although in a less dramatic fashion.
In the face of changes in technology and trading opportunities, it is the younger, the more
educated, and the more able who benefit the most. The middle-aged and the older
workers are at a disadvantage. Unless their wages adjust, they become unemployable.
       This observation serves to explain why unemployment in Europe has increased
across education and skill categories, especially among more experienced workers. As a
consequence of rigidity in wages across the skill categories, these workers have become
less employable. Economic policy should promote wage flexibility if it seeks to improve
the employability of these workers. It should also reduce incentives to be unemployed
from high-income replacement rates.Wage subsidies for the cohorts of workers caught up
in the transition represent one option for improving their employment without reducing
their standard of living (Snower, 1994; Phelps, 1997). Germans and other Europeans
abhor the route of wage flexibility followed by the American economy, arguing that
equity or social justice is as important, if not more important, than economic efficiency.
       I do not want to tell Germans how to run their economy. Nor do I want to argue
that European values placed on equality are inappropriate. However, I cannot help but



                                             12
note that the popular emphasis on “equity” and “social justice” is usually made in a
factual void about the true costs of redistribution, which groups are targeted for social
justice and which groups are excluded. It is certainly true that there is less inequality in
earnings among workers in Germany and Europe than in the United States and in other
economies with less rigid markets (see Table 1). At the same time, it is important to
recognize that these statistics exclude the long-term unemployed, who constitute more
than half of the unemployed in Germany. Accordingly, comparisons of income inequality
between the United States and Germany exclude people with zero earnings and bias the
comparisons, although this does not eliminate the gap in U.S.-German inequality. The
long-term unemployed and the long-term dropouts are excluded from the accounting
system of “social justice.”
       Implicit in many popular discussions of income inequality is the crude belief that
one person’s gain is another person’s loss, that is, that the economic problem is a matter
of dividing a fixed pie. In fact, the welfare state, at the level it currently operates in
Germany, reduces the total social pie by discouraging production. It makes the size of the
pie for the next generation smaller than it would otherwise be by discouraging investment
in skills, technology, and knowledge. It discourages venture capital by taxing the
proceeds of good investments and by regulating capital markets.
       Going back to Figure 1, we see that the welfare state reduces the dispersion of
social outcomes by reducing the level of social outcomes. How sizable is the cost in lost
output? This is the crucial empirical question that is never asked or answered in public
discussions. How much of the rise in German unemployment and the slow growth in
output is due to institutions of the welfare state?


3. The Causes of Joblessness
In order to answer the question of what causes joblessness, it is useful to review the sharp
contrast in the institutional features of German (and European) labor and product markets
with those of American and other less regulated markets. The familiar picture that
emerges is that European markets are much more regulated, wage setting is much more
centralized and less adaptable to local conditions, and the replacement rate (the
percentage of earnings an unemployed worker can claim) is much higher in Europe than



                                              13
in the United States. (See Figures 7, 8, and 9, respectively). The level of payroll taxation
is substantially higher in Europe than in the United States (see Table 2). The tax wedge
between what a firm pays per unit labor and what the worker receives is much greater in
Europe than in the United States.
          A large body of evidence suggests that at the current levels of incentives, the
German welfare state reduces employment, raises unemployment, retards flexibility and
creates a two-tier system, with a protected enclave surrounded by a partially protected
group of unskilled, uneducated, and marginal workers (Siebert, 1997).
          The high level of centralized wage bargaining thwarts the ability of workers and
firms to act on local conditions and to bargain flexibly. Pencavel (1996) documents that
the application of three principles—(1) decentralization of bargaining to the enterprise
level; (2) removal of government intervention from the bargaining process; (3) local
determination of the terms over which to bargain—promotes productivity and links
payments to productivity in the workplace and not to politics. Studies of reforms of union
systems in Great Britain, New Zealand, and Chile reveal that application of these
principles to previously centralized wage-setting environments promoted productivity
and raised wages in the aggregate.2
          Detailed econometric studies by Nickell et al. (1992), Gregg et al. (1993), and
Machin and Stewart (1996) demonstrate that substantial productivity growth occurred
after decentralized unionism began to govern economic relations. The issue on the table
is not about getting rid of unions; substantial productivity gains were registered at union
plants when decentralized unionism was introduced. The issue is about making wage
setting responsive to local conditions and to adapt to opportunities that appear. It has
been shown that locally responsive unions facilitate plant-wide response to technical
change (Levine, 1995). Decentralization improves adaptability, and the new economy
places a premium on adaptability.
          It is sometimes argued that centralized bargaining is beneficial and that unions
can act in an enlightened way to correct any spillovers created by the action of local wage
agreements. In theory, this is possible and experience with recent Dutch wage setting,


2
    While wage inequality rose in Great Britain during this period, so did real wages, and at
a much faster rate than in the United States.


                                                14
until recently, illustrates that in a small country with few unions, it may be possible to
make centralized bargaining work. However, as Pencavel demonstrates, the monopoly
power created by centralization is too tempting not to use and the track record on
centralized bargaining is poor, especially in large economies such as that of Germany.
       Germany does not have a governmentally mandated minimum wage although
union wage floors effectively operate as wage minimums. One measure of the
effectiveness of a minimum wage is the ratio of the minimum to the average wage. This
ratio is much higher in Germany, and continental Europe more generally, than it is in the
United States or Great Britain (see Table 3). The higher this ratio, the more binding these
minimums are on the operations of firms.
       The French ratio is below that of Germany but much higher than that of the
United States or Great Britain. A series of important papers by John Abowd (e.g., Abowd
et al., 1997, 1999) and various co-authors documents the substantial disemployment
effects of French minimum wages. Minimum wage effects are weak only when minimum
wages do not bind. A widely cited study by Card and Krueger (1995) that claimed to find
no disemployment effects of minimum wages has been challenged in the professional
journals. Even if correct for the small wage changes studied in the United States, this
study is irrelevant for Europe, which has much higher effective—and binding—
minimums. Machin et al. (2000) demonstrates ho New Deal minimum-wage increases
reduced employment in the home core sector in England
       Some indirect evidence of the importance of the disemployment effects of the
minimum wage is implicit in Figure 5. The lower rate of youth unemployment in
Germany compared to that of many other countries is frequently attributed to the
apprenticeship system. It is certainly true that a system that encourages youth to both
work and learn promotes their immediate employment. A closer look at this system
reveals that during the apprenticeship period, firms can pay apprentices wages that are
substantially below the minimum wage. When the apprenticeship period ends, union-
mandated minimum wages apply. It is no accident, then, that Germany is one of the few
countries in the world to have a higher rate of unemployment among young adults (in
their early 20s) not covered by the minimum-wage exemption than among teenage youth




                                            15
(Heckman et al., 1994). Reducing minimum wages substantially promotes employment in
economies such as that of Germany, where minimum wages are high.
       German replacement rates of the earnings of the unemployed by social insurance
are substantial (see Figure 9). It is very well documented that higher levels of
unemployment compensation induce greater rates of unemployment. (See the evidence
summarized in Layard et al., 1999). As the generosity of benefits increases, so does the
incentive not to work. Germans, like all people, respond to these incentives.
       German levels of labor market regulation are high compared to those in the
United States. Employment protection laws protect the status quo and make it difficult for
firms to respond flexibly to changing market conditions and to improved technologies.
Thus it is no accident that the unemployment–GDP growth relationship is weak in
Germany compared to that of countries with more flexible labor markets. Figure 10
compares the change in the unemployment rate in response to GDP growth across a
variety of countries. In economies where it is costly to fire workers, job growth in
response to GDP growth is diminished since firms account for the possibility that the
economy might turn sour in the future and employment protection laws make it difficult
to fire redundant labor. Hence, they hire fewer workers to avoid having to pay the costs
of possibly having to fire them. The other side of the coin, however, is that employment
protection laws make slowdowns in GDP growth less costly in terms of unemployment. It
protects the insiders against job loss.
       The United States has a very flexible labor market compared to Germany.
Nonetheless, substantial changes have recently been made to the “employment at will”
doctrine that gave freedom to the employer to fire employees without any cost. This has
moved the American system of severance pay closer to that of Europe. Union work rules
impose some restrictions on U.S. firms, and the portion of the costs of unemployment
insurance borne by the firm make work force reduction costly.
       In the 1980s, many state judiciaries in the United States adopted “wrongful
termination” doctrines. These doctrines impose substantial costs of employment
termination on employers that are similar in character to severance cost payments in the
German system. In what appears to be a natural experiment, it is possible to examine the




                                            16
consequences of these doctrines on employment. The effectiveness and comprehensive
nature of the law vary from state to state.
       While the direct legal costs of the new doctrines are relatively low, on average the
whole process adds uncertainty to the employment process and some settlements are high
($177,000 in U.S. 1998 dollars). Firms now play a lottery with the court system. Despite
small average costs, the response of firms to the potential of experiencing a very visible
wrongful termination case has been dramatic. Elaborate procedures have been established
at all stages of the hiring and discharge process. Firms now institute more elaborate
screening and review procedures when hiring and firing workers.
       These costs have a potent negative effect on employment in states that adopt
“wrongful termination” laws. Dertouzos and Karoly (1991) examine the employment
consequences of these costs. The most severe systems, which in my view are lower
bounds for the German case, suggest that employment declines by 5 percent in states with
the most comprehensive employment protection legislation.
       Employment protection laws in theory need not have any adverse effects on
employment. The argument is that if a firm were mandated to offer a benefit such as job
security to its workers, the latter would be willing to accept lower wages to obtain the
benefit. The composition of the pay package would be affected even if the total level of
compensation is not. For this argument to have any practical significance, wages have to
be downward flexible. Yet Table 3 suggests that they are not. Binding minimum wages,
whether imposed by national laws as in France or by union minimums as in Germany,
prevent the necessary wage adjustments.
       Evidence of the impact of employment protection legislation on employment and
wage inequality suggests the following. Countries with more severe employment
regulation legislation have lower employment rates (Figure 11) and less wage inequality
among workers (Figure 12). Those who keep jobs stay at them longer (Figure 13). There
is little effect of this legislation on the employment of prime age males (Figure 14).
       The picture that emerges from this evidence is that the employment protection
laws (EPL) create a protected enclave of insiders who experience less unemployment and
wage fluctuations than the excluded outsiders. Social justice applies to this enclave but
not to the entire society. Given that the long-term unemployed are excluded from the



                                              17
statistics on income inequality, international comparisons of income inequality such as
those in Table 1 dramatically understate the inequality inherent in the European welfare
state.




                                          18
4. Restrictions in Other Markets
When considering Germany’s employment problems, the natural first impulse is to look
at the institutions governing the labor market. Yet economists since the time of Alfred
Marshall have recognized that the structure of the product and the capital markets affect
the performance of the labor market.
          The German product market is highly regulated, although it is far from the most
regulated product market in Europe (see Figure 15). Product market regulation goes hand
in glove with labor market regulation (see Figure 16) (Nicoletti and Scarpetta, 2001;
Scarpetta, 1998). Inducing competition in the product market is one way of curbing
excess union power. Price-taking firms offer smaller opportunities for rent seeking
unions.
          Regulation of the product market retards the responsiveness of the German
economy to new trade and technology opportunities and inhibits job creation (Djankov et
al., 2000). Table 4 compares the regulatory environment in Germany with that of the rest
of the world. Compared to the United States, German firms are required to go through
more procedures (seven vs. four) and take a longer time (90 vs. 7 days), and the process
costs roughly ten times more in Germany than in the United States. By inhibiting entry
and retarding flexibility, product market regulation reduces the demand for labor and the
growth of jobs. This unfriendly regulatory environment also retards investment and risk
taking. It inhibits German adaptation to the new economy. As an example, consider the
relationship between Internet usage and EPL (see Figure 17). The more stringent the
employment protection or business regulation laws, the less the use of the Internet (see
Samaniego, 2001), which accounts for the lesser use of the Internet in Germany (see
figure 18).
          This unfriendly environment also helps to explain why, in recent years, the share
of foreign direct investment in Germany has been so low (see Figure 19) and why
German investment in venture capital is low (see Figure 20). It also accounts for why
Germans have found investment abroad so attractive.
          Reforms in the product market and in capital markets will promote flexibility and
will facilitate reforms in the labor market. That is a lesson learned during many
successful economic reforms around the world.



                                             19
5. The Long-Run Consequences of Regulation and the Welfare State for Germany
Product market and labor market regulation not only impede the flexibility of the German
economy but also threaten its future vitality. These long-run effects are rarely debated in
public because they operate in a subtle fashion and do not show up on the front pages of
newspapers.
       Trade is the engine of German economic power. Germany retains its strong
competitive position in medium-high technology (e.g., traditional manufacturing). But it
does not have comparative advantage in the cutting edge technologies of computers,
information technology, and biotechnology (see Figure 21). The technology intensity of
German exports is low by international standards (see Figure 22). The highly regulated
capital markets have prevented German venture capital from flowing into these cutting-
edge areas of world trade and technology (Siebert and Stolpe, 2001). As a consequence,
German supremacy in trade in future world markets is at risk.
       The high tax rates inherent in the German system and the rigidity of the
educational system discourage skill formation. Since knowledge is created by educated
people, the failure of German institutions of higher learning to produce more students and
to develop flexible arrangements with industry bodes ill for the future of German
technology.


6. Summing Up
The Germany economy labors under the burden of heavy regulation and weak incentives.
The German welfare state has succeeded in raising the wages and benefits of protected
insiders but at the cost of low employment growth, low productivity growth in the
manufacturing sector, and higher unit labor costs (see Figures 24, 25, 26). These factors
threaten the long-term competitive position of German industry in world trade and inhibit
Germany from investing in the technologies of the future.
       In analyzing German employment problems, I have stressed the importance of
distinguishing long-run from short-run problems and long-run from short-run solutions.
German unemployment is a structural problem. Some aspects of German unemployment
will fade as older cohorts of workers trained under the East German system retire and are



                                            20
replaced by more educated workers adapted to the new system. Apart from this short-run
feature a substantial portion of German unemployment is a symptom of the deeper
problem that incentives to innovate, to acquire skills, and to take risks have been thwarted
by the welfare state. The costs of preserving the status quo have increased in the new
world economy that is characterized by many new opportunities in technology and trade.
The winners in world trade in the next generation will be those countries that can respond
flexibly with educated work forces.
          I opened this chapter with a quotation from Thomas Mann’s Buddenbrooks. In
closing, let me explain its relevance. The German economy is, in many ways, still in
robust health. Germany remains a major factor in the world economy. Germans have
begun to shift toward making markets more flexible, unemployment benefits lower, and
bargaining more decentralized. These reforms have only been partial in character and are
not substantial enough to successfully adapt the German economy to the economy of the
future.
          In pursuit of social justice—which in actuality is a defense of a protected enclave
of workers and firms—Germany has muted incentives to invest in ideas, skills, and new
technology. These muted incentives portend a second-rate German economy in the
future. While Germany is not yet Thomas Mann’s dead star, sending forth its light, it will
be a dying star if it fails to adapt to the new world economic order.




                                              21
6. Sources
        Abowd, J., F, Kramarz, T. Lemieux and D. Margolis, “Minimum Wages and
Youth Employment in France and The United States,” National Bureau of Economic
Reserarch Working Paper 6111, July 1997.
        Abowd, J., F. Kramarz and D. Margolis, “Minimum wages and Employment in
France and The United States,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper
6996, March, 1999.
        Addison, J. and J. L. Grosso, “Job Security Provisions and Employment: Revised
Estimates,” Industrial Relations, 35(4), 1996, 585-603.
        Agell, J., “On The Benefits From Rigid Labor Markets: Norms, Market Failures,
and Social Insurance,” Economic Journal, 109, 1999, 143-164.
        Bean, C., “European Unemployment: A Survey,” Journal of Economic Literature,
32(2), 1994, 573-619.
        Belot, M. and J. Van Ours, “Does The Recent Success of Some OCED Countries
in Lowering Unemployment Lie In Their Clever Design of Labor Market Reforms?,”
IZA Working Paper, 147, April 2000.
        Bertola, G., “Europe's Unemployment Problems,” in Economics of The European
                                          2nd
Union, ed. by M. Artis and F. Nixson,           Edition, Oxford: Oxford University Press,
2000.
        Bertola, G., “Aggregate and Disaggregated Aspects of Employment and
Unemployment,” European University, April, 2001.
        Bertola, G., F. Blau and L. Kahn, “Comparative Analysis of Labor Market
Outcomes: Lessons for the U.S. from International Long-Run Evidence,” Russell Sage
Foundation, New York, 2001.
        Bertola, G. and R. Rogerson, “Institutions and Labor Reallocation,” European
Economic Review, 41, 1997, 1147-1171.
        Bertrand, M. and F. Kramarz, “Does Entry Hinder Job Creation? Evidence From
The French Retail Industry,” NBER Working Paper 8211, April 2001.
        Bierhanzl, E. and J. Gwartney, “Regulations, Unions and Labor Markets,”
Regulation, 21(3), 1998.




                                           22
       Blanchard, O. and J. Wolfers., “The Role of Shocks and Institutions In The Rise
of European Unemployment: The Aggregate Evidence,” Economic Journal, 110, 2000,
C1- C33.
       Card, D. and A. Krueger, “Myth and Measurement: The New Economics of the
Minimum Wage, Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1995.
       Cox Edwards, A., “The Unemployment Effect of Labor Market Interventions,”
Argentina Labor Markets Study, World Bank, February, 1996.
       Dertouzos, J. and L. Karoly, Labor Market Responses To Employer Liability, ,
Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corporation, Institute for Civil Justice, 1991.
       Djankov, S., R. Laporta, F. Lopez and A. Shleifer, “Regulation of Entry,”
unpublished manuscript, Harvard University, Department of Economics, 2000.
       Eicher, M. and M. Lechner, “Public Sector Sponsored Continuous Vocational
Training in East Germany: Institutional Arrangements, Participants and Results of
Empirical Studies,” IZA Working Paper 76/2000.
       Evans, L., A. Grimes, B. Wilkinson with D. Teece, “Economic Reform in New
Zealand 1984-1995: The Pursuit of Efficiency,” Journal of Economic Literature, 1996,
1856-1902.
       Freeman, R., “Institutional Differences and Economic Performance Among
OECD Countries,” unpublished manuscript, Harvard University, 2001.
       Fuchs, S. and R. Schettkat, “The Impact of Deregulation On The German Labor
Market,” unpublished manuscript, Humbolt University, Berlin, 1999.
       Gregg, P., S. Machin and D. Metcalf, “Signals and Cycles? Productivity Growth
and Change in Union Status in British Companies,” Economic Journal, 1993, 854-907.
       Guasch, L., “Estimating the Benefits of Labor Reform in Argentina,” World
Bank, May 24, 1996.
       Heckman, J., “Policies to Foster Human Capital,” Research in Economics, 54,
2000, 3-56.
       Heckman, J., R. Roselius, and J. Smith, “U.S. Education and Training Policy: A
Reevaluation of The Underlying Assumptions Behind The New Consensus,” in A.
Levenson and L. C. Solomon, eds., Labor Markets, Employment Policy and Job
Creation. Santa Monica: Milken Institute for Job and Capital Formation, 1994.



                                           23
       Heckman, J., R. LaLonde, and J. Smith, “The Economics of Econometrics of
Active Labor Market Program,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3, edited by O.
Ashenfelter and D. Card, Elsevier Science, B. V. Amsterdam, 1999, 1865-2097.
       Kasper, W., Free to Work The Liberalization of New Zealand's Labour Markets,
Wellington, New Zealand, Centre for Independent Studies, 1996.
Kortum, Samuel and Joshua Lerner, Rand Journal of Economics, 2000.
       Lazear, E., “Job Security Provisions and Employment,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 3, 1990, 699-726.
       Layard, R. and S. Nickell, “Labor Market Institutions And Economic
Performance,” in Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3C, edited by, O. Ashenfelter and
D. Card, Amsterdam: North Holland, 1999.
       Levine, D., Reinventing the Workplace. How Business and Employees Can Both
Win, Brookings, Washington, 1995.
       Ljungquist, L. and T. Sargent, “The European Unemployment Dilemma,” Journal
of Political Economy, 106(3), 1998, 514-550.
       Machin, S. and M. Stewart, “Trade Unions and Financial Performance,” Oxford
Economic Papers 48, 1996, 213-241.
       Mann, T., Buddenbrooks, translated by H. T. Lowe-Porter, New York, Alfred
Knoff Publisher, 1924.
       Menezes-Filho, N., “Unions and Profitability Over the 1980s: Some Evidence on
Union Firm Bargaining in the U.K,” Economic Journal, 107, 1997, 651-670.
       Nickell, S., “Unemployment and Labor Market Rigidities: Europe vs. North
America,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(3), 1997, 55-74.
       Nickell, S. and B. Bell, “Changes in the Distribution of Wages and
Unemployment in OECD Countries,” American Economic Review, 1996, 302-308.
       Nickell, S. S. Wadwahni, and M. Wall, “Productivity Growth in U.K. Companies:
1975-1986,” European Economic Review, 36, 1992, 1055-1091.
       Nickell, S., L. Nunziata, W. Ochel and G. Quintini, “The Beveridge Curve,
Unemployment and Wages in the OECD from the 1960s to 1990s,” unpublished
manuscript, London School of Economics, 2001.




                                           24
        Nickell, S. and J. Van Ours, “Netherlands and the United Kingdom: A European
Unemployment Miracle,?” Economic Policy, April 2000, 137-180.
        Nicoletti, G. and S. Scarpetta, “Interactions Between Product and Labor Market
Regulations: Do They Affect Employment? Evidence From OECD Countries,” Banco
Portugal Conference, June 3-4, Cascais, Portugal, 2001.
        OECD Jobs Study: Evidence and Explanations, Parts I and II, Paris: Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development, 1994.
        OECD Economic Outlook, Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development, 2000.
        OECD Economic Surveys. Germany, Paris: Organization for Economic
Cooperation and Development, May 2001.
        Pencavel, J., “Selected International Experience Concerning the Legal Framework
for Collective Bargaining and Unionism,” unpublished manuscript, Stanford University,
Palo Alto, CA, 1996.
        _____, “The Surprising Retreat of Union Britain,” unpublished manuscript,
Stanford University, November 2000.
        Samaniego, R., “Does Employment Protection Inhibit Technology Diffusion?,”
unpublished manuscript, University of Pennsylvania, Department of Economics, 2001.
        Scarpetta, S., “Labor Market Reforms and Unemployment: Lessons From The
Experience of The OECD Countries,” IADB Working Paper 387, Washington, D.C,
1998.
        Siebert, H., “Labor Market Rigidities: At The Root of Unemployment in Europe,”
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 11(3), 1997, 37-54.
        Siebert, H. and M. Stolpe, “Technology and Economic Performance In
Germany,” Kiel Working Paper 1035, April, 2001.
        Snower, D., “Converting Unemployment Benefits into Employment Subsidies,”
American Economic Review, 84(2), 1994, 65-70.
        Stewart, M., “Union Wage Differentials, Product Market Influences and The
Division of Rents,” Economic Journal 100, 1990, 1122-1137.




                                           25
26
                                Figure 1.
                      Two alternative social orders


Low risk/low return                                   High risk/high return




  Mean outcome                                            Mean outcome
                                                 Figure 2a.
                                      Standardized unemployment rates in OECD countries




 Source: Scarpetta, Stefano. (1998)




Source: Scarpetta, Stefano. (1998) "Labour Market Reforms and Unemployment: Lessons from the Experience of the OECD
Countries." Inter-American Development Bank Working Paper No. 382.
                                                      Figure 2b
                                     Standardized unemployment rates in OECD countries




Source: Scarpetta, Stefano. (1998)
                                                           Figure 3
                                                    Unemployment Rate, E15

0.3




0.2




0.1




 0
 1950                        1960                       1970                       1980                       1990                       2000
                                                                     Period
Source: Blanchard, Oliver and Justin Wolfers. (1999). "The Role of Shocks and Institutions in the Rise of European Unemployment: The Aggregate
Evidence." NBER Working Paper No. 7282.
                                                                                    Un




                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                       10
                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                 30
                                                                                                                                      40
                                                                                                                                           50
                                                                                                                                                60
                                                                                                                                                     70
                                                                                       it   ed
                                                                                                 St
                                                                                                    at     es
                                                                                               No
                                                                                                  r     wa
                                                                                                           y
                                                                                               Ca
                                                                                                  n     ad
                                                                                                              a
                                                                                              De
                                                                                                 n   ma
                                                                                    Ne                      rk
                                                                                       w
                                                                                              Ze
                                                                                                   ala
                                                                                                           nd
                                                                                                   Ja
                                                                                                        pa
                                                                                                              n
                                                                                              Au
                                                                                                 s




Source: OECD Employment Outlook 2000.
                                                                                                     tr a
                                                                                                            lia
                                                                                               Fin
                                                                                 Un                     lan
                                                                                    it   ed                   d
                                                                                              Ki
                                                                                                ng
                                                                                                     do
                                                                                                            m
                                                                                                Au
                                                                                                   s     tria
                                                                                     Lu
                                                                                          xe
                                                                                               mb
                                                                                                     ou
                                                                                                            rg
                                                                                              Sw
                                                                                                ed
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 4




                                                                                                           en
                                                                                         Sw
                                                                                           itz
                                                                                               e     rla
                                                                                                           nd
                                                                                                Fr
                                                                                                     an
                                                                                                           ce
                                                                                              Po
                                                                                                 r   tu g
                                                                                     Ne                     al
                                                                                        th     er
                                        a) Unemployment of 12 months and over.

                                                                                                    lan
                                                                                                           ds

                                                                                                   Sp
                                                                                                      a     in
                                                                                              Ge
                                                                                                   rm
                                                                                                        an
                                                                                                              y
                                                                                               Gr
                                                                                                     ee
                                                                                                           ce
                                                                                                 Ir e
                                                                                                        lan
                                                                                                              d
                                                                                              Be
                                                                                                 lg     ium
                                                                                                                                                          Long-term Unemployment as a Percentage of Total Unemployment a) 1999




                                                                                                        Ita
                                                                                                              ly
                                                                                                   Figure 5

                                                                              Youth Unemployment a) 1999
          %
35

30

25

20

15

10

 5

 0

                                                                                                                            m
                             rg




                                                                                                                                     nd




                                                                                                                                                                               d
                                                                        al
                                       ds




                                                                                                   es


                                                                                                                rk
          nd




                                                             d




                                                                                                                                                 lia


                                                                                                                                                              a

                                                                                                                                                                    en




                                                                                                                                                                                                    in
                                                                                                                                                                                      ium
                                                  y




                                                                                           y




                                                                                                                                                                                                                ly
                 tria




                                                                                  n




                                                                                                                                                                                             ce




                                                                                                                                                                                                          ce
                                                 an




                                                                                        wa




                                                                                                                                                                          lan
                                                        lan




                                                                                                                                                         ad
                                                                             pa




                                                                                                                                                                                                               Ita
                                                                   tu g




                                                                                                                                                                                                     a
                                                                                                                       do
                                                                                                           ma
                            ou




                                                                                                                                            tr a
                                                                                                    at
                                  lan




                                                                                                                                                                                            an




                                                                                                                                                                                                         ee
                                                                                                                                   ala
     rla




                                                                                                                                                                    ed




                                                                                                                                                                                                  Sp
                  s




                                                                                                                                                                                      lg
                                             rm




                                                                                                                                                          n
                                                                             Ja


                                                                                         r




                                                                                                                                                                         Fin
                                                                                                 St
                                                      Ir e
               Au




                                                                                                                       ng
                        mb




                                                                                      No




                                                                                                                                             s
                                                                    r




                                                                                                                                                                                            Fr




                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gr
                                                                                                                                                                  Sw
      e




                                                                                                            n




                                                                                                                                                       Ca




                                                                                                                                                                                   Be
                                  er




                                                                                                                                Ze
                                                                 Po




                                                                                                                                          Au
  itz




                                                                                                         De
                                            Ge




                                                                                                                     Ki
                                                                                             ed
                                th
                       xe
Sw




                                                                                                                               w
                             Ne




                                                                                                                ed
                                                                                            it
                      Lu




                                                                                                                            Ne
                                                                                         Un




                                                                                                               it
                                                                                                            Un




                            a) Ratio refers to unemployed persons aged 15 to 24 years divided by the labour force of the same age group.

     Source: OECD, Employment Outlook 2000.
                                                                                                                                              Figure 6
                                                                            Structural and cyclical components of unemployment rates1
                                                                                                                    Per cent of total labour force
     21
     20                                                                                                                                                1997
     19
     18
     17
     16
     15
     14
     13
     12
     11
     10
      9
      8
      7
      6
      5
      4
      3
      2
      1
      0
     -1
     -2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Greece

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Germany
                                                                                                                   New Zealand
                                                                                               Turkey
                                     Norway




                                                              Switzerland




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      France
                           Iceland




                                                                                                                                 Portugal




                                                                                                                                                                           Sweden




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Ireland
                                                                                                                                                                 Denmark
                                                                            Netherlands




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                                        Australia
              Japan




                                                                                                                                            United Kingdom




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Spain
                                                                                                        Austria




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Finland
                                              United States




                                                                                                                                                                                                    Canada




                                       Structural component                                                       Cyclical component                                                Unemployment rate
Source: Scarpetta, Stefano. (1998) "Labour Market Reforms and Unemployment: Lessons from the Experience of the OECD Countries." Inter-American Development Bank Working
Paper No. 382.

           Finland

           Sweden

          Germany

           Iceland

      Switzerland                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Change 1990-97
           Greece

              Italy

          Portugal

            France

          Belgium

           Austria

             Japan

          Norway

             Spain

    United States

           Canada

          Denmark

          Australia

           Turkey

    New Zealand

  United Kingdom

     Netherlands

           Ireland


                      -5                      -3                                          -1                       1                                         3                      5                            7                        9                    11                          13

                                     Change in total unemployment rate                                                                             Change in structural unemployment rate

1. Based on national unemployment definitions. Structural unemployment data are based on Secretariat estimates of the
   non-accelerating wage rate of unemployment (NAWRU) made for the OECD Economic Outlook, 60, 1996.
Source: OECD.

                                                                                                                                                                           7
       Table 1




 Table 1



Source: Gottschalk, Peter and Timothy M. Sneeding. (1997). "Cross-National Comparisons of Earnings and Income Inequality." Journal of Economic
Literature. 34(2): 633-687.
                                                            Figure 7
                                                                                                          a)
                                         Strictness of Employment Protection
    5
                                Late 1980s
                                Late 1990s

    4


    3


    2


    1


    0




                                                                                                     ce
                                           nd




                                             d




                                           ria


                                           en


                                                                                     n




                                                                                                                               e
                                             k




                                             s




                                                                                               y




                                                                                                                                          l
                           nd




                                            m




                                                                                                              n


                                                                                                                     ly
                  m
        es




                                                                                                                                        ga
                                         nd




                                                                                             an
                                          ar

                                         an




                                                                                   pa




                                                                                                                            ec
                                                                                                            ai

                                                                                                                  Ita
                                         iu
                do




                                                                                                   an
      at




                                        la




                                       ed
                                        st
                         la




                                                                                                          Sp




                                                                                                                                     rtu
                                       m




                                      lg

                                     rla




                                                                                            m




                                                                                                                          re
                                      nl




                                                                                 Ja
                                     er
                      Ire




                                   Au
    St


              ng




                                                                                                   Fr
                                  Sw
                                   en




                                  Be
                                   Fi




                                                                                         er




                                                                                                                                   Po
                                                                                                                          G
                                he
                                 itz
            Ki
    d




                               D




                                                                                      G
  te




                          Sw




                              et
            d
ni




                            N
          te
U

        ni
    U




                            a) The scores can range from 0 to 6, with higher values respresenting stricter regulation


Source: OECD, Employment Outlook 1999.
HIGHER UNIONIZATION EQUALS HIGHER UNEMPLOYMENT


                               Figure 8 Percent of Employees Whose Wages Are Set by Collective Bargaining
                                                          Contracts: 1980 and 1995
         Unionized Workers As a Share of
                                                                         1980           1995
           Nonfarm Labor Force: 1995

                                                                 18
                                       United States                     26
                        16
                                                                    21
                         24                   Japan                       28

                        30                                                    31
                                       New Zealand                                                   67

                        38                                                         36
                                            Canada                                 37

                                                                                           47
                        34         United Kingdom                                                     70

                                                                                               50
                        27              Switzerland                                             53

                                                                                                      69
                        76                 Denmark                                                    69

                                                                                                          71
                        32                 Portugal                                                   70

                        58                  Norway                                                         74
                                                                                                               75

                        19                                                                                      78
                                              Spain                                                            76

                                                                                                                    80
                         35                Australia                                                                       88

                                                                                                                    81
                        26              Netherlands                                                            76

                                                                                                                     82
                        39                     Italy                                                                     85

                                                                                                                              89
                         91                 Sweden                                                                        86

                                                                                                                               90
                        50                  Ireland                                                                            90

                                                                                                                               90
                         54                Belgium                                                                             90

                                           Germany                                                                              92
                        29                                                                                                     91

                                                                                                                                    95
                         34                 Greece                                                                             90

                                                                                                                                    95
                         9                   France                                                                      85

                                                                                                                                    95
                         81                 Finland                                                                                 95

                        42                  Austria                                                                                  98
                                                                                                                                     98


                                  Source: OECD, Employment Outlook, July 1994 (Table 5.7), OECD Employment Outlook, July
                                  1997 (Table 3.3), and OECD, Country Surveys (various years),

nonunion employees and nonassociation employers who nei-                 the German labor force in 1995, but labor-management con-
ther participated in the bargaining process nor agreed to wage           tracts set the wages for 92 percent of the employees. Except in
contracts. Sometimes political officials also are actively               Switzerland and the United Kingdom, collective bargaining
involved in the wage-setting process.                                    contracts set the wages for two-thirds or more of the employ-
   Therefore, as the data of Chart 1 highlight, the percentage of        ees throughout Europe in the mid-1990s.
workers whose wages are set by collective bargaining is often               In contrast with Europe, the United States, Canada, and
substantially greater than the union density rate. For example,          Japan are characterized by decentralized collective bargaining.
in France, where only 9 percent of the nonfarm labor force was           Unionized wage contracts in these countries reflect bargaining
unionized in 1995, contracts between unions and employer                 between a union and a single employer, or in some cases, a
associations set the wages for 95 percent of French employees.           single plant of the employer. Those contracts do not apply to
Similarly, unionized workers constituted only 29 percent of              other firms. Under these circumstances, the union density fig-

42                                               REGULATION • VOL. 21, NO. 3, 1998
HIGHER UNIONIZATION EQUALS HIGHER UNEMPLOYMENT


                                     Figure 9 The Net Initial Replacement Rate for an Unemployed Married
                                                   Worker with Two Children: 1995
                                                                  Net Replacement Rate (% of Income)
                                                                      (Including Housing Benefits)

                                                                                           47
                                                    Italy
                                                                                                  59
                                                 Japan
                                                                                                   60
                                             S   tates
                                      United                                                       61
                                                     m
                                            Belgiu
                                                                                                       64
                                            e    aland
                                      New Z                                                            65
                                                          d
                                                 Irelan
                                                                                                        66
                                                     da
                                             Cana
                                                                                                        67
                                           Kin   gdom
                                    United                                                               69
                                                 Austria
                                                                                                            71
                                                     lia
                                           Austra
                                                                                                             73
                                                         y
                                             Norwa
                                                                                                             73
                                                         e
                                             Greec
                                                                                                              75
                                                          e
                                                 Franc
                                                                                                              76
                                                  Spain
                                                                                                                 78
                                                   al
                                            Portug
                                                                                                                  79
                                                 ny
                                           Germa
                                                                                                                  80
                                                 ark
                                           Denm
                                                                                                                   81
                                                    d
                                             Finlan
                                                                                                                   82
                                              rlands
                                        Nethe                                                                         84
                                               rland
                                        Switze
                                                                                                                       85
                                                     en
                                            Swed


                                   Source: OECD, Job Strategy: Making Working Pay, 1997 (Table 9) and OECD,
                                   Database on Taxation and Benefit Entitlements. These data are for a 40-year-
                                   old worker (with spouse and two children) employed continuously since age 18.


contribute to the complexity of empirical work in this area.                     training, public sector employment, subsidized employment,
   The Distortion of Employment Statistics. Labor market regu-                   and subsidized early retirement. Those programs are often
lations are complex and their impact is often subtle. The diffi-                 lumped together under the heading of Active Labor Market
culties are compounded by the fact that seemingly similar poli-                  Policies (ALMPs). Various inducements, including income
cies and programs are sometimes enforced differently across                      supplements and renewed eligibility for other transfer benefits,
countries and at different times within the same country. For                    make the programs attractive for participants. Expenditures on
example, countries differ with regard to work registration                       programs of this type are larger in Europe, particularly north-
requirements for unemployment benefits, and the differences                      ern Europe, than in Japan and the United States. Even though
influence the number of persons who are counted as unem-                         there is little evidence that ALMPs permanently reduce unem-
ployed. Countries such as Belgium permit part-time workers to                    ployment, they will influence the “measured” rate. Because
draw unemployment benefits, thereby confounding the measure                      persons involved in training programs are not looking for
of unemployment. Countries also have a variety of retirement,                    work, they are not counted among the unemployed. Persons
invalidity, and sickness programs that further complicate the                    induced into early retirement are moved out of the labor force.
matter. These differences between countries reduce the compa-                    Subsidized private employment and sheltered government
rability of even the standardized data on rates of unemployment.                 employment not only reduce the observed rate of unemploy-
   Furthermore, in response to high rates of unemployment,                       ment, they also add to the number counted as employed.
several OECD countries have adopted programs involving                              Differences in the enforcement of eligibility criteria and the

46                                                            REGULATION • VOL. 21, NO. 3, 1998
 Yet, the degree of unionisation is notper se sufficient to identify workers’ market power. In many
 countries, the administrative extension of wage agreements means that the terms and conditions of
 union contracts often cover workers who are not union members. By the same token, high union power
 in one sector can lead to spillover effects in non-union sectors.



 Table 2 Tax wedge and social security contributions
       (in percent of gross wages). (Source: Scarpetta, S., 1998)
                                                           Total tax wedge                         Employers’ social security
                                                                                                        contribution rate
                                               1985              1994                               1985                1994
            Australia                          22,9               23,5         0,0                              0,0
            Austria                            40,3               39,7         18,6                             19,1
            Belgium                            54,2               53,5         28,8                             25,8
            Canada                             26,9               31,4         4,7                              6,2
            Denmark                            47,8               45,2         2,8                              0,0
            Finland                            38,0               39,4         5,7                              3,6
            France                             43,4               43,6         27,5                             26,2
            Germany                            44,5               48,3         14,5                             16,3
            Greece                             31,4                ..          17,9                             21,6
            Iceland                            16,5               22,9         2,1                              2,8
            Ireland                            42,4               38,4         10,9                             10,9
            Italy                              50,0               49,9         29,9                             31,5
            Japan                              21,6               21,6         6,8                              7,0
            Luxembourg                         38,4               35,1         13,3                             13,0
            Mexico                               ..               26,5         15,2                             16,2
            Netherlands                        49,9               45,6         19,2                             7,3
            New Zealand                        27,9               24,3         0,0                              0,0
            Norway                             41,8               36,9         13,5                             11,3
            Portugal                           30,7               34,3         16,7                             19,7
            Spain                              36,6               38,8         23,8                             24,0
            Sweden                             50,9               46,8         24,0                             23,2
            Switzerland                        28,8               28,7         9,4                              9,3
            Turkey                             37,0               35,7         8,3                              6,7
            United Kingdom                     37,8               33,3         9,5                              9,3
            United States                      33,6               31,2         6,6                              7,1
                  1. Total tax wedges include income taxes, employer and                            employee social security
                      contributions, but not indirect taxes. Tax rates refer to one                earner without dependents
                      and take into account standard tax relief.
                  Source: OECD, Tax/Benefit Position of Production Workers (various issues).
Source: Scarpetta, Stefano. (1998) "Labour Market Reforms and Unemployment: Lessons from the Experience of the OECD Countries." Inter-American
Development Bank Working Paper No. 382.

 The degree of centralisation of wage bargaining is an important characteristic of industrial relations. A
 highly centralised wage bargaining system may allow the economy to respond in a more consistent way
 to adverse shocks than decentralised systems in which different groups/sectors/companies negotiate
 separately over wages (Tarantelli, 1986; Bruno and Sachs, 1985). However, Calmfors and Driffill
 (1988) have stressed that the relationship between centralisation of wage bargaining and wage
 outcomes is not linear, but rather hump-shaped15. This implies that both highly centralised (co-
 operative) bargaining structures -- such as those in Austria and the Nordic countries-- and fully
 decentralised (competitive) structures (United States) offer the best results. In an intermediate


 15. However, the hump-shaped hypothesis has also been criticised. See in particularSoskice (1990) and the OECD
     (1997c).

                                                                         21
                    Table 3.
   Minimum to Average Wage in Latin America
        and the Industrialized Countries

Bolivia (1995)    0.21       Columbia 95            0.54
Brazil (1995)     0.24       Costa Rica 95          0.54
Argentina 95      0.26       Denmark 94             0.54
Chile 94          0.30       Germany 91             0.55
Spain             0.32       Ireland 93             0.55
Mexico 94         0.36       Netherlands            0.55
Peru 96           0.36       Luxembourg             0.56
USA 93            0.39       Belgium 92             0.60
UK 93             0.40       Honduras 96            0.61
Panama 95         0.43       Austria 93             0.62
Portugal          0.45       Greece 95              0.62
France            0.50       Paraguay 95            0.64
Finland 93        0.52       El Salvador 95         0.69
Sweden            0.52       Italy 91               0.71
Switzerkand       0.52       Venezuela              0.88
Source: LAC countries; authors’ calculations based on
household surveys. Industrial countries; Dolado et al. (1996)
                                         Figure 10 Unemployment Response to GDP Growth
                                                                    Change in unemployment rate
              -1.6           -1.4           -1.2            -1          -0.8         -0.6               -0.4           -0.2            0             0.2   0.4

  Guatemala**

        Chile**

United States**

     Canada**

    Uruguay**

  Venezuela**

      France**

   Argentina**

      Mexico**

         Peru*

    Germany**

       Brazil**

     Colombia

       Japan**

      Ecuador

      Note : * or ** indicate the coefficient is significant at the 5 or 1 percent level, respectively. Only countries for which unemployment data
      is available for at least 10 years are included.
      Source : Economic and Social Progress in Latin America: 1996 Report. Special Section: Making Social Services Work. The Inter-
      American Development Bank. Washington, D.C.: Johns Hopkins University Press. 1996.
                                                      Figure 11 Overall Employment and Labor Market Regulation

                                      0.85
                                                                                                                                                                                                   Figure9b:Maleadultemploymentandlabormarketregulation

                                       0.8                                                                                                                                               0.9

                                                                               Switzerland                     Norway
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Portugal
  Employment rate 15-64, late 1990s




                                                                                                                                                                                     0.85                                                                       Sweden
                                      0.75                                       Denmark                                                                                                                                                                        Norway




                                                                                                                                             Employment rate (males 25-64, late 1990s)
                                                                                                                                                                                                         U.S.
                                                          U.S.
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                U.K.                                Netherlands                      Italy
                                       0.7
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                France
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Germany
                                                                 U.K.
                                                                    Canada
                                                                       Australia                               Sweden
                                                                                                                                                                                     0.75
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Ireland                                               Spain
                                      0.65
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Finland
                                                                                               Finland
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.7

                                       0.6                                                        Netherlands
                                                                                                           Germany
                                                                                                               France                                                                0.65
                                                                     Ireland
                                      0.55                                                                Belgium
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.6


                                       0.5                                                                                  Italy                                                    0.55
                                             0      0.5          1         1.5             2             2.5            3   3.5     4
                                                                               EPL indicator, late 1990s
                                                                                                                                                                                         0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                               0   0.5          1            1.5            2             2.5            3           3.5           4
Source: Bertola, Guiseppe. (2001) "Aggregate and Disaggregate Aspects of
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 EPL indicator, late 1990s
Employment and Unemployment." Central Bank of Colombia Conference Paper.




                                                 4.1. Policy responses to unemployment
                                                 Why does high unemployment persist when it is not only unpleasant for the individuals concerned, but
                                                 also decried by unions, politicians, and public opinion? One might entertain the possibility that simple
                                                 theoretical mechanisms such as those outlined above are not well understood by those who draft laws
                                                 and set wages, so that unemployment is evil in the eyes of the same agents who (directly or indirectly,
                                                 individually or collectively) are responsible for it. If this were the case, more economics education—or
                                                 perhaps granting exceptional reform powers to a well-trained economist—could suffice to resolve all
                                                 problems. It is more satisfactory, of course, to maintain that rational agents understand the economy’s
                                                 mechanisms as well as, or even better than, we do. One may then be tempted to argue that
                                                 unemployment, if it exists and persists, presumably is more palatable to a political majority than possible
                                                 alternatives. Eliminating unemployment subsidies, for example, could very well eliminate
                                                 unemployment, but only at the cost of increases in poverty and possibly crime rates. Like Dr.Pangloss,
                                                 one might be tempted to conclude that, in the best of possible worlds, unemployment can hardly be a
                                                 problem, at least not a problem that can ever be solved.
                                                          A realistic and constructive approach to unemployment should of course be intermediate
                                                 between these two extremes. While reducing unemployment cannot be easy, it does not necessarily
                                                 follow that the current configuration of any given labor market is the best possible one. Institutional
                                                 features do need to be reformed when their negative effects (possibly unintended, or amplified by
                                                 exogenous structural changes) offset or overwhelm their intended purpose.




                                                                                                                                        19
                                               Figure 12 Employment Protection Legislation and Wage Inequality


                                     2.2
                                                                    Canada

                                                        U.S.
                                      2




             Male wage D5/D1, 1993   1.8
                                                               U.K.
                                                                                                                                Portugal
                                                                                                     Austria
                                                                       Australia
                                     1.6                                                           Japan       France   Italy

                                                                               Switzerland
                                                                                               Finland
                                     1.4
                                                                                              Belgium     Sweden
                                                                                                      Germany

                                     1.2
                                           0      0.5           1            1.5          2            2.5         3    3.5           4
                                                                               EPL indicator, late 1990s


         Source: Bertola, Guiseppe. (2001) "Aggregate and Disaggregate Aspects of Employment and Unemployment."
         Central Bank of Colombia Conference Paper.




would need to bid for the insiders’ jobs on a present discounted (rather than period-by-period) basis,
and minimum wage constraints can prevent such bidding.


4 Labor market institutions and outcomes
Wage inequality statistics, like wage level statistics, are not readily comparable across countries. Low
variability of wages across jobs may be due to compression and truncation, and result in involuntary
unemployment for relatively less productive workers, but it may also reflect relative homogeneity of the
labor force in terms of education and skill levels. Such sources of wage inequality, however, are
relatively similar across industrialized countries: Devroye and Freeman (2001) find that differences in
the distribution of skills explain only about 7% of cross-country wage inequality indicators. Available
data on the difference between the 5th and 1st decile of male earnings, plotted in Figure 7, indicate that
high job-security countries also tend to display relatively less dispersed wage distribution. This is far
from surprising if EPL and other labor-market regulations aim at protecting workers from (uninsurable)
labor-income fluctuations. Clearly, restrictions on employers’ ability to dismiss redundant worker at will
would offer little such protection if wages were left free to vary over time (and across labor market
segments) in response to labor demand fluctuations. Conversely, limits to wage flexibility would give
employers stronger incentives to hire and fire in response to labor demand fluctuations and, if such
hiring and firing were not constrained by EPL, would result in more unstable labor income patterns for
workers facing job-switching costs.
         Thus, EPL and wage compressions may be viewed as the quantity and price components of a
coherent policy package which, while reducing the productive efficiency of the economy, can be
attractive to workers exposed to uninsurable labor income risk. The measures of tenure length and
earnings volatility considered in Figure 8 offer additional support to the notion that that work experiences
and labor incomes are more stable and “protected” in countries with high EPL – which is in turn rather
                                                                                        16
tightly negatively associated with earnings inequality in Figure 7, and may therefore be viewed as a
summary indicator of labor market regulation on both the price and quantity margins. Not only does
high EPL effectively protect workers from frequent turnover, lengthening average tenure length; it is
also empirically associated with high correlation of earnings for workers who are employed in both of
the beginning and end of a five-year period, and with relatively small mobility across the distribution of
earnings, measured as the average number of quintiles changes over the same 5-year period.




                                                                                                                   Figure 13 Employment Protection Legislation and Tenure Length



                                                                                            12

                                                                                                                                                                                                           Italy
                                             Mean tenure (years), all workers, late 1990s




                                                                                                                                                                       JapanBelgium
                                                                                            11                                                                                                                          Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                                         France
                                                                                                                                                                  Finland           Sweden

                                                                                            10                                                                              Austria                              Greece
                                                                                                                                                                                        Germany


                                                                                            9                                               Switzerland    CzechR                                 Spain
                                                                                                                                Ireland           Netherlands
                                                                                                                                                                 Korea
                                                                                            8
                                                                                                                           U.K.Canada           Denmark

                                                                                                                   U.S.
                                                                                            7


                                                                                                                                    Australia
                                                                                            6
                                                                                                 0          0.5             1             1.5             2                  2.5              3            3.5                    4
                                                                                                                                            EPL indicator, late 1990s
            Source: Bertola, Guiseppe. (2001) "Aggregate and Disaggregate Aspects of Employment and Unemployment."
            Central Bank of Colombia Conference Paper.


                                                                                                                          Figure 8b: EPL and earnings fluctuations

                                             0.85




                                                                     0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                       Germany
             Earnings correlation, 1986-91




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Italy

                                                                                                                                                                               France
                                             0.75




                                                                                                                                                                     Sweden
                                                                     0.7                                          U.K.

                                                                                                     U.S.

                                             0.65                                                                         Denmark



                                                                     0.6
                                                                                             0              2               4               6                 8                    10             12               14

                                                                                                                                                    17
                                                                                                                                          EPL indicator, late 1980s
                                                                                                                                            Figure 14 Male Adult Employment and Labor Market Regulation
                                                                                                                                                                                                          Figure 14 Male Adult Employment and Labor Market Regulation




                                                     Figure 9a: Overall employment and labor market regulation                                                                            0.9


                                  0.85
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.85                                                                        Sweden                       Portugal
                                                                                                                                                                                                           U.S.                                                   Norway




                                                                                                                                              Employment rate (males 25-64, late 1990s)
                                      0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                  U.K.                                Netherlands                      Italy
                                                                              Switzerland                     Norway                                                                                                                                              France
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Germany
Employment rate (15-64, late 1990s)




                                                                                Denmark                                                                                                                                  Ireland
                                  0.75                                                                                                                                                0.75                                                                                     Spain
                                                         U.S.                                                                                                                                                                                     Finland

                                                                U.K.                                                                                                                      0.7
                                      0.7
                                                                   Canada                                     Sweden
                                                                      Australia
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.65
                                  0.65
                                                                                              Finland
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.6
                                      0.6                                                        Netherlands
                                                                                                          Germany
                                                                                                              France
                                                                    Ireland
                                                                                                                                                                                      0.55
                                                                                                          Belgium
                                  0.55
                                                                                                                                                                                          0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                                0   0.5           1            1.5            2             2.5            3           3.5           4
                                      0.5
                                                                                                                           Italy
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   EPL indicator, late 1990s
                                            0      0.5          1         1.5             2             2.5            3   3.5     4
                                                                              EPL indicator, late 1990s                                     Source: Bertola, Guiseppe. (2001) "Aggregate and Disaggregate Aspects of
                                                                                                                                            Employment and Unemployment." Central Bank of Colombia Conference
                                                                                                                                            Paper.




                                                4.1. Policy responses to unemployment
                                                Why does high unemployment persist when it is not only unpleasant for the individuals concerned, but
                                                also decried by unions, politicians, and public opinion? One might entertain the possibility that simple
                                                theoretical mechanisms such as those outlined above are not well understood by those who draft laws
                                                and set wages, so that unemployment is evil in the eyes of the same agents who (directly or indirectly,
                                                individually or collectively) are responsible for it. If this were the case, more economics education—or
                                                perhaps granting exceptional reform powers to a well-trained economist—could suffice to resolve all
                                                problems. It is more satisfactory, of course, to maintain that rational agents understand the economy’s
                                                mechanisms as well as, or even better than, we do. One may then be tempted to argue that
                                                unemployment, if it exists and persists, presumably is more palatable to a political majority than possible
                                                alternatives. Eliminating unemployment subsidies, for example, could very well eliminate
                                                unemployment, but only at the cost of increases in poverty and possibly crime rates. Like Dr.Pangloss,
                                                one might be tempted to conclude that, in the best of possible worlds, unemployment can hardly be a
                                                problem, at least not a problem that can ever be solved.
                                                         A realistic and constructive approach to unemployment should of course be intermediate
                                                between these two extremes. While reducing unemployment cannot be easy, it does not necessarily
                                                follow that the current configuration of any given labor market is the best possible one. Institutional
                                                features do need to be reformed when their negative effects (possibly unintended, or amplified by
                                                exogenous structural changes) offset or overwhelm their intended purpose.




                                                                                                                                       19
                                                                                                                                                                                            1
                                                                     Figure
                                                                  Figure 153. Overall indicator of product market regulation

                       3.5      Product market regulation
                         3

                       2.5

                         2

                       1.5

                         1

                       0.5

                         0
                                                                I RL




                                                                                                                                                                                                     FIN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                ITA
                                                      L




                                                                                                                                                          T
                                            A




                                                                                                  D




                                                                                                                                               K




                                                                                                                                                                                           A
                                                                                                                                     S
                                                                                                              E




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             L
                                                                           JPN


                                                                                       N




                                                                                                                                                                     A


                                                                                                                                                                                 T
                                 R




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        C
                                                                                                                        U

                                                                                                                                  AU
                                                    NZ




                                                                                                                                                        AU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           BE
                                                                                                           SW




                                                                                                                                                                              PR
                              GB




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GR
                                                                                                NL




                                                                                                                                                                                         FR
                                                                                     CA




                                                                                                                                            DN
                                         US




                                                                                                                                                                   SP
                                                                                                                      DE
                    1. Factor analysis applied to summary indicators of state control, barriers to entrepreneurial activity and barriers to trade and
                       investment.
Source: Nicoletti, Guiseppe and Stefano Scarpetta. (2001). "Interactions Between Product and Labour Market Regulations: Do They Affect Employment? Evidence from OECD Countries." Presented at Banco de Portugal Conference on "Labour Market Institutions and
Economic Outcomes", June 3-4, 2001.




     Dynamic regulatory reform indicators

     39.       Reconstructing past developments in product market regulation is a difficult task for many
     reasons. First, national administrations have a short memory when it comes to changes in regulation:
     turnover of civil servants and incomplete and unsystematic reporting of past regulatory activity make it
     impractical to collect information from national sources alone. Second, regulatory reform is a relatively
     recent phenomenon: the more back in time one goes, the less attention to product market regulation one
     finds in the press and in specialised publications. Third, published professional or academic sources often
     follow the fashion of the day, concentrating on specific industries (e.g. telecoms) and regulatory areas (e.g.
     public ownership), but rarely on a continuous basis. These problems are compounded when information on
     past regulatory developments is sought for a large set of countries. As a result, the available data are often
     scattered and incomplete, and refer to a set of industries that does not necessarily cover a large share of the
     economy.

     40.       The data used in this paper covers regulations and market conditions in seven energy and service
     industries over the 1970-1998 period: gas, electricity, post, telecoms (mobile and fixed services), passenger
     air transport, railways (passenger and freight services) and road freight. The coverage of regulatory areas
     varies across industries. Regulatory barriers to entry are reported for all industries; public ownership is
     reported in all industries except road freight; vertical integration is documented for gas, electricity and
     railways; market structure is documented for gas, telecommunications and railways; and price controls are
     reported for road freight. Time-series information on regulatory and market developments was drawn from
     five main sources:

                             − the OECD: Regulatory Reform, Privatisation and Competition Policy (1992); OECD
                               Roundtables on competition and regulation, various issues; The OECD International
                               Regulation Database; OECD Reviews of Regulatory Reform, various issues;

                             − the European Conference of Ministers of Transportation: Rail Restructuring in Europe, 1998;
                               Regulatory Reforms in the Transport Sector, 1987; Ompetition Policy and Deregulation of
                               Road Transport, 1990; Railway Reform, 2001;

                             − the World Bank: Industry Structure and Regulation in Infrastructure: a Cross-Country
                               Survey, 1996;


                                                                                                                                16
                 Figure 16 Product market regulation and employment protection legislation
 Employment protection legislation
   4.0

                    Correlation 0.73                                                                                                      Portugal
                     t-statistic 4.72
   3.5                                                                                                                                                                      Greece
                                                                                     rd
                                                                                  3 cluster                                                                                     Italy
                                                                                                                                 Spain
                                                                                                                                                                 France
   3.0
                                                                                                                                                       Norway
                                                                                                                  Germany
                                                                                                                     Japan
   2.5                                                                                    Sweden
                                                                                                             Austria
                                                                                                            Netherlands
                                                nd
                                            2        cluster
                                                                                                                  Finland                             Belgium
   2.0



   1.5                                                                                                          Denmark
                                                                                                                      Switzerland
                                                                             Australia
   1.0                                                 Ireland
                                                                                      New Zealand

                                                                                                 Canada
   0.5                                           United Kingdom                                                                          st
                                                                                                                                      1 cluster
                                                                                   United States

   0.0
         0.0                                0.5                                1.0                                 1.5                                 2.0                                2.5
                                                                                                                                                     Product market regulation


 1. The scale of indicators is 0-6 from least to most restrictive
 Source: Nicoletti, Guiseppe and Stefano Scarpetta. (2001). "Interactions Between Product and Labour Market Regulations: Do They Affect Employment? Evidence from OECD Countries." Presented at
 Banco de Portugal Conference on "Labour Market Institutions and Economic Outcomes", June 3-4, 2001.

44.       To clarify further the relationship between product market regulations and EPL, we used cluster
analysis to identify groups of countries that share common patterns across the two sets of regulations. The
analysis was performed using as basic data the three summary indicators of product market regulations --
state control, barriers to entrepreneurial activity, and barriers to international trade and investment --
together with the two summary indicators of EPL for regular and for temporary employment. We
identified three main country clusters:

         − The first cluster includes common-law countries (the United States, the United Kingdom,
           Canada, Ireland, Australia and New Zealand). They are characterised by a relatively liberal
           approach in both the labour and product markets.
         − The second cluster includes most continental European countries and Japan. They share relatively
           restrictive product market regulations. This group can be further split in two sub-groups
           according to the EPL stance: Denmark and Switzerland being less restrictive than Germany,
           Japan, Austria, the Netherlands, Sweden, Finland and Belgium.



                                                                                               19
                                                                                                                                                         31

7DEOH5HJXODWLRQRI%XVLQHVV)RUPDWLRQDQG3URWHFWLRQRI,QYHVWRUVLQ$GYDQFHG2(&'
 Table 4
&RXQWULHV (Source: Freeeman, R.B, 2001)

                             %XVLQHVV)RUPDWLRQ                                                    3URWHFWLRQRI,QYHVWRUV (higher= better)
                  # Procedures    Days to get Cost/GDP                                              Rule of Law Anti-Director Creditor
             required                          Approval                 Per Capita                                             Rights               Rights
Australia        3                                  3                      .0209                      10                       4                    1
Austria         12                               154                       .4545                      10                       2                    3
Belgium          8                               42                        .1001                      10                       0                    2
Canada           2                                2                        .0140                      10                       4                    1
Denmark          5                               21                        .0136                      10                       3                    3
Finland         4                                32                        .0199                      10                       2                    1
France          16                               66                        .1970                      8.98                     2                    0
Germany          7                               90                        .0851                      9.23                     1                    3
Greece          13                               53                        .4799                      6.18                     1                    1
Ireland          4                               25                        .1145                      7.80                     3                    1
Italy           11                               121                       .2474                      8.33                     0                    2
Japan           11                               50                        .1144                      8.98                     3                    2
Neth             8                               77                        .3031                      10                       2                    2
N Zealand        3                               17                        .0042                      10                       4                    3
Norway          6                                24                        .0249                      10                       3                    2
Portugal        12                               99                        .3129                      8.68                     2                    1
Spain           11                               83                        .1269                      7.80                     2                    2
Sweden          4                                17                        .0254                      10                       2                    2
Switzerland     12                              88                        .1336                       10                       1                    1
United Kingdon 7                                  11                        .0056                      8.57                      4                    4
United States    4                                 7                       .0096                       10                       5                    1
Freeman, Richard B. (2001) "Institutional Differences and Economic Performance Among OECD Countries." Unpublished manuscript. Harvard University.


Source: Djankov, Simeon; La Porta, Rafael; Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio; Shleifer, Andrei,
“The Regulation of Entry”, NBER Working Paper 7892 September 2000; La Porta, Lopez-Silanes, Shleifer,
and Vishny, “Investor Protection and Corporate Valuation” NBER Working Paper 7403, October 1999
La Porta, Lopez-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny, “Legal Determinants of External Finance” NBER Working
Paper 5879, January 1997

a) table III, number of procedures = sum of safety & health, environment, taxes,
labor, screening,; time = estimated days before firm can start operation; cost = time and direct cost of
meeting requirements as fraction of GDP per capita in 1997

b) Rule of Law, based on International Country Risk Guide
   Anti-Director Rights, index that measures shareholder rights, range from 0 to 5.
   Creditor Rights, range from 0 to 4.
                                                                            Figure 17 Internet Usage and Employment Protection
                                                         5.5


                                                                US
                                                          5
                                                                                                        FIN

                                                         4.5
                                                                           CAN
                                                                                                                    SWE
       Internet Hosts per 1,000 Inhabitants, July 1999




                                                                                 NWZ          1       DEN
                                                          4                       AUSL


                                                         3.5          UK
                                                                                                              BEL
                                                                                                            AUST

                                                          3                                                   JAP         GER

                                                                                 IRE
                                                                                                                    FRA
                                                         2.5
                                                                                                                                SPA
                                                                                                                                  ITA
                                                          2                                                                             POR


                                                         1.5
                                                            0        0.5         1      1.5      2        2.5       3       3.5         4
                                                                                  Employment Protection Index, 1998
      Source: Samaniego, Roberto. (2001) "Does Unemployment Protection Inhibit Technology
      Diffusion." Unpublished manuscript. University of Pennsylvania.




1.2   EP2




                                                                                                  3
                                                                                              0
                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                          3
                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                          7
                                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                                                  9
                                                                                 Denmark
                                                                              United States
                                                                                   Canada
                                                                                   Sweden
                                                                               Switzerland
                                                                           United Kingdom
                                                                                   Iceland
                                                                              Luxembourg
                                                                               Netherlands
                                                                              New Zealand
                                                                                   Norway




                                                            under domain
                                                                                  Australia
                                                                                    OECD
                                                                                    Austria




     Source: OECD from Netcraft Data (www.netcraft.co.uk)
                                                                                 Germany




55
                                                                                   Finland
                                                                                  Belgium
                                                                                    Ireland
                                                                                    France
                                                                                      Italy
                                                                            Czech Republic
                                                                                  Portugal

                                                            under gTLDs              Spain
                                                                                     Japan
                                                                                  Hungary
                                                                                     Korea
                                                                                    Greece
                                                                                    Poland
                                                                                                                                      Figure 18 Web server sites per 1 000 inhabitants, July 1998 (including: com, net, org)




                                                                                   Turkey
                                                                                   Mexico
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DSTI/ICCP/TISP(98)7/FINAL
                                                                                                                                   Foreign Direct Investment




Figure 19 Foreign Direct Investment

       Stocks of foreign direct investment                                                             Flows of foreign direct investment
               as a share of GDP                                                                              as a share of GFCF1
                       1997                                                                                      Average 1990-97

                                                     New Zealand          Belgium-Luxembourg
                                                     Belgium-Luxembourg                 Sweden
                                                     (1994)
                                                                                  New Zealand
                                                     Netherlands (1995)
                                                                                    Netherlands
                                                     Australia (1996)
                                                                                United Kingdom
  80                                                 Switzerland (1996)                 Greece
                                                     United Kingdom                  Denmark
                                                                              Hungary (outward
                                                     Sweden (1996)                    1993-97)
                                                                                        Ireland
                                                     Norway (1995)
                                                                                       Australia
                                                     Canada
                                                                                         France
                                                     Spain (1996)
                                                                                        Norway
                                                     Hungary
                                                                                          Spain
                                                     Mexico (1995)                  Switzerland

                                                     Denmark (1995)                     Mexico

                                                     Czech Republic (1995)              Finland
                                                                                        Canada
                                                     France (1996)
                                                                                       Portugal
                                                     Germany (1996)            Poland (outward
                                                                                      1992-97)
                                                     Austria                     United States
                                                     United States                      Iceland
        Outward                                                                          Austria                                        Outward
                                                     Finland
        Inward                                                                                                                          Inward
                                                                                 Czech Republic
                                                     Italy                    (outward 1992-97)
                                                                                           Italy
                                                     Iceland
                                                                                         Turkey
                                                     Poland (1996)
                                                                                      Germany
                                                     Korea (1994)
                                                                                          Korea
                                                     Japan (1996)                        Japan

 60      50       40     30      20      10      0                                                 0     5     10      15      20       25        30
                                                 %                                                                                                %

 1. GFCF: Gross Fixed Capital Formation
 Source : OECD, International Direct Investment database and IMF, May 1999.




                                                                                                                                                         69



OECD 1999
                                                                                                                                   Foreign Direct Investment




                                                                          Figure 19 (cont.) Foreign Direct Investment

       Stocks of foreign direct investment                                                             Flows of foreign direct investment
               as a share of GDP                                                                              as a share of GFCF1
                       1997                                                                                      Average 1990-97

                                                     New Zealand          Belgium-Luxembourg
                                                     Belgium-Luxembourg
                                                     Belgium-Luxem
                                                     Belgium-Luxembg                    Sweden
                                                     (1994)
                                                                                  New Zealand
                                                     Netherlands (1995)
                                                                                    Netherlands
                                                     Australia (1996)
                                                                                United Kingdom
  80                                                 Switzerland (1996)                 Greece
                                                     United Kingdom                  Denmark
                                                                              Hungary (outward
                                                     Sweden (1996)                    1993-97)
                                                                                        Ireland
                                                     Norway (1995)
                                                                                       Australia
                                                     Canada
                                                                                         France
                                                     Spain (1996)
                                                                                        Norway
                                                     Hungary
                                                                                          Spain
                                                     Mexico (1995)                  Switzerland

                                                     Denmark (1995)                     Mexico

                                                     Czech Republic (1995)
                                                                    (1)                 Finland
                                                                                        Canada
                                                     France (1996)
                                                                                       Portugal
                                                     Germany (1996)            Poland (outward
                                                                                      1992-97)
                                                     Austria                     United States
                                                     United States                      Iceland
        Outward                                                                          Austria                                        Outward
                                                     Finland
        Inward                                                                                                                          Inward
                                                                                 Czech Republic
                                                     Italy                    (outward 1992-97)
                                                                                           Italy
                                                     Iceland
                                                                                         Turkey
                                                     Poland (1996)
                                                                                      Germany
                                                     Korea (1994)
                                                                                          Korea
                                                     Japan (1996)                        Japan

 60      50       40     30      20      10      0                                                 0     5     10      15      20       25        30
                                                 %                                                                                                %

 1. GFCF: Gross Fixed Capital Formation                                          1. GFCF: Gross Fixed Capital Formation
 Source : OECD, International Direct Investment database and IMF, May 1999.
                                                                      19         Source : OECD, International Direct Investment database and IMF, May 1999.




                                                                                                                                                              69



OECD 1999
                                                                                                        The Role of Business Enterprises in R&D and Innovation




                                                      Figure 20 Venture capital

               Investment in venture capital                                                            Average annual growth rate of investment
                  as a percentage of GDP                                                                       in venture capital, 1995-97
                              1997

1 374                                                     Canada                            Austria                                              174

 473                                                      Netherlands                       Finland                                                76

1 500                                                     United Kingdom
                                                                                           Sweden
8 766                                                     United States
                                                                                            Canada
  87                                                      Finland
                                                                                             Ireland
 176                                                      Belgium
             Early stage                                                                    Greece
4 352        Expansion                                    EU
                                                                                  United Kingdom
  42                                                      Ireland
                                                                                            France
  69                                                      Portugal
                                                                                       United States
 796                                                      Germany
                                                                                           Germany
 545                                                      France
                                                                                           Belgium
 178                                                      Australia
                                                                                                EU
 251                                                      Spain

                                                          Sweden                          Denmark
  56

 311                                                      Italy                               Spain
               Value
            in millions                                   Denmark                       Netherlands
  19
          of US dollars
        using purchasing                                                                       Italy
  20                                                      Greece
         power parities
 113                                                      Japan (1994)                     Australia

   8                                                      Austria                          Portugal

   0.0025      0.002     0.0015      0.001   0.0005   0                                                -20       0          20        40                60
                                                      %                                                                                                 %



                                               Distribution of venture capital by industry, 1997

         Information technology                       Communications                             Health/biotechnology                      Other

            United States                                                Japan                                                   Europe

                                                         1%
                                                       1%

                       20%                                                                                                  7%

                                                               10%                                                       6%
         36%
                                                                                 88%                                    11%                76%
                            22%


                22%




Source: OECD, based on data from European Venture Capital Association; MITI (Japan); CVCA (Canada); NVCA (United States).                                    55



OECD 1999
                                                                                                                  Technology and International Trade




            Figure 21 Revealed Comparative Advantage by Technology Intensity

                                         Contribution to the manufacturing trade balance, 1996
                                                      As a percentage of manufacturing trade

                                               High-technology               Medium-high technology
                                               Medium-low technology                   Low technology

                                              Comparative disadvantage                          Comparative advantage
                         Japan
                    Switzerland
                      Germany
                  United States
                        Mexico
                        Ireland
                United Kingdom
                        France
            Belgium-Luxembourg
                       Sweden
                         Korea
                   Netherlands
                        Austria
                         Spain
                           Italy
                      Denmark
                Czech Republic
                      Hungary
                       Canada
                      Portugal
                       Norway
                       Finland
                        Poland
                       Greece
                      Australia
                        Iceland
                        Turkey
                  New Zealand
                                   -30          -20               -10              0              10            20           30


Source: OECD.




                                                                                                                                                 101



OECD 1999
                                                                                                                                                                            Technology and International Trade
                                                           Figure 22 Exports by Technology Intensity
                                                              Share of high- and medium-high-technology industries
     %                                                                    in manufacturing exports, 1996                                                                                               %
     90                                                                                                                                                                                                90
     80                                                                                                                                                                                                80
                                                                                                                                                                   High technology
     70                                                                                                                                                                                                70
                                                                                                                                                                   Medium-high technology
     60                                                                                                                                                                                                60
     50                                                                                                                                                                                                50
     40                                                                                                                                                                                                40
     30                                                                                                                                                                                                30
     20                                                                                                                                                                                                20
     10                                                                                                                                                                                                10
      0                                                                                                                                                                                                0
              n    d    d s   o    y       e  n                                       a   n     a s     a   .     y  c    k  d   y  l  a  y   d    y  d  e   d
            pa lan lan ate xic an do
                                     m  D
                                       C nc de                                   EU re pai ad nd stri Lux Ital ubli ar lan gar uga rali wa lan rke lan ec lan
          Ja Ire er St Me erm ing OE Fra we                                        Ko S an rla Au m-              ep   nm in un ort st or Po Tu ea Gre Ice
                  itz d     G dK           S                                              C he         iu        R De     F  H  P  Au  N           Z
                Sw nit
                      e                                                                      et      lg       ch                                ew
                    U         ni
                                te                                                          N      Be      ze                                  N
                            U                                                                             C
                                                                          Annual growth rate of exports
     %                                                      in high- and medium-high-technology industries, 1990-96                                                                                    %
     40                                                                                                                                                                                                40
     30                                                                                                                                                                                                30
                                                                                                                                                      High- and medium-high technology
                                                                                                                                                      Total manufacturing
     20                                                                                                                                                                                                20
     10                                                                                                                                                                                                10
      0                                                                                                                                                                                                0
               ic
                  o      nd    nd      nd        ey          lia     al     ce    in      nd     da      es     x.   en aly         m     D       s
                                                                                                                                                        EU wa
                                                                                                                                                              y    e    ia  rk   n   d   y
                        a     a       a        k           a        g      e     a       a      a       t      u    d       t      o     C      nd               nc str    a   pa lan  an
            ex        el    al     re
                                     l     u r
                                                      st
                                                         r       rtu     re    Sp
                                                                                      in
                                                                                        l
                                                                                             an      St
                                                                                                       a     -L    e      I      gd
                                                                                                                                      O
                                                                                                                                       E     rla           or Fra Au enm Ja zer erm
          M         Ic    Ze      I       T         u          Po                    F                     um Sw                n
                                                  A                     G                   C      d      i                   Ki           he             N             D        it
                       ew                                                                        te
                                                                                               ni Bel
                                                                                                         g                  d            et                                    Sw
                                                                                                                                                                                     G
                                                                                                                         te             N
                      N                                                                       U                        ni
                                                                                                                      U
                                          R&D intensities and export specialisation in high-technology industries, 19961
 R&D intensities3                                                                                                                                                                         R&D intensities3
   4.0                                                                                                                                                                                            4.0
                                                                                                    Sweden
    3.5                                                                                                                                                                                                3.5
                                                                                                                                    United States
    3.0                                                                                                                                                                                                3.0
                                                                                                                      Japan
                                                                                 Switzerland
    2.5                                                                                France                                                                                                          2.5
                                               Germany
                                                                               Finland
    2.0                                               Denmark                                                         Korea                                                                            2.0
               New Zealand                                                                                               United Kingdom
                                                                                                  Netherlands
    1.5                                    Belgium                                                                                                                                                     1.5
                                                             Australia
                          Norway
                                                                                                                                                                                        Ireland
    1.0                                                     Canada                                                                                                                                     1.0
                 Czech Republic Italy
    0.5        Iceland            Spain                                                                                                                                                                0.5
            Greece     Poland Hungary
      0     Turkey          Portugal                                                                 Mexico                                                                                            0
           0                     5                    10                    15                    20                    25                    30                 35               40              45
                                                                                                                                                      Export specialisation in high technology 2 (%)
 1. Or latest available year. Greece: 1993; Belgium, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand, Portugal: 1995.
 2. High-technology exports/Manufacturing exports.
 3. Manufacturing R&D expenditures/Manufacturing production.
 Source: OECD, Main Industrial Indicators and R&D database, 1999.                                                                                                                                            99
OECD 1999
                                                                                                                                              Productivity and Unit Labour Costs
                                                      Figure 23 Productivity growth
                                                                  Output per employed person
                      Non-farm business sector (ISIC 2-8)                                          Manufacturing industry (ISIC 3)
 1979 = 100                                                                                                                                                    1979 = 100
   170                                                                    170    190                                                                               190
                                                                                 180                                                                                 180
    160                                                                   160
                                                                                                                                                       Japan
                                                           Japan                 170                                                                                 170
    150                                                                   150
                                                                                 160                                                                                 160
    140                                                                   140                                  United States
                                                                                 150                                                                                 150
                                                      EU-4
    130                                                                   130    140                                                                                 140
                                                          United States
                                                                                 130                                                                                 130
    120                                                                   120
                                                                                                                                  EU-4
                                                                                 120                                                                                 120
    110                                                                   110
                                                                                 110                                                                                 110
    100                                                                   100
                                                                                 100                                                                                 100
     90                                                                   90      90                                                                                 90
       1979    81    83       85   87       89   91       93       95   97          1979     81      83         85       87       89         91   93    95      97
                                                      Change in output per employed person
              Non-farm business sector                                                                                    Manufacturing industry
                      (ISIC 2-8)                                                                                                 (ISIC 3)
          Average annual growth rate 1979-96                                                                         Average annual growth rate 1991-97
                                                          Finland                                 Korea
                                                          Norway                              Finland
                                                          Japan                               Sweden
                                                                                                   Italy
                                                          Belgium
                                                                                              Belgium
                                                          Sweden
                                                                                       United Kingdom
                                                          Italy
                                                                                          Netherlands
                                                          United Kingdom
                                                                                         United States
                                                          France
                                                                                                  Japan
                                                          Australia
                                                                                               France
                                                          Western Germany
                                                                                              Canada
                                                          Denmark
                                                                                             Australia                                                  Output/person
                                                          Netherlands                                                                                   Output/hour
                                                                                             Denmark
                                                          United States           Western Germany
                                                          Canada                              Norway
4             3           2             1             0                                                    0         1        2          3        4     5        6         7
                                                      %                                                                                                                    %
Source: OECD.                                                                                              Source: OECD and US Bureau of Labor Statistics.                     85
OECD 1999
                                                                                                                                   Productivity and Unit Labour Costs




                                                          Figure 24 Unit labour costs
                                           Relative trade-weighted unit labour costs by industry, 1996
                                                                 1990 = 100, US dollar basis

            Total manufacturing (ISIC 3)                                                                        Food, beverages and tobacco (ISIC 31)
                                                      Japan                                        Japan                                                142.7
                                                      Greece                              West Germany
                                                      Portugal                                    Austria
                                                      West Germany                               Greece
                                                      Austria                              United States
                                                      Denmark                                  Denmark
                                                      Belgium                                   Australia
                                                      Norway                                      France
                                                      Australia                                  Norway
                                                      France                                 Netherlands
                                                      Netherlands                                  Spain
                                                      United States                             Portugal
                                                      Spain                                     Belgium
                                                      United Kingdom                     United Kingdom
                                                      Sweden                                    Sweden
                                                      Italy                                      Canada
                                                      Canada                                         Italy
                                                      Finland                                    Finland
 60   70      80    90   100   110   120      130   140                                                  60       70    80    90   100   110    120   130   140



      Textiles, footwear and leather (ISIC 32)                                                                         Chemical products (ISIC 35)
                                               179.8 Japan                                       Greece
                                                      West Germany                                Austria
                                                      Greece                                    Portugal
                                                      Netherlands                                  Japan
                                                      Denmark                                    Norway
                                                      Austria                                   Australia
                                                      Portugal                            West Germany
                                                      Australia                                Denmark
                                                      France                                      France
                                                      Belgium                                   Belgium
                                                      Norway                               United States
                                                      United States                          Netherlands
                                                      Spain                                        Spain
                                                      United Kingdom                            Sweden
                                                      Canada                                         Italy
                                                      Sweden                             United Kingdom
                                                      Italy                                      Finland
                                                      Finland                                    Canada
 60   70      80    90   100   110   120      130   140                                                  60       70    80    90   100   110    120   130   140



           Basic metal industries (ISIC 37)                                                                  Fabricated metal products and machinery (ISIC 38)
                                                      Portugal                                  Portugal
                                                      Australia                                  Greece
                                                      Japan                                        Japan
                                                      Norway                              West Germany
                                                      Greece                                    Belgium
                                                      Belgium                                     Austria
                                                      Netherlands                              Denmark
                                                      France                                     Norway
                                                      West Germany                           Netherlands
                                                      Spain                                       France
                                                      Austria                                   Australia
                                                      United States                      United Kingdom
                                                      United Kingdom                                 Italy
                                                      Denmark                                   Sweden
                                                      Canada                                       Spain
                                                      Italy                                      Canada
                                                      Finland                              United States
                                                      Sweden                                     Finland
 60   70      80    90   100   110   120      130   140                                                  60       70    80    90   100   110    120   130   140


Source: OECD, STAN and Bilateral Trade databases, May 1999.
                                                                                                                                                                  87



OECD 1999
                                         Figure 25
                             Real Total Compensation per Employee
                          in the USA, Germany, Italy, the Netherlands
    170



    160



    150



    140                                                                                      D
                                                                                             I
                                                                                             USA
    130                                                                                      NL



    120



    110



    100
       1970        1975          1980         1985          1990         1995         2000




Bertola, Guiseppe. (2000) "Europe's Unemployment Problems." Unpublished manuscript.




                                                     34
                                                                                                   Figure 26

    GDP per Employed Person, 1996                                                Employment Growth, 1997                                                    Manufacturing and Services
                                                                                                                                                            Employment, 1997
                                                                                                                                   Million workers          Percent of total employment
    Thousand US $
                                                                                                                                                                              Manufacturing               Services




            US             Japan       France Germanya, b          UKb                     US          Japan        Franceb Germanyb          UKb                     US         Japan       France    Germany       UK

    Average Hours Worked in Manufacturing                                        Hourly Compensation in                                                     Unit Labor Costs in Manufacturing
    per Employee, 1997                                                           Manufacturing, 1997d                                                       in US Dollars

    Thousand hours                                                               US $                                                                       Index: 1986=100
                                                                                                 Indirect
                                                                                                 Direct
                                                                                                                                                                                        Germany a

                                                                                                                                                                                                      Japan



                                                                                                                                               US manuscript.
                                                                          Bertola, Guiseppe. (2000) "Europe's Unemployment Problems." Unpublished



           US              Japan       France     Germany          UK                      US          Japan        France     Germany         UK                86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97

a                                  d
  Western area only.               Labor costs for production workers. Hourly direct pay includes pay          for legally required insurance programs and contractual and private
b                                  for time worked, pay for time not worked, bonuses, and the cost of any      benefit plans plus taxes on, minus subsidies of, payrolls or employme.
  1996.
c                                  payments in kind. Hourly indirect pay includes employer expenditures
  Latest data available.                                                                                                                       Source: CIA Handbook of International Economic Statistics (1999).
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 366434AI 1-99
