NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTEGRATION OF UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE
WITH RETIREMENT INSURANCE
Joseph Stiglitz
Jungyoll Yun
Working Paper 9199
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9199
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Joseph Stiglitz and Jungyoll Yun. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Integration of Unemployment Insurance with Retirement Insurance
Joseph Stiglitz and Jungyoll Yun
NBER Working Paper No. 9199
September 2002
ABSTRACT
This paper analyzes a social insurance system that integrates unemployment
insurance with a pension program through an individual account, allowing workers
to borrow against their future wage income to finance consumption during an
unemployment episode and thus improving their search incentives while reducing
risks. This paper identifies factors which determine the optimal degree of
integration. A fully integrated system is one in which no reliance is placed at all
on a separate tax-funded unemployment insurance program. We show that when
the duration of unemployment is very short compared to the period of employment
or retirement, the optimal system involves an exclusive reliance on pension-funded
self-insurance. This system imposes a negligible risk burden for workers while
avoiding attenuating search incentives. We also argue that a joint integration of
several social insurance programs with a pension program through an individual
account is desirable unless the risks are perfectly correlated to each other.

Joseph Stiglitz
Institute for International Studies
Encina Hall C100
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305
and NBER
stiglitz@stanford.edu

1

I. Introduction

The East Asian crisis brought home to much of the developing world a lesson that the
Great Depression brought home to more advanced countries seventy years ago—the
importance of a safety net. But as countries like Korea go about constructing their safety
nets, they are cognizant of the complaints that have been raised against unemployment
insurance systems: they attenuate incentives. To be sure, there are adverse incentive
effects (or, as they are today generally referred to, moral hazard effects) in all insurance
programs. What worries critics is that the risk reduction benefits might, on the face of it,
be outweighed by the adverse incentive effects. For most individuals, a typical spell of
unemployment is less than six months (and that spell would presumably be shorter,
possibly much shorter in the absence of unemployment insurance.) Over a working time
of, say, forty-five years, an individual with three such spells would lose perhaps 4% of
his lifetime income—a risk which presumably the individual could easily absorb if he
had sufficient savings or could borrow against future earnings. With the bulk of savings
used for retirement, and mostly dedicated to social security programs, the amount
individuals have to buffer themselves against these income shocks is limited; and well
documented limitations in capital markets make it difficult for individuals to borrow
much against future earnings. Thus compulsory old age public pension programs, while
they help resolve one problem—the tendency of individuals not to save enough for their
old age, because of the proclivity of public “bail-outs”—exacerbate another.
This naturally leads to the suggestion of an integrated unemployment and pension
program, which we will call the integrated unemployment insurance (UI) system. Such

1

2

integration makes particular sense with individual accounts, which are increasingly
forming the basis of even public pension programs.1 In such programs, benefits are
related to contributions by simple formulae; in the simplest form, there is no
redistribution. Such programs are like defined contribution pension programs, though
some of the contributions can be used to “purchase” insurance (e.g. against inflation or
interest rate fluctuations) which is not available on the market. But it is easy to impose
redistributions on top. For simplicity, in this paper, we will ignore the redistributive
components.2
Under the integrated UI system through an individual account, an individual who is
unemployed can have his unemployment payments taken out of his individual account.
Thus, the individual obtains the liquidity to maintain his standard of living; the
compulsory and universal nature of the contributions provide, in effect, perfect collateral,
so that early on in his life, his account balance could become negative. The fact that
normally the risk is small means that the individual can bear this risk—when it is spread
out over his entire life; and since the individual bears the risk, there is no attenuation of
job search incentives.
If, however, the loss from unemployment is large enough, it is optimal to have some
true unemployment insurance—the individual should not bear the cost even over his
lifetime. In general, individuals should not rely exclusively on the pension-funded selfinsurance under the integrated UI system. In this paper we take this ‘lifetime’
unemployment insurance to be tax-funded, but the results would be identical with a
mandatory private insurance program with competitively determined premia.3 Taking this
into account, we characterize in this paper the optimal benefit structure of the integrated

2

3

UI system, that is, the optimal combination of the two types of benefits—tax-funded and
pension-funded. The lower the risk-aversion, or the greater the elasticity of search with
respect to the insurance benefit, the less reliance should be placed on tax-funded
insurance as opposed to (what might be viewed as implicit) pension-funded selfinsurance. In an extreme case, if a worker is risk-neutral, then there should be no need for
tax-funded unemployment insurance, and if there is no incentive problem associated with
unemployment insurance, there is no need to rely on pension-funded self-insurance. Not
surprisingly, the larger the risk, which in turn is related to the length of the period of
unemployment relative to the working period, the greater the need for tax-funded
insurance. In the limit, if the period of unemployment is vanishingly minute, then the
individual can bear all the risk through pension-funded self-insurance with no welfare
loss.
Unemployment is, of course, only one of many risks that individuals face. There are,
for instance, the risks of disability and health, as well as unemployment. The idea of
integration can be applied to each of these risks, leading us to consider what we call an
integrated lifetime insurance program. Under the integrated lifetime insurance pension
savings can be used to provide cover for these risks. The Provident Funds of Malaysia
and Singapore provide prototypes of such an integrated program. The problem is that
while the loss from any one of these risks may be small, there is some chance the
individual may experience all of these losses. In that case, the funds available to an
individual at the time of retirement may be reduced to an unacceptably low level .If the
government has to provide lifetime insurance to cover such contingencies—in effect,
bailing out the individual account because it would provide an unacceptably low level of

3

4

pension, the borrowing by an individual to smooth consumption to cover any one of these
risks would have an adverse disincentive effect much as the tax-funded benefit does.
These considerations might appear to diminish the relevance of joint integration.
We argue in this paper, however, that so long as the risks are not perfectly correlated
then it always pays to integrate all the social insurance programs with the pension
program rather than to have separate insurance programs covering each risk. The key
point is that the integrated lifetime insurance system allows a given amount of pension
savings of an individual to be used for the benefits under all the risks. This benefit of
joint integration—having a common pool from which to draw upon—gets larger as the
correlation gets smaller.
In the next section we present a basic model for an integrated UI system to
characterize its optimal benefit structure and to show how it varies with the relative size
of unemployment risk and other parameters. Section 3 provides an informal presentation
for an integrated lifetime insurance system to argue for its optimality. Some concluding
remarks are given in Section 4.

II. The Model
Consider an infinitely-lived worker who spends (M+2) periods working and retires for
the remaining N periods, as depicted in Figure 0. In period 2 a worker becomes
unemployed with probability q. The length of unemployment depends upon his search
decision. In this paper we assume that a worker can choose either ‘no search’ or ‘search’.
If he searches, he gets reemployed immediately after the unemployment shock. If he does

4

5

not search, he remains unemployed for one period. Thus, depending upon his search
decision, a worker with an unemployment shock can either be employed or unemployed
in period 2. The cost of search e is a random variable, which is distributed with
distribution function F(e). There is a threshold search cost e′, such that he chooses to
search (or not to search) if e < (or >) e′. Thus the probability of being unemployed in
period 2 is q(1-F(e′)).
Suppose there is a public pension program,4 to which an individual worker is mandated
to contribute a certain portion of his income. Although it does not matter whether the
pension program is of a defined-contribution or of a defined-benefit type, here we will
assume for simplicity that an individual’s pension is determined simply by his
contributions. In addition to mandatory savings, an individual may also have voluntary
private savings for retirement or to cover the risk of unemployment in the future.
Under the integrated UI system, the unemployment benefit comes from two sources:
from a formal unemployment program, funded by an unemployment insurance tax, and
from the past and prospective mandated pension savings. If the period of unemployment
is small enough and/or the mandated level of savings is high enough, and if the individual
is allowed to borrow as much as he wants from his individual account, there would be no
additional precautionary savings to cover the risk of unemployment. . In other words, an
individual would save just for retirement.
The main objective of the integrated UI system is to provide efficient consumption
smoothing and lifetime risk absorption, while minimizing the adverse search incentives.
We approach the problem in several stages. We first pretend the government could
control perfectly consumption at every date in every state and circumstance (that is,

5

6

whether the individual does or does not face an unemployment shock) as well as search
(which will presumably depend on the cost of search e) to characterize the first-best
optimum. We then analyze the constrained optimum, where the government cannot
directly control whether individuals search the government knows however, that their
search decisions will depend on the benefits provided. We next characterize a set of
unemployment insurance tax and benefits as well as mandated savings and retirement
benefits the government needs to achieve this constrained optimum, examining, in
particular the factors that determine the optimal degree of integration. In doing this we
will assume for the expositional simplicity that there is no discounting for money and
utility. This will enable us to identify more clearly the welfare gains associated with the
integrated UI system.
Let C1 be the consumption in period 1 for an individual. From period 2 on, there are
two different work-states possible for an individual: ‘unemployed in period 2’ (U) and
‘employed in period 2’ (N). A worker with one work-state chooses his consumption
pattern over time differently from the one with the other work-state.
Let C n ,t , C u ,t (for t >1) be the amount of consumption at time t for an individual with

work-state N, U, respectively. Then, assuming that consumption C and search effort e
are separable in the utility function, we can represent his expected utility as follows:

V (C1 , C n ,t , C u ,t , q ) = U (C1 ) + (1 − q(1 − F (e' )))

M + N +2

∑
t =2

U (C n ,t ) + q(1 − F (e' ))

M + N +2

∑U (C
t =2

u ,t

)

e'

− q ∫ edF (e)
0

(1)

6

7

where {C1 , C n ,t , C u ,t }t satisfies the following constraint:

C1 + (1 − q(1 − F (e' ))

M + N +2

M + N +2

t =2

t =2

∑ C n,t + q(1 − F (e' ))

∑C

u ,t

= ( M + 2 − q(1 − F (e' )) w.

(2)

The above constraint indicates that the sum of the expected consumption over a lifetime
should be equal to the expected lifetime wage income earned. This can also be
interpreted as an aggregate constraint based upon the law of large numbers.

First Best Solution
Maximizing the expected utility function V subject to the above constraint, with
respect to consumption at each date and in work state {C1 , Cˆ n ,t , Cˆ u ,t } and with respect to
the threshold search cost ê , we have

Cˆ 1 = Cˆ n ,t = Cˆ u ,t = Cˆ ,

=

M + 2 − qˆ
w
M +2+ N

(FB-1)

for all t (>1)—there is complete consumption smoothing - and

eˆ = U ' (Cˆ ) w ,

(FB-2)

7

8

where qˆ ≡ q(1 − F (eˆ)) . In our model, search always yields a job, which generates a wage

of w and a marginal utility of U’w; it pays to search so long as the cost of search (in
utility terms) is less than the cost.
The first-best expected utility Vˆ of an individual would then be

ˆ

e
Vˆ = ( M + 2 + N )U (Cˆ ) − ∫ edF
0

(FB-3)

Second best optimum
In fact, however, the government cannot directly control individual search behavior. If
the government guaranteed consumption irrespective of search, no individual would have
an incentive to search. The threshold search cost e′ chosen by an individual worker will
be the one that maximizes his expected utility V without taking into account its effect
upon the constraint (2). Thus, we have

e' =

M + N +2

∑
t =2

U (C n ,t ) −

M + N +2

∑U (C
t =2

u ,t

).

(3)

The optimal outcome that the government can achieve given its inability to control
individual search behavior, otherwise called the second-best optimum, can be
characterized by maximizing the expected utility V(.) subject to the constraint (2) and the
individual search behavior constraint (3). A detailed analysis of the second-best optimum
will be given later in this section, where the optimal benefit structure of the integrated UI

8

9

system is characterized. But one can see that the additional constraint (3) implies that the
*

second-best set of consumptions {C1 , C n*,t , C u*,t } and threshold search cost e * satisfies

*

C n*,t = C n ,
C u*,t = C u

(SB-1)

*

for all t = 2, --, M+N+2, and

*

*

*

*

C n > Cu

C n > C1 > C u

*

(SB-2)

*

*

e * = ( M + N + 1){U (C n ) − U (C u )} .

(SB-3)

The condition (SB-1) says that, from period 2 on, the consumption in each period should
be equal for each work-state N or U, which is also required for the first-best. The
condition (SB-2), however, states that per period consumption for those with work-state
U should be less than that for those with work-state N. This is due to the moral hazard
associated with a search incentive, and distinguishes the second-best from the first-best.

II.1. The Second-Best Savings, Borrowings and UI Benefits

9

10

To identify a set of savings, borrowings and UI taxes and benefit that generates the
second-best consumption pattern for an individual, we will first figure out how those
variables determine the consumption level in each period for each state. In this model the
UI tax T is paid only in period 15, and the unemployment benefit B paid in period 2
consists of the benefit r funded by UI tax T and the benefit R funded by lifetime savings.
The benefit R is self-insurance for an unemployed worker, which can be financed either
by his pre-unemployment private savings or by borrowings from his future pension
savings. The distinction between these two is important in this paper, for reasons which
will be discussed later.
The condition (SB-1) for consumption smoothing implies that the savings of an
individual with a given work-state should be the same for all periods, because in this
model a worker faces the same wage for each period while there is no discounting. Let
s1 , s u , and s n be the savings rate in period 1, the savings rate for those with work-state U
and N, respectively. Then, we have

C1 = w(1 − s1 − T )
C n ,t = w(1 − s n ),

t = 2,−−, M + 2

( M + 1) s n + s1
,
N
= w(r + R)

C n ,t = w
Cu ,2

C u ,t = w(1 − s u ),
C u ,t = w

*

(4)

t = 3,−−, M + 2

Msu + s1 − R
,
N

*

t = M + 3, − −, M + N + 2

t = M + 3, − −, M + N + 2

*

Let {s1 , s n , s u ; r * , R * , T * } be a set of the optimal variables that can achieve the secondbest optimum. Then, substituting (4) into the expected utility function V( ) in (1), we can
10

11

solve for these variables by maximizing V(.) subject to the individual search behavior
constraint (3) and the government budget constraint. More specifically, the variables
*

*

*

{s1 , s n , s u ; r * , R * , T * } solve the following optimization problem:

Max V (.)
s1 , r ,T

(5)

e*

= U ( w − s1 w − Tw) + (1 − q ) I ( M , N , s1 ) + q J (r , R; M , N , s1 ) − q ∫ edF (e)
0

subject to

e * = I ( M , N , s1 ) − J (r ; M , N , s1 )
T = qr .

(Individual Search Constraint)
(Government Budget Constraint)

(6)
(7)

where
q ≡ q(1 − F (e * ))
*

I ( M , N , s1 ) =

Max

( M + 1)U ((1 − sn ) w) + NU {

sn

( M + 1) sn + s1
w}
N

(8)
*

J (r , R; M , N , s1 ) = Max U ((r + R) w) + MU ((1 − su ) w) + NU (
su , R

Msu + s1 − R
w)
N

(9)

The valuation functions I(.) and J(.) measure the payoff as of period 2, depending on
whether the individual is or is not employed in period 2, respectively. For the purpose of
simplicity, we will hereafter normalize the wage at unity.

11

12

Before characterizing the second-best optimum, we will briefly outline the underlying
intuitions. In determining the second-best savings, borrowings and UI benefit, the
consumption smoothing across periods or across work states is critical. The maximization
*

*

problems (8) and (9) suggest that the optimal savings and borrowings {s n , su , R * } are to
be set solely based upon intertemporal consumption smoothing for those in a given work
state N or U. The optimal savings s1* in period 1 and the optimal UI benefit r* (and its tax
T*) are also affected by consumption smoothing across periods and across work states,
respectively. As for s1* and r*, however, another consideration may also apply. Although
an individual takes UI tax T as given in choosing his search strategy as implied by (6), T
depends upon the unemployment probability q , which is in turn affected by an
individual search decision. In determining s1* and r*, therefore, we have to take into
account their effects upon T. In other words, s1* and r* will be set to facilitate
consumption smoothing across periods and work states, taking incentive effects into
account. Differentiation of (6) with respect to r and s1 will provide us with the following
results about their effects upon individuals’ search decision:

Lemma
(i)

M + r + s1
∂e *
) < 0.
= −U ' (
∂r
N + M +1

(ii)

M + r + s1
M + 1 + s1
∂e *
) −U '(
)} < 0.
= {U ' (
∂s1
N + M +1
N + M +1

12

13

The proof of the Lemma can be found in the Appendix. Lemma (i) shows that an
individual worker’s search decision is adversely affected by the tax-funded UI benefit r.
This is the source of well-known welfare cost associated with the UI system. Lemma (ii)
shows that the savings in period 1 would also negatively affect search effort decision,
because a worker with greater private savings would not take as serious the reduction in
his account balance. In other words, an individual search decision is negatively related to
one’s post-unemployment lifetime consumption. To the extent that savings in period 1 is
only a small portion of one’s post-unemployment lifetime consumption, therefore, its
effect on e′ would also be minimal. In particular, we will assume that q is so small
relative to M and N that

q
≈0.
N +M

(A)

Under the assumption (A) the effect of s1 upon UI tax T would become negligible,
because, by Lemma (ii),

∂T ∂e'
≈ 0,
∂e' ∂s1

where

∂T
= qf (e' )r1 by (7). Since the assumption (A) enables us to ignore the search
∂e'

incentive effect of s1 in determining its optimal value, the optimal savings s1* in period 1
will be determined only by consumption smoothing across periods in the model.6

13

14

Let a ≡

M +2
be the ratio of length of working career to retirement duration. Then,
N

we can establish the following Proposition on the second-best set of savings, borrowings
and UI benefit.

Proposition 1
*

(i) s1 + T * =

(ii) 1 − s n

1
1+ a
=
N + M +1
M +1+

*

(iii) 1 − s u

1
, where T * = q r * ,
1+ a

*

1
*
1 + a − X * , where X * = 1 − r
,
=
N + M +1
N + M +1
M +1+

1
1+ a − X * − r* .
(iv) R * =
N + M +1
M +1+

(v) δX * − U ' (

f (.)
U"
a
, δ ≡−
)) Hr * = 0 , where H ≡
.
1 − F (.)
U'
1+ a

Proposition 1 suggests that the second-best savings, borrowings and UI benefit can be
characterized as a function of exogenous parameters, H , δ , M , N , q . Here δ represents
an Arrow-Pratt measure of absolute risk aversion and H indicates search elasticity or the
sensitiveness of reemployment probability to the increase in threshold search cost e' .7
*

Rewriting (i) as 1 − s1 − T * =

a
M +2
=
, we can see that the optimal savings s1*
1+ a N + M + 2

14

15

in period 1 is determined as a retirement savings based on intertemporal consumption
smoothing for given r*, not as a precautionary savings against unemployment risk.
Without the government provision of pension-funded borrowing, however, the savings s1
in period 1 would also have to serve as a precautionary savings against unemployment
shock. This is the case for the conventional UI system, which will be discussed later. By
(ii) and (iii) the optimal savings after period 1 are also to be determined solely by
intertemporal consumption smoothing for given UI benefit r*.
As for the second-best self-insurance R* (using pension savings), it is also determined
by intertemporal consumption smoothing as shown in (iv). Although the government
provides an unemployed worker with tax-funded benefit r*, it may be short of his optimal
consumption level, due to the concern about search incentives. Given the limitation of the
tax-funded benefit r* , an unemployed worker may rely on a certain amount R* of
pension-funded self-insurance that supplements r*.8
On the other hand, the optimal UI benefit is set by (v) to balance consumption
smoothing between the two work states N and U,.,(which represents the provision of
insurance) with the concern about incentives. The first term δX * of (v) reflects the
marginal insurance benefit provided by r, while the second term U ' (a)) Hr * represents its
marginal incentive cost.
Note that the marginal insurance benefit of r is positively related to X , the amount of
consumption reduction per period due to unemployment. This implies that the risk
burden that an individual has to bear due to the limitation of r depends upon the amount
of consumption reduction per period, not upon the total consumption reduction. The
amount of total (lifetime) consumption reduction due to unemployment is (1-r). If an

15

16

unemployed individual would not be able to borrow, therefore, the risk burden of
unemployment he has to bear would be positively related to (1-r). Under the integrated
UI system in which an individual can borrow, however, he can spread out the reduction
in lifetime income over the working and retirement period. This reduces the risk burden
associated with the incomplete provision of insurance against unemployment . This is
how integrated UI system improves the trade-off between insurance and incentive,
thereby enhancing welfare.
Taking into account the fact that the optimal self-insurance R* and tax-funded UI
benefit r* are partial substitutes for each other(by (iv) of Proposition 1), the relatively
small marginal insurance benefit of r under the integrated UI suggests a smaller taxfunded UI benefit under the integrated system. Some of the tax-funded UI benefit is
replaced by self-insurance . A complete set of comparative statics about the mix of selfinsurance and tax-financed insurance is presented in the following Proposition.

Proposition 2
∂R *
∂B *
∂r *
< 0,
> 0,
< 0,
(i) ∂H
∂H
∂H

(ii)

∂r *
> 0,
∂δ

∂R *
< 0,
∂δ

(iii)

∂r *
∂M

< 0,
a =const

∂R *
∂M

where B * = r * + R *

∂B *
>0
∂δ

> 0,
a =const

∂B *
∂M

>0
a =const

16

17

The proof of Proposition 2 is included in the Appendix. As the search elasticity
(indicated by H) increases, the potential incentive cost of unemployment insurance grows,
making it more desirable to rely on pension funded self-insurance; but the fact that
insurance is more distortionary means that, in addition, the total unemployment benefit
(tax funded plus pension funded self-insurance) decreases. Greater risk-aversion of a
worker (a higher δ) implies a greater need for insurance against the risk of
unemployment, as well as greater reliance on tax-financed benefits more than pensionfunded self-insurance.
Consider some extreme cases. When a worker is risk-neutral, i.e., when δ = 0, r * = 0 :
there is no need for unemployment insurance. Note from Proposition 1 (iii) that
*

R * = 1 − su in this case, which implies that the pension-funded self-insurance R takes

care of all the necessary consumption smoothing for those with the work-state U.
Reliance on pension-funded self-insurance is also desirable when the reemployment
probability of a worker is very sensitive to his search effort, i.e., when H is very large.
On the other hand, if a worker is very risk-averse ( δ is very large) or if his
reemployment probability is constant irrespective of his search effort ( H = 0), no
pension-funded self-insurance will be necessary. In this case, r * = 1 by Proposition 1 (v),
implying that after receiving the tax-funded benefit, which provides complete insurance
so that it is equal to the wage the individual would have received had he been employed9,
an unemployed worker saves some of the benefit so as to smooth out his consumption
over time.
More importantly, Proposition 2 (iii) shows how the optimal benefit package for the
unemployed changes with the length of working and retirement periods. The increase in

17

18

M and N with a kept constant indicates that the unemployment duration gets shorter
relative to the length of working life. Under this circumstance the optimal benefit
package for the unemployed entails a larger amount of pension-funded borrowing and a
smaller amount of tax-funded benefit. The reason for this result is that the risk associated
with unemployment viewed from a life-time perspective gets smaller, so that when it can
be effectively smoothed as under the integrated UI system, the risk burden becomes
negligible. That is, a worker who borrows from his pension can ease the burden of
reduction in his lifetime income by spreading it out more effectively over the longer postunemployment and retirement periods, i.e., by increasing his savings during the postunemployment period and reducing his consumption during retirement.

II.2. Government Intervention for the Second-Best Outcome
: The Integrated UI System

II.2.1. The Relevance of Integration

In this subsection we will see whether or not we need government intervention to
support the second-best optimum we have described. There are two possible reasons for
government intervention: first, all the second-best variables may not be decentralized by
individual choices in competitive markets; and second, the second-best outcome may not
be realizable under imperfect capital market as it involves individual borrowing against
future income.

18

19

Let us first look at the decentralization issue, assuming for the moment that the capital
market is perfect. It is easy to verify that the second-best UI benefit r * can be supported
as an equilibrium in a competitive insurance market. Since the government budget
condition (7) is equivalent to the zero profit condition for an individual insurance firm,
the maximization problem for r* will be identical to the one for an equilibrium amount of
insurance in a competitive market.10
*

*

*

In examining whether or not the other second-best variables – savings {s1 , s n , s u } and
borrowings rate R * - can be decentralized by individual choices in a competitive capital
market, we will presume that r = r*. Let {s1 , s n , su , R i } be an individual’s choices of
i

i

i

savings and borrowings rates given {r * , T * } . An individual makes these choices by
maximizing his expected utility (5) without the budget constraint (7) or without taking
into account the effect of his search incentive on the UI tax (or premium) T. However,
the equations (8) and (9) imply that both individual and second-best optimization
*

problems for s n , s u , R are the same, i.e., that if r = r * , s1 = s1 ,

i

*

i

*

s n = s n , su = su , R i = R * .

As for s1i, on the other hand, it will be determined solely by intertemporal consumption
smoothing because an individual takes T as given in choosing s1i. Since this turns out to
be the case for the optimal savings s1* by the assumption (A), s1i = s1*. Thus, we have
established the following Proposition:

19

20

Proposition 3
Under the assumption (A), the second-best outcome can be decentralized by individual
choices in competitive markets, i.e.,

i

*

i

*

i

*

s1 = s1 , s n = s n , su = su , r i = r * , R i = R * .

Conversely, if assumption A is not satisfied, individuals in making their own savings
decisions the first period fail to take into account the moral hazard effect associated with
that savings. Hence, the greater the savings, the less the search intensity should they be
unemployed, and accordingly the greater the burden on the unemployment insurance
system. This is a standard externality-like effect that arises in insurance markets. In this
case, it takes the somewhat surprising form that individuals will save too much. In this
particular model, the government might be able to control the level of savings (assuming
it is observable) by taxing savings that exceed s1* at sufficiently high rates such that
individuals will not save excessively. But more generally, the government will have to
intervene to obtain a third best outcome by taxing activities that are substitutes for search
and first period consumption and subsidizing activities that are complements. (See
Greenwald and Stiglitz, 1986, and Arnott and Stiglitz, 1990) For the analytical simplicity
we will not pursue these issues by assuming (A) in this paper.
Proposition 3 suggests that the government does not need to intervene if capital

markets are perfect, so that individuals can borrow against future income.11 But because
capital markets are not perfect, the government may have to intervene whenever an

20

21

individual has to borrow to sustain his optimal consumption. Suppose that the
government sets the mandatory savings rate in period 1 to be αs1 , where α ∈[0,1] . The
*

amount of withdrawal an unemployed worker can make in period 2 would then be
(1 − α ) s1 . Note that α would not affect any individual choice in this model so long as
*

α ≤ 1 , because s1* is the level of savings that an individual wants to make in period 1.
The amount of necessary borrowing for an unemployed individual will then be
( R * − (1 − α ) s1 ) . Thus, the integrated UI system will be needed to support the second*

best optimum if the amount of borrowing required to sustain the second best optimum is
positive, i.e., if

(1 − α ) s1 < R * .
*

(10)

Condition (10) suggests that the integration of UI with a pension is likely to be relevant,
or welfare enhancing12 , when (i) the optimal borrowing R* is large (which will be the
case when the optimal tax-funded benefit r* is small), (ii) the pre-unemployment savings
is small, or (iii) the level of mandatory savings (α) is high.
Under certain circumstances an unemployed worker would not need to borrow much
for his consumption. If the optimal pension-funded self-insurance R* is small for the
reasons presented above, for example, then the amount that an unemployed worker can
withdraw (1 − α ) s1 may be large enough to cover R*. In this case, the integration of UI
*

with a pension would not be necessary. Furthermore, if the tax-funded benefit r* is very
large, R* may be non-positive, i.e., an unemployed worker may want to save out of the

21

22

tax-funded benefit r*, in which case an integrated UI system would again not be relevant.
However, we can present a certain set of parameter values for which integrated UI is
always relevant. More specifically, Proposition 1, 2 and the condition (10) can give us
some important results on the conditions for the relevance of integrated UI system. First,
we can establish the following.

Proposition 4-1
For any given set of exogenous parameters {α , q, H , δ , N } , there exists M (< ∞) such
that (10) holds if M > M = M (α , q, H , δ , N ) .

The proof is delegated to the Appendix. Proposition 4-1 demonstrates that an integrated
UI system is desirable if M (the post-unemployment working period) is long enough.
The reason for this should be obvious: With a long working period (given a fixed
retirement period), the savings rate required to finance retirement is lower.13 Also, long
working period tends to render small the risk burden of self-insurance R, leading to more
self-insurance and less tax-funded benefit (by Proposition 3 (iii)). The reduction in s1*
and the increase in R* imply the greater need for the integrated UI by (10). Note that
integrated UI is relevant for large M because s1* → 0 while R* > 0 as M goes to infinity.
To examine other conditions for the relevance of the integrated UI, we will keep the
ratio of employment duration to retirement duration, a(≡

M +2
) , constant, and will
N

22

23

suppose that a ≥ 1 . Then, we can establish the following Proposition on the relevance of
integrating UI with the pension program.

Proposition 4-2
Suppose that a ≥ 1 and that a is kept constant. There exists a set of finite parameter
values {M o , H o , δ o } for any given set of the other parameter values such that (10) holds
if
(i) M ≥ M o = M (α , q, H , δ , a) ,
(ii) H > H o = H (α , q, M , δ , a) ,
(iii) δ < δ o = δ (α , q, M , H , a ) .

The proof can be found in the Appendix. The result (i) shows that another feature of an
individual career structure – the relative length of unemployment period - may also affect
the relevance for an integrated UI. As both working and retirement periods get longer
relative to unemployment duration, the pre-unemployment savings s1* increases just a
little due to the slight reduction in UI tax T (by Proposition 1 (i) and (v)) while the
pension-funded self-insurance R* increases (by Proposition 2 (iii)). Since the increase in
R* outweighs the increase in s1*, for large enough M (and N) integration becomes
unambiguously desirable. This result can be seen another way: (10) will hold for large M
*

and N because s1 →

a
1
, R* →
as M and N go to infinity while a > 1 .
1+ a
1+ a

23

24

Proposition 4-2 also shows that the integration of UI with a pension program would be
necessary when workers are not so risk-averse and reemployment is relatively sensitive to
search activity. When the economy is subject to serious incentive distortion, the taxfunded benefit decreases (by Proposition 1 (v)) and thus the need for borrowing grows
(by Proposition 1 (iv)). The integration is necessary for large H because as H goes to
infinity, all the consumption for the unemployed will be financed by self-insurance R (by
Proposition 1 (iv) and (v)), which is greater than s1. If H = 0, i.e., if there is no incentive
problem, there would be no need for pension-funded self-insurance, so that no integration
might be necessary. If workers were risk-neutral, on the other hand, there would be no
need for tax-funded benefits (by Proposition 1 (v)), implying the need for full integration.
As workers become more risk-averse, however, the optimal tax-funded benefit would rise
and thus need for integration would be reduced.

II.2.2. Mandatory Savings

It is obvious that the greater the level of mandatory savings, the greater the desirability
of integration. More specifically, we can state the following Proposition, with its proof
being delegated to the Appendix.

Proposition 4-3
∂M
< 0,
∂α

∂M o
∂α

< 0,
a = const

∂H o
< 0,
∂α

∂δ o
>0.
∂α

24

25

As α approaches unity (all of first period savings are mandatory) then integration is

always desirable so long as in the second best optimum, there is some pension-funded
self-insurance, which there will be so long as individuals are not very risk averse and/or
there is no moral hazard problem associated with search. This suggests that an economy
with a strong public pension program should integrate unemployment insurance with the
pension program.
In improving welfare relative to the conventional unemployment insurance,there might
seem to be an alternative to integrating the public pension program with the
unemployment insurance scheme: reducing α to zero or eliminating the public pension
program. This is not the occasion to provide a full rationale for the existence of such
programs. Our analysis is simply predicated on the observation that governments have
chosen to provide such programs; if they do so, then our analysis has demonstrated that

the unemployment insurance scheme should be integrated with it. But our analysis goes
further: as we shall show in the next section, a program integrating unemployment
insurance and pensions increases welfare relative to a purely private (non-mandatory)
pension scheme, with imperfect capital markets, because it allows, in effect, for
borrowing against future income.
While we do not provide here an analysis of the role of mandatory pension
programs, we note that there are a number of factors which may make such schemes
more or less attractive. For instance, societies in which there is more concern that elderly
individuals do not fall below a certain threshold level—but in which at the same time
there are many individuals willing to take advantage of society’s compassion—will find
it desirable to have at least a minimal mandatory program.14 If the incidence of

25

26

unemployment is particularly high among those with low income—for whom the
mandatory savings constitute a large fraction of their total savings—then integration will
be desirable. In the United States, for instance, those at the bottom of the income
distribution have little savings to which they can get access, and at the same time face
higher risks of unemployment. Similarly, integration is likely to be of particular value in
developing countries, where monitoring informal work may be difficult (so designing
unemployment insurance schemes is more problematic) and where the poor both face
high risks of unemployment and have low savings.

II.3. Welfare Performance of the Integrated UI
II.3.1. Comparison Between the Conventional UI and Integrated UI

We have stressed that the welfare advantage of an integrated UI system over the usual
UI system arises from capital market imperfections. Without the government provision of
pension-funded borrowings, when (10) holds, an unemployed worker would not only
have to use savings made in period 1 in an effort to maintain the optimal consumption
level, but he would have to undertake some additional (precautionary) savings in period
1 to supplement the tax-funded benefit r for his consumption while unemployed.
To present a clear comparison between the conventional UI system and the integrated
system, we will assume that no mandatory savings is prescribed by the government, i.e.,
*

that α = 0. Suppose also that (10) holds, i.e., s1 < R * so that integration is necessary for
the second-best optimum. Then, we can show that the consumption level of an
unemployed worker under the conventional UI system in the periods prior to the
unemployment shock will be lower than the second-best level that can be achieved by the

26

27

integrated system. Let r̂ be the (tax-funded) UI benefit paid by the conventional UI
system, and let ŝ1 be the savings that an individual makes in period 1 under UI. Then we
can prove the following results.

Proposition 5
*

Suppose that α = 0 and that s1 < R * . Then,

(i)

r * < rˆ , R * > ŝ1 ,

(ii) r * + R * > rˆ + sˆ1 .

The proof of the Proposition 5 is delegated to the Appendix. The Proposition confirms
the earlier intuition: Under the conventional UI system, if a worker’s optimal retirement
savings s1* in period 1 is not enough to replace the optimal pension-funded benefit R*, he
would have to make additional savings in period 1 to ameliorate the consequences of the
unemployment shock. Since this precautionary savings involves some efficiency costs,
however, the savings made in period 1 would still be short of the optimal self-insurance
R* for the unemployed. Although the tax-funded benefit will increase to partially fill the
gap, because of the costs associated with the distortion, it would be insufficient to secure
the optimal consumption for the unemployed.

II.3.2. Welfare Performance of the Integrated UI:
A Limiting First-Best Argument

27

28

The welfare advantage of the integrated UI system stems from its ability to ease the risk
burden caused by the insufficiency of (optimal) UI benefits by spreading out income loss
over one’s lifetime. In this subsection we will explore how much the integrated UI
system can improve welfare. In particular, we will show that where the postunemployment working period (M) or the retirement duration (N) is very long, the
integrated UI system can approximate the first-best optimum.
The condition (6) for the threshold search cost can be rewritten as

*

*

e * = ( M + 1 + N ){U (1 − s n ) − U (1 − su )}
2

X*
≈ ( M + 1 + N ){U ' (1 − su ) X + U "
}
2
2
U"
*
= (1 − r * )U ' (1 − s u ) +
(M + 1 + N ) X *
2
*

*

(11)

The payoff for a worker then under the optimal system (r * , R * ) , denoted by V*, would be

e*

V * = U (1 − s1 − T * ) + (1 − q ) I (.) + q J (.) − q ∫ edF
*

0

*

*

= U (1 − s1 − T ) + ( M + 1 + N )U (1 − s n )
*

*

− q{(1 − r * )U ' (1 − s u ) +

(12)

e
2
U"
( M + 1 + N ) X * } − q ∫ edF
0
2
*

On the other hand, the first-best payoff for a worker, denoted by Vˆ as in (FB-3), will be

28

29

ˆ

e
Vˆ = ( M + 2 + N )U (Cˆ ) − ∫ edF
0

eˆ
qˆ
) − ∫ edF
0
M +2+ N
eˆ
(qˆ ) 2
≈ ( M + 2 + N )U (C ' ) − qˆU ' (C ' ) −
U "− ∫ edF
0
2( M + 2 + N )

= ( M + 2 + N )U (C '−

where C ' ≡

(13)

M +2
and Cˆ , qˆ are defined as in (FB-1) and (FB-2), respectively .
M +2+ N

Then, we can now establish the following proposition:

Proposition 6
As M → ∞ while
{ Cˆ =

M
= a , r * → 0,
N

R* →

a
, and the first-best state outcome,
1+ a

a
a
, eˆ = U ' (
) }, can be approximated by the integrated UI system (r * , R * ) .
1+ a
1+ a

The proof of Proposition 6 can be found in the Appendix. It highlights one of the
several important aspects of an integrated UI system. As the period of postunemployment or retirement gets longer compared to the unemployment period, the
integrated UI system makes arbitrarily small the amount of welfare distortion associated
with pension-funded borrowings. This occurs because under the system the adverse risk
effect becomes arbitrarily small, while maintaining the desired level of search incentives.
In the limiting case, the pension-funded self-insurance would have no risk effect with no
attenuation of incentives; there is a complete replacement of tax-funded benefit by

29

30

pension-funded self-insurance. Full integration thus allows the achievement of the firstbest optimum.
As previously noted, if a ≥ 1 , then the integrated UI system will be relevant in
approximating the first-best optimum. If a < 1 , however, the relevance of the integrated
UI would depend upon the mandatory savings rate α.

II. 4. Remarks
II.4.1. Multiple Unemployment Shocks and Participation Incentives

We have dealt with, up to now, a simple case where an individual experiences only one
unemployment shock in his career. In fact, however, people may experience several
unemployment shocks, which are to be covered by the integrated UI system. We will
briefly mention the effectiveness and benefit structure of the integrated UI system under
this circumstance.
Replacing tax-funded benefit by pension-funded borrowing would still alleviate
incentive cost associated with tax-funded benefit while reducing risk burden associated
with borrowing. The benefit of the integrated UI system would be especially marked
when the unemployment shocks occur earlier (rather than later) in one’s career. Only if
there is a risk of substantial correlation among the unemployment shocks, so there is a
risk of substantial lifetime losses as a result of these shocks, do the benefits of integration
become limited. Proposition 2 argued that if the unemployment shock was small relative
to lifetime income (and if the unemployment shock came early in life) then integration
was likely to be of particular value. Conversely, with multiple, highly correlated shocks,

30

31

there is a risk that, in effect, the unemployment shock is large relative to lifetime, so that
the gains from integration may be small.
The question then is whether or not total unemployment duration for an individual is
short compared to his lifetime, which can be explored empirically. Feldstein and Altman
(1998) demonstrated in a simulation study based on PSID that if an individual deposits a
modest amount out of his income to his savings account to finance his unemployment
benefit (that under the current UI system), the terminal balance of an individual savings
account is positive for most of individuals. Similar studies by Vodopivec and Yun (2002)
on developing countries such as Malaysia and Estonia reveal that for most individuals the
amount of hypothetical lifetime unemployment benefit for an individual is only a small
portion of lifetime savings . These results seem to support the relevance of an integrated
UI system.15
Intertemporal consumption smoothing implies that the optimal amount of borrowing
(from one’s pension) at a certain point in time is positively related to the level of his
pension expected at that time. Thus, the integrated UI system may involve a different
benefit mix for the unemployed depending upon their employment history. For an
unemployed worker who has a relatively long period of unemployment experience and
low level of expected pension savings in the future, for example, the amount of the
desired borrowing (out of the pension program) will be small. These arguments suggest
that the amount of borrowing offered to the unemployed by the integrated UI would
decrease in the total duration of previous unemployment.
Another issue related to the relevance of integrated UI system relates to individual
incentives to participate in the system, where such participation is voluntary. The

31

32

participation incentive problem would be particularly prevalent among the young workers
in the informal sector who are relatively more subject to unemployment risk than others
and who have yet to accumulate large pension savings.16 Once they have borrowed more
than the entire balance in their individual accounts, they may desire to quit the system
because of their repayment liabilities (if they are allowed to do so). This adverse
incentive problem will clearly limit the amount of borrowing that the integrated UI can
offer the unemployed in the informal sector. However, the concern about adverse effects
on participation would not change the desirability of integration;. but instead changes
the benefit mix offered by the system. In particular, it reinforces the argument given
above that the optimal amount of borrowing for the young may be negatively related to
the total duration of unemployment they have experienced. The detailed analysis
regarding this issue will be left for future research.

II.4.2. Myopic Behavior

The integrated UI system enables an individual to self-insure himself against
unemployment by using his pension and thereby maintaining his search incentive. The
favorable incentive effect of self-insurance is thus based upon the presumption that an
individual has the burden of repayment for the borrowing he makes during
unemployment. Some may argue, however, that an individual worker is so myopic in
reality that he may not act as if he has such a repayment burden, even when he does. In
particular, especially for the young unemployed workers, the repayment of borrowing
may be too remote to affect their search incentives; for such individuals, the impact on

32

33

search of benefits financed through self-insurance is no different from that from
government provided insurance.
For such individuals, search can only be affected by differences in income experienced
in the short run; that is, only limitations on the total benefit (r + R) will induce search.
In practice, even myopic individuals can respond to changes in consumption in the
near term induced by success or failure in obtaining a job. Earlier, we noted that if an
individual is not myopic, he will reduce his consumption (or increase his savings) after
being reemployed in order to spread out the burden of borrowing, as indicated by the
savings sn* and su* characterized in Proposition 1. This implies that a rational individual
in fact would start to pay for his borrowings just after a period of unemployment.
By the same account the government can mandate a myopic individual to save more for
his retirement after experiencing unemployment.17 Thus our model suggests that the
government can use this differential mandatory savings policy or experience-rated policy
to help induce search. With myopic behavior, the government might need to impose a
greater burden for repayment earlier in an individual’s life in order to induce the second
best level of search.
The welfare analysis of economies with myopic individuals is complicated by the
difficulty of ascertaining the appropriate valuation function. Traditional economic
analysis is concerned with individual’s expected utility over their entire life. But with
myopic individuals, there is no loss to the individual’s expected utility (viewed at the
beginning) to payments made out of retirement benefits to finance unemployment
benefits.

33

34

II.4.3. Distributional Issue

It has often been argued that the integrated UI system with individual accounts
aggravates inequality among individuals. High-wage workers, who tend to get
unemployed less frequently than low-wage workers, are able to accumulate more savings
than under the tax-funded UI system.18 In response to this argument, we can raise the
following two points.
First, there is another aspect of the integrated UI system that has a favorable
implication for distribution. A key point of the integrated UI system is that it allows a
worker to borrow against his future savings to finance a part of his unemployment benefit.
This would be particularly beneficial to the low-wage workers who do not have much
precautionary savings on their own against possible unemployment. Many studies have
shown that income distribution among individuals at a particular point in time is more
unequal than distribution of lifetime incomes.19 This implies that a young low-wage
worker, who has a higher probability of becoming unemployed, has a high chance of
moving up within the income strata of a society in the future. Thus it would be more
beneficial to a low-wage worker than to a high-wage worker to use his future income to
finance current consumption when he is unemployed.
Second, the government can provide an explicit subsidy to compensate for the implicit
subsidy under the unintegrated system. Appropriately designed explicit subsidies can
mimic the distributional impacts of the implicit subsidies, and would entail no
incremental adverse incentive effects.

34

35

III. Toward a Joint Integration of Multiple Social Insurance Programs with
Pension: An Integrated Lifetime Insurance

We have argued that allowing a worker to withdraw from his pension to finance his
consumption when faced with an unemployment shock can yield some welfare
improvement. The idea of integration can be applied to other forms of social insurance
than UI, such as health and disability insurance, that cover various shocks an individual
may face in his life. We can then think of a comprehensive integration system that jointly
integrates several social insurance programs with a pension program through an
individual account. We refer to this as an integrated lifetime insurance system. If an
individual experiences only a few shocks, so that the amount of corresponding income
loss is small compared to his retirement savings, the previous argument for integration
should still apply. Suppose, however, that an individual experiences so many of those
shocks that were there heavy reliance on borrowing against future pension savings, his
retirement account would be so drained that retirement consumption would fall below the
socially acceptable level; there would have to be a government bailout. Since early in his
life, the individual does not know what shocks await him in the future, there would seem
to be a risk associated with any integration. Given this possibility associated with multirisk case, we will in this subsection briefly examine the relevance of a joint integration of
social insurances with pension.
Before providing the more detailed arguments, we note that qualitatively there is an
obvious answer to these concerns. The degree of integration—of borrowing against
future pension income—can be state dependent. In effect, the amount of tax funded

35

36

insurance provided against risks later in an individual’s life depends on his cumulative
experience. An individual with no experience of unemployment early in life will selfinsure against small health and disability risks later in life.
In general, the integrated lifetime insurance system consists of several social insurance
programs integrated with the public pension program, providing an individual facing a
particular shock with tax-funded benefit and pension-funded borrowing. As in the
integrated UI, the benefit mix for a particular shock would depend not only upon riskaversion and incentive of an individual but also upon the parameters affecting the pattern
of consumption smoothing. An important factor determining the benefit mix (the
magnitude of the pension-funded borrowing) of an integrated social insurance is the
amount of pension savings that is expected to be available at the time of retirement. If an
individual under shock expects to have a relatively large amount of pension savings at the
time of retirement, he would be offered a benefit mix consisting of large borrowings and
a small tax-funded benefit.
There are a couple of reasons for the positive relationship between pension-funded
borrowing offered by an integrated social insurance for an individual and his pension
savings expected at the time of a shock. First, the greater amount of retirement savings
for an individual implies that more borrowing is necessary for intertemporal consumption
smoothing in the event of a shock. Second, lower expected pension savings for an
individual implies a higher probability that the government bails him out to sustain a
certain minimum level of retirement consumption. As the government bails out a low
pension savings of an individual, the pension-funded borrowing to finance consumption
in the face a shock would in fact have adverse disincentive effects. This is because the

36

37

individual would know that his borrowing to sustain his consumption might not be
repaid as he experiences more shocks in the future. In other words, the reason for
reliance on pension-funded borrowing is to eliminate the adverse incentive effects of
insurance; the possibility of a government bailout means that there is still some implicit
insurance, and therefore there is still some adverse incentive effect. Note, however, that
this adverse disincentive effect of borrowing is less severe than a tax-funded benefit to
the extent that there is some probability that the borrowing is repaid.
The expected pension savings available to an individual at the time of retirement
depends upon the amount of income loss caused by the shocks he experiences and the
amount of borrowing under the integrated social insurances. Hence, the desired amount
of pension-funded borrowing offered by an integrated social insurance for an individual
will also be determined by two factors.20 First, the amount of borrowing for an individual
under shock would be negatively related to the number and the sizes of other shocks that
he has experienced in the past and is expected to go through in the future. If he has
already experienced several shocks and borrowed substantially against his future pension,
for example, he may not have been able to accumulate much savings for his retirement.
This will lower his expected pension savings, implying that should he experience another
shock, he should not rely much on pension-funded borrowing. If shocks are highly
positively correlated with each other, the benefit mix of an integrated social insurance
involves less self-insurance and more tax-funded benefits. Second, the level of
integration for a particular social insurance program— the amount of pension-funded
borrowing offered by an integrated social insurance against that particular risk—is
constrained by the amount of pension-funded borrowing offered under other integrated

37

38

social insurance programs. This is because a given amount of pension savings has to be
shared for self-insurance against the shocks dealt with under several integrated social
insurance programs.
This suggests that as more social insurance programs are integrated with the pension
program, the level of integration for each will be lowered. This raises the question :
Would it be relevant to integrate all the social insurance programs with the public pension
scheme or to exclude some of them from the integration? The answer is that all the social
insurances should be jointly integrated unless one risk is perfectly, positively correlated
with another. With the risks being imperfectly correlated to each other, there is always
some positive probability that an individual suffering from a shock later in his life has not
experienced any other shock before, in which case some borrowing against his pension
may be offered to him, and this will attenuate the adverse incentive effect of the taxfunded insurance program...
The basic idea behind the integrated lifetime insurance system is thus that there should
be no constraint on the fund that confines its use to a specific set of shocks only. Such a
constraint unambiguously lowers welfare. The joint integration allows us to have a
common pool of pension savings that we can draw upon in funding benefit payments
under different shocks. For those who have not experienced any shock and thus have not
received benefits, for example, the system allows a relatively large amount of their
pension savings to be used for the upcoming shocks (and retirement). Also, more pension
savings can be used to finance the borrowing against an early shock if other subsequent
shocks are expected to occur with a low probability before retirement.
The extent of welfare improvement from an integrated lifetime insurance would

38

39

depend upon the correlation among the risks. If all the risks were perfectly, negatively
correlated to each other, the joint integration would be able to give us the maximum
welfare benefit by setting the highest possible level of integration for each social
insurance. As the risks are more positively correlated to each other, the level of
integration for each social insurance program that can be set by the joint integration
system would become lower. When all the risks are perfectly correlated with each other,
there is no advantage of sharing a common pool of savings, and hence no advantage in
integration. Unless the risks are perfectly positively correlated, however, the integrated
lifetime insurance system will always bring some welfare gain.21
These arguments for the integrated lifetime insurance system lend support to the
Provident Fund in Singapore, Malaysia, and recently in Hong Kong. The Provident Fund,
to which individuals contribute a portion of their wage earnings, covers several risks,
such as disability, medical, and retirement risks. It should be noted, however, that there is
an important difference between the Provident Fund and the integrated lifetime insurance
introduced here: while the integrated lifetime insurance allows an individual to withdraw
more than what he has contributed, the Provident Fund limits the amount of individual
withdrawal to what he has accumulated in his account. Thus the levels of insurance and
intertemporal consumption smoothing it can provide to individuals are considerably
limited, compared to the integrated lifetime insurance system that allows them to access
to future income.

IV. Conclusion

39

40

The failure of markets to provide adequate insurance against certain risks has long been
recognized. This, combined with the fact that social norms do not allow individuals in
their old age to suffer from insufficient income, even when their misfortune arises partly
because they have chosen to save insufficiently, provides a rationale for a public,
compulsory pension program. This paper has developed a further advantage to the public,
mandatory program; it allows for the collateralization of future wage income in a way
which is not easily possible otherwise, thus allowing individuals to in effect self insure
against a variety of risks.
This paper has addressed two related issues. The possibility of pension-funded selfinsurance does not eliminate the desirability of some tax-funded insurance, except under
extreme circumstances. We have identified the factors on which the optimal degree of
pension-funded self-insurance depends. Our analysis is consistent with the suggestion in
the introduction of a heavy reliance on pension-funded self-insurance.
When there are multiple risks (including the risk of multiple bouts of unemployment),
again some reliance on pension-funded self-insurance is in general desirable, unless the
risks are perfectly correlated. The integrated lifetime insurance system can always
generate a welfare gain from allowing a common pool of pension savings to be shared to
finance the benefits for those facing various shocks. The general principle naturally leads
to the suggestion of a fully integrated lifetime insurance system through a joint individual
account, an extension of the Provident Fund of Singapore and Malaysia,22 where major
risks including disability and health are integrated with the public pensions program..

40

41

REFERENCES

Arnott, Richard, B. Greenwald, and J. E. Stiglitz (1994), “Information and Economic Efficiency,”
Information Economics and Policy, 6(1), March, pp. 77-88.
Arnott, Richard, and J. E. Stiglitz (1990), “The Welfare Economics of Moral Hazard,” in Risk
Information and Insurance: Essays in the Memory of Karl H. Borch, H. Louberge (ed.),
Norwell: Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp. 91-122.
Asher, M.G. (1994), Social Security in Malaysia and Singapore – practices, issues and
directions, Institute of Strategic and International Studies, Malaysia, 1994.
Bjorklund, Anders (1993), “ A Comparison between Actual Distributions of Annual and
Lifetime Income: Sweden 1951-92,” Review of Income and Wealth, 39, pp. 377- 86.
Feldstein, Martin and Daniel Altman (1998), “Unemployment Insurance Savings
Account,” NBER Working Paper 6860.
Folster, S. and Trofimov, G. (1999), “Social Insurance based on Personal Savings
Account: A Theoretical Analysis. Working Paper, The Swedish Research Institute of
Trade, Stockholm.
Folster, S. (2000), “An Evaluation of Social Insurance Savings Account,” mimeo.
Greenwald, B, and J. E. Stiglitz (1986) “Externalities in Economies with Imperfect Information
and Incomplete Markets,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, pp. 229-264.
Orzag, M.J., Orzag, P.R., Snower, D.J., and Stiglitz, J.E. (1999), “ The Impact of
Individual Accounts: Piecemal vs. Comprehensive Approaches”, Presented At the Annual
Bank Conference on Development Economics, The World Bank.
OECD (1996), Employment Outlook, OECD, Paris.

41

42

Stiglitz, J.E. (1993) “Perspectives on the Role of Government Risk-Bearing within the Financial
Sector,” In Government Risk-bearing, M. Sniderman (ed.), Norwell, Mass.: Kluwer
Academic Publishers, pp. 109–30.
Vodopivec, M. and Yun, J. (2002), “Unemployment Benefits Through Unemployment
Savings Account,” mimeo, The World Bank.

APPENDIX
Proof of Lemma
*

*

*

Given the choices of s n , s u , R in (8) and (9), we have

*

( M + 1) s n + s1 M + 1 + s1
(1 − s n ) =
=
N
N + M +1
*

*

*

r + R * = 1 − su =

Ms n + s1 − R * M + r + s1
=
N
N + M +1

Thus, differentiating (6) with respect to r and s1, we get the desired results from (8) and (9).

Proofs of propositions:

<Proposition 1>
The optimal choices of sn*, su*, R* will imply by (8) and (9) that

*

*

1 − sn =

M + 1 + s1
N + M +1

(A1)

42

43

*

1 − su

*

M + r + s1
.
=
N + M +1

(A2)

Then, by assumption (A) and envelope theorem, the optimal savings s1* will satisfy

dV ∂V
=
ds1 ∂s1
*

*

= −U ' (1 − s1 − T ) + (1 − q )U ' (
=0

*

M + r * + s1
M + 1 + s1
) + qU '(
)
N + M +1
N + M +1

(A3)

The condition (A3) leads to the result (iv) by the assumption (A). Substituting the result (iv) into (A1) and
*

(A2), and using the assumption (A), we get the desired results (i) and (ii). Since r + R = 1 − s u by (9),
*

*

we have the desired result (iii) by (ii). Finally, the necessary condition for r1* will be

*

*

M + r * + s1
M + r * + s1
*
*
) − U ' (1 − s1 − T * ) − U ' (1 − s1 − T * ) Hr *U ' (
)]
(A4)
N + M +1
N + M +1
=0

q [U ' (

*

M + r * + s1
Dividing both sides of (A4) by U ' (
) and using (A3) and the assumption (A), we can
N + M +1
rewrite (A4) as the desired result (v).

<Proposition 2>
(i) From Proposition 1 (v) we can see that

∂r *
∂R *
∂B *
< 0 , implying that
> 0 and
< 0 , by
∂H
∂H
∂H

Proposition 1 (iii).

43

44

(ii) From Proposition 1 (v) we can see that

∂r *
∂R *
∂B *
> 0 , implying that
< 0 and
> 0 , by
∂δ
∂δ
∂δ

Proposition 1 (iii).

∂r *
(iii) From Proposition 1 (v) we can see that
∂M
Proposition 1 (iii) and (v). Solving for X

∂B *
desired result that
∂M

*

a = const

∂R *
< 0 , implying that
∂M

> 0 by
a = const

from Proposition 1 (v) and substituting it into (iii), we get the

> 0.
a = const

<Proposition 4-1>
As M → ∞, R* → 1 by Proposition 1 (iii) and (v). Also, s1* → 0 by Proposition 1 (iv) because r* → 0 as M
→ ∞. This implies that (10) holds for large M. When M = 0, on the other hand, R* < 0 and s1* > 0, implying
that (10) does not hold when M = 0. These arguments establish the desired result.

<Proposition 4-2>
∂R *
(i)
∂M

*

a = const

∂s
> 0 by Proposition 3 (iii). Also, 1
∂M

a =const

∂T *
= 0 , because
∂M

≈ 0 by the
a =const

∂{R * − (1 − α ) s1 }
assumption (A). Thus,
> 0.
∂M
a =const
*

As M → ∞ with a being kept constant, R* →

a
1
while s1* →
by Proposition 1 (iii) and (iv)
1+ a
1+ a

because r* → 0 by Proposition 1 (v). Since a > 1 , (10) will hold as M → ∞. When M = 0, (10) will not
hold because R* < 0 and s1* > 0.

(ii) and (iii)

44

45

*

*

∂s
∂s
∂r *
∂R *
∂T *
> 0 (or
< 0 ) by Proposition 3 (i) (or (ii)). Since 1 = 0 (or 1 = 0 ) because
≈0
∂H
∂δ
∂H
∂δ
∂H
∂{R * − (1 − α ) s1 }
∂{R * − (1 − α ) s1 }
∂T *
≈ 0 ) by the assumption (A). Thus,
> 0 (or
< 0 ).
∂δ
∂H
∂δ
*

(or

*

1
N
1 + a while s * →
As H → ∞ (or as δ → 0), R* →
by Proposition 1 (iii) and (iv)
1
N + M +1
N +M +2
M+

because r* → 0 by Proposition 1 (v). Thus (10) will hold as H → ∞ (or as δ → 0). Similarly, as H → 0 (or
as δ → ∞), R* → 0 while s1* →

N
, implying that (10) will not hold.
N +M +2

<Proposition 4-3>

∂{R * − (1 − α ) s1 }
> 0 , implying the desired results.
∂α
*

Since α does not change R* or s1*,

<Proposition 5>
Let s1(r) and R(r) satisfy

*

*

− U ' (1 − s1 (r ) − t ) + (1 − q )U ' (( M + 1) s n + s1 ) + q U ' (1 − su ) = 0,
r + R(r ) = 1 − su

*

for any given r*. Also, let s1′(r) be the precautionary savings of a worker who is not offered any pensionfunded borrowing by the government. Then, it satisfies

*

Ω( s1 ' ) ≡ −U ' (1 − s1 ' (r ) − t ) + (1 − q )U ' (( M + 1) s n + s1 ' ) + q U ' (r + s1 ' ) = 0.

45

46
Note that Ω( R ( r )) < 0 , because R (r ) > s1 ( r ) and by the above condition for s1(r). Thus,

s1 ' (r ) < R(r ) , implying the desired result (i). The optimal tax-funded benefit r′ for a given precautionary
savings s1′ should satisfy

q [U ' (r '+ s1 ' ) − U ' (1 − s1 '−T ' ) − U ' (1 − s1 '−T ' ) Hr1U ' (r + s1 ' )] = 0 .

Then, − 1 <

∂r '
< 0 , implying the desired result (ii).
∂s1 '

<Proposition 6>
X → 0 as M → 0 with a being kept constant, implying that r → 0 by Proposition 1 (v), and that
*

R* →

a
1
*
*
, s n , su →
by Proposition 1 (i), (ii), (iii). Since
1+ a
1+ a

e * = {I (.) − J (.)} → U ' (

1
) = eˆ as M → ∞ with a being kept constant by (11), q → qˆ . Then,
1+ a

by (12) and (13), V → Vˆ as M → ∞.
*

46

47

FOOTNOTES
*

Department of Economics, Columbia University . Email: jes322@columbia.edu.

**

Department of Economics, Ewha University, Seoul, Korea. Email: jyyun@ewha.ac.kr.
Financial support of the World Bank is gratefully acknowledged.

1

See Orzag, Orzag, Snower and Stiglitz (1999) for a more general discussion. Folster and Trofimov (1999)

also presented a theoretical analysis of individual savings account for social insurance.
2

However, some detailed redistribution issues associated with the integration will be discussed later in this
paper.

3

Since in our model, there are no adverse selection problems.

4

There are some reasons, including a moral hazard problem, why the government has to mandate
individuals to make savings for pension. One of the reasons for a mandatory pension is that an individual

may not save for retirement because they may expect the government to bail him out when he does not
have savings at the time of retirement.
5

Alternatively, we can model an individual as paying the UI tax whenever he is employed rather than in

period 1 only. The difference in modeling would not affect the main results of this paper, however, so long
as an individual can maintain his optimal consumption in each period for a given state by adjusting his
savings or borrowings appropriately.
6

This is also exactly the way an individual determines his savings s1, as will be shown later. In the more

general case, savings in the first period does affect search intensity. Assume, for instance, that the
individual lives only 6 periods, three work periods, three retirement periods, and faces unemployment in
the second period. If, for some reason, he had no savings from the first period, failing to search in the
second would reduce consumption per period in retirement by 50%. On the other hand, if he had been very
risk averse, had anticipated that he might be unemployed, and that he might be unlucky and face a high
search costs, and so had set aside 60% of his income (so that he has complete smoothing in the worse case
scenario), then the benefit to searching—the cost of not searching—is much less, and so the threshold e
above which the individual does not search is much lower.

47

48

7

H and δ are evaluated at the optimum. Assuming that the risk aversion

δ

and search elasticity H are

assumed to be constant for all consumption levels and e' , respectively, we can see that the second-order
condition for r* is satisfied.
8

Theoretically R* could be negative as r* becomes greater than one’s optimal consumption level in period 2,

in which case a part of the tax-funded benefit has to be left for retirement consumption. Although this can
be perceived as another type of integration between UI and pension, we will disregard this possibility in
this paper.
9

Remember that the wage has been normalized at unity.

10

Note that all the individuals are of the same risk type in this model, so that insurance firms are not

subject to adverse selection problems caused by privately-informed individual heterogeneity. Once we
allow for individual heterogeneity, then the second-best UI benefit r* for all types of individuals would not
be supported as a competitive equilibrium.
11

There are, of course, other reasons that government intervention might be desirable. We focus here on

problems of moral hazard. All insurance markets also face problems of adverse selection. In general, such
markets are not constrained Pareto efficient. See Greenwald and Stiglitz [1986] and Arnott, Greenwald,
and Stiglitz [1994]
12

This is because the second best optimum cannot be sustained without such integration.

13

From Proposition 1 (i), the level of savings prior to the unemployment, s1 is lowered.

14

For a more extensive discussion of the role of government in risk bearing, see Stiglitz [1992]. The fact

that mandatory pension savings cannot be withdrawn until retirement means that there is a considerable
welfare burden placed upon individuals who may experience several shocks other than unemployment
during their lifetime. These concerns may have placed some limits on the extent of mandatory savings.
Integration may, accordingly, lead to still further welfare benefits (beyond those formally modeled in this
paper: integration allows an increase in the level of mandatory savings, and thus an improvement in the
quality of the safety net provided to the elderly.
15

See also Folster (2000) for a simulation study on this issue based on Swedish data.

16

A worker in the informal sector can effectively drop out of participation by not reporting income. This

is assumed not to be possible in the formal sector. The concern is that the existence of large liabilities may

48

49
induce individuals to move from the formal to the informal sector; there may be large costs associated with
this distortion.
17

In fact, our model already incorporates this type of mandatory savings: an individual is mandated to save

the optimal level su* after experiencing unemployment, which is greater than the optimal savings level sn*
for those with no unemployment experience in period 2.
18

In fact, in experience rated systems described before, the extent of redistribution through the UI system is

limited.
19

See Bjorklund (1993) and OECD (1996).

20

This implies that the benefit mix offered by an integrated social insurance for an individual would also

depend upon individual employment history as well as the nature of a shock he suffers from.
21

There are some studies which indirectly suggest that shocks are not highly correlated for an individual

during his lifetime: Bjorklund (1993) showed based upon Swedish data that lifetime income is more
equally distributed among individuals than annual income. OECD (1996) also reported that the upward
income mobility for low income individuals is higher than for high income individuals.
22

For detailed information on the system, see Asher (1994).

49

q

U( w(1 − T − s1 ) )

•

(1-q)

Period 2
(Emp./Unemp.)

Periods (3-(M+2))
(Employment)

(No Search)

Figure 0

0 ------------------ U( w(r + R) ) ------------ U( w(1 − su ) ) --------------- U{ w

(Search)

-e ------------------ U( w(1 − s n ) ) ------------ U( w(1 − s n ) ) --------------- U{ w

s u M + s1 − R
}
N

s n ( M + 1) + s1
}
N

s n ( M + 1) + s1
}
N

Periods ((M+2)-(M+2+N))
(Retirement)

0 -------------------- U( w(1 − s n ) ) ----------- U( w(1 − s n ) ) --------------- U{ w

Period 1
Unemp. Shock
(Employment) (Search Effort)

Integrated Unemployment Insurance

See Orzag, Orzag, Snower and Stiglitz (1999) for a more general discussion. Folster and Trofimov (1999) also presented a theoretical analysis of individual

Since in our model, there are no adverse selection problems.

There are some reasons, including a moral hazard problem, why the government has to mandate individuals to make savings for pension. One of the reasons for

3

4

Alternatively, we can model an individual as paying the UI tax whenever he is employed rather than in period 1 only. The difference in modeling would not

savings or borrowings appropriately.

affect the main results of this paper, however, so long as an individual can maintain his optimal consumption in each period for a given state by adjusting his

5

the time of retirement.

1

a mandatory pension is that an individual may not save for retirement because they may expect the government to bail him out when he does not have savings at

However, some detailed redistribution issues associated with the integration will be discussed later in this paper.

2

savings account for social insurance.

1

Financial support of the World Bank is gratefully acknowledged.

Department of Economics, Ewha University, Seoul, Korea. Email: jyyun@ewha.ac.kr.

Department of Economics, Columbia University . Email: jes322@columbia.edu.

**

*

Footnotes

1

This is also exactly the way an individual determines his savings s1, as will be shown later. In the more general case, savings in the first period does affect

H and δ are evaluated at the optimum. Assuming that the risk aversion

δ

9

Remember that the wage has been normalized at unity.

this paper.

2

Theoretically R* could be negative as r* becomes greater than one’s optimal consumption level in period 2, in which case a part of the tax-funded benefit has to

and search elasticity H are assumed to be constant for all consumption levels and e' ,

be left for retirement consumption. Although this can be perceived as another type of integration between UI and pension, we will disregard this possibility in

8

respectively, we can see that the second-order condition for r* is satisfied.

7

is much less, and so the threshold e above which the individual does not search is much lower.

and so had set aside 60% of his income (so that he has complete smoothing in the worse case scenario), then the benefit to searching—the cost of not searching—

50%. On the other hand, if he had been very risk averse, had anticipated that he might be unemployed, and that he might be unlucky and face a high search costs,

second period. If, for some reason, he had no savings from the first period, failing to search in the second would reduce consumption per period in retirement by

search intensity. Assume, for instance, that the individual lives only 6 periods, three work periods, three retirement periods, and faces unemployment in the

6

2

Note that all the individuals are of the same risk type in this model, so that insurance firms are not subject to adverse selection problems caused by privately-

There are, of course, other reasons that government intervention might be desirable. We focus here on problems of moral hazard. All insurance markets also

From Proposition 1 (i), the level of savings prior to the unemployment, s1 is lowered.

For a more extensive discussion of the role of government in risk bearing, see Stiglitz [1992]. The fact that mandatory pension savings cannot be withdrawn

13

14

15

See also Folster (2000) for a simulation study on this issue based on Swedish data.

of the safety net provided to the elderly.

benefits (beyond those formally modeled in this paper: integration allows an increase in the level of mandatory savings, and thus an improvement in the quality

their lifetime. These concerns may have placed some limits on the extent of mandatory savings. Integration may, accordingly, lead to still further welfare

until retirement means that there is a considerable welfare burden placed upon individuals who may experience several shocks other than unemployment during

This is because the second best optimum cannot be sustained without such integration.

12

Stiglitz [1994]

3

face problems of adverse selection. In general, such markets are not constrained Pareto efficient. See Greenwald and Stiglitz [1986] and Arnott, Greenwald, and

11

supported as a competitive equilibrium.

informed individual heterogeneity. Once we allow for individual heterogeneity, then the second-best UI benefit r* for all types of individuals would not be

10

3

In fact, our model already incorporates this type of mandatory savings: an individual is mandated to save the optimal level su* after experiencing

See Bjorklund (1993) and OECD (1996).

This implies that the benefit mix offered by an integrated social insurance for an individual would also depend upon individual employment history as well as

19

20

There are some studies which indirectly suggest that shocks are not highly correlated for an individual during his lifetime: Bjorklund (1993) showed based

mobility for low income individuals is higher than for high income individuals.

upon Swedish data that lifetime income is more equally distributed among individuals than annual income. OECD (1996) also reported that the upward income

21

the nature of a shock he suffers from.

In fact, in experience rated systems described before, the extent of redistribution through the UI system is limited.

18

unemployment, which is greater than the optimal savings level sn* for those with no unemployment experience in period 2.

17

this distortion.

4

A worker in the informal sector can effectively drop out of participation by not reporting income. This is assumed not to be possible in the formal sector. The

concern is that the existence of large liabilities may induce individuals to move from the formal to the informal sector; there may be large costs associated with

16

4

22

For detailed information on the system, see Asher (1994).

5

5

