                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       DO TRUST AND TRUSTWORTHINESS PAY OFF?


                                               Joel Slemrod
                                              Peter Katuscak


                                          Working Paper 9200
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9200


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




We would like to thank members of the University of Michigan Public Finance workshop, and particularly
John Bound and Matthew Shapiro, for helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2002 by Joel Slemrod and Peter Katuscak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Do Trust and Trustworthiness Pay Off?
Joel Slemrod and Peter Katuscak
NBER Working Paper No. 9200
September 2002
JEL No. J30, H40


                                        ABSTRACT

       Are individuals who trust others better off than those who do not? Do
trustworthy people prosper more than untrustworthy ones? We first pose these
questions in a search model where individuals face repeated choices between
trusting (initiating an investment transaction) and not trusting, and between being
trustworthy (not stealing the investment) and cheating. We then derive predictions
for the relationship between observed individual behavior, aggregate attitudes, and
individual prosperity. Finally, we evaluate these predictions empirically using
household-level data for eighteen (mostly developed) countries from the World
Values Survey. We find that, on average, a trusting attitude has a positive impact
on income, while trustworthiness has a negative impact on income. In addition, we
find evidence of complementarity between these two attitudes and the aggregate
levels of the complementary attitudes. Most strikingly, the payoff to being
trustworthy depends positively on the aggregate amount of trust in a given country.


Joel Slemrod
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
and NBER
E-mail: jslemrod@umich.edu

Peter Katuscak
Department of Economics
University of Michigan
E-mail: pkatus@umich.edu
1     Introduction

    The notions of trust and trustworthiness have received much recent attention

in social science, stimulated in part by the work of Putnam (1993) and Fukuyama

(1995), but with antecedents in, for example, Coleman (1990). Economists have for

a long time recognized the critical role played by trust in economic performance.

Arrow (1972), for example, remarks: “Virtually every commercial transaction has

within itself an element of trust, certainly any transaction conducted over a period

of time. It can plausibly be argued that much of the economic backwardness in the

world can be explained by the lack of mutual confidence.” In high-trust societies,

individuals need to spend less resources to protect themselves from being exploited

in economic transactions. Knack and Keefer (1997) argue that trusting societies

tend to have stronger incentives to innovate and to accumulate both physical and

human capital and, as a result, grow faster. Zak and Knack (2000) corroborate

the positive effect of aggregate trust on growth. Alesina and La Ferrara (2000)

investigate the individual-level determinants of trust within the United States and

find that income and education are strongly positively correlated with trust.

    The flip side of trust is trustworthiness. Glaeser et al (2000) distinguish between

trusting behavior, which they define as “the commitment of resources to an activity

where the outcome depends upon the cooperative behavior of others,” and trustwor-

thy behavior, which “increases the returns to people who trust you.” The idea of

reputation–the level of trust one is perceived to merit–has also been examined. As

Axelrod (1986) puts it, an individual’s reputation derives from adherence to or vio-



                                           1
lation of a norm that others view as a signal about the individual’s future behavior

in a wide variety of situations.

       In this paper, we begin the task of linking the microeconomic theory to empir-

ical evidence based on micro data. We start by developing an equilibrium search

model in which individuals face repeated choices between trusting and not trusting,

and between being trustworthy and cheating. Each person possesses individual-

specific intrinsic predispositions to trust and trustworthiness. In addition to these

intrinsic preferences, the person is strategic: he considers how his actions may af-

fect his chance of developing and sustaining a current match and forming beneficial

matches in the future. In equilibrium, his strategic actions are guided by the equi-

librium distribution of his opponents’ actions, i.e., by the equilibrium probability

that a randomly chosen individual will trust, and will act in a trustworthy man-

ner. Given the individual heterogeneity in the intrinsic predispositions to trust and

trustworthiness, equilibrium entails both trusting and mistrusting individuals, and

both trustworthy and cheating individuals.

       There have been several recent theoretical contributions addressing the issue of

trust. Tirole (1996) develops a dynamic model where there may exist a certain level

of trust between individuals due to the considerations of individual and collective

reputation.1 Although there is some heterogeneity in the tendency towards trust-

worthy behavior in his model, he does not consider heterogeneity in the tendency

towards trusting behavior. On the other hand, Chen (2000) develops a model in

   1
    Dixit (2001) studies the role of individual reputation and informational intermediaries in a
similar framework.




                                               2
which individuals differ in their intrinsic preferences for being honest, or trustwor-

thy, as captured by the notion of a population distribution of trustworthiness. But

his focus is on the role of trust in contracting, and he takes a reduced-form approach

where dynamic effects are not explicitly considered.

   The present model overcomes these limitations by integrating individual het-

erogeneity in the behavioral predisposition toward both trusting and trustworthy

behavior with the dynamic considerations. In contrast to Tirole (1996), the in-

troduction of heterogeneity in the behavioral predisposition for both trusting and

trustworthy behavior leads to the joint determination of the behavioral predispo-

sition cutoffs separating trusting and trustworthy behavior in equilibrium. One

implication of this enrichment of the model is that a change in the distribution of

either of the two predispositions affects the extent of both trusting and trustworthy

behavior. In addition, the resulting two-sided behavioral heterogeneity allows us to

compare the equilibrium monetary payoffs associated with acting in a trusting versus

untrusting manner as well as acting in a trustworthy manner versus untrustworthy

manner, which is the central question addressed in this paper.

   Based on our theoretical framework, we estimate a model of the private return to

trust and trustworthiness, using data from eighteen countries from the 1990 World

Values Survey. We find evidence that the return to trustworthiness is negative on

average and depends (in a statistically significant way) on the average amount of

trust in the society. In particular, this return is negative in low-trust countries and

positive in high-trust countries. We also find that the return to trust is positive on

average and some of our results suggest that it is related in a positive way to the


                                          3
average amount of trustworthiness in the society. However, this relationship appears

to be statistically less robust than the previous one, although the sign pattern is

consistent throughout various specifications. Strikingly, these results suggest the

possibility that a country might be in an equilibrium trap where it is not in most

people’s interest to invest in either trust or trustworthiness.

    The paper is structured in the following way: Section 2 develops the theoretical

model. Section 3 discusses comparative statics results and empirical predictions

of the model. Section 4 reviews previous empirical work. Section 5 describes the

dataset we use. Section 6 contains our empirical results. Section 7 concludes.

Technical proofs can be found in the Appendix.




2     Model

2.1    Setup


    There is a continuum of individuals with a total measure normalized to 1. The

output in the economy is created from business transactions. Each transaction has

two parties to it: an initiator and a respondent. Each individual simultaneously

participates in both roles. An initiator initiates a transaction by ’investing’ 1 unit

of a generic good, and a respondent, who if responding honestly, contributes to a

successful completion of the transaction. In such case the total payoff from the

transaction is 2a + 1 and the net output of 2a is shared equally by the two parties,

giving a net payoff a to each party. However, the respondent may also respond



                                           4
dishonestly by ’stealing’ the investment. In such case the net payoff to the initiator

is −1 and the net payoff to the respondent is 1 − d, where d measures inherent

disutility from being dishonest, or intrinsic honesty. The value of d is individual-

specific with support [d, d] and with a continuous distribution function F that is

strictly increasing on [d, d]. To make the dishonest response potentially attractive

to at least some respondents, we assume that a < 1 − d. In light of this possibility,

the initiator may decide not to initiate a transaction in the first place. In such case

the net payoff to the initiator is −m and the net payoff to the respondent is 0, where

m is an individual-specific inherent propensity to trust, captured by the disutility

m of mistrust. The value of m has support [m, m] and a continuous distribution

function G that is strictly increasing on [m, m].23 If a transaction is not initiated or

if an initiated transaction is met with a dishonest response, there is no net output

produced (the theft is just a transfer). The extensive form of the transaction game

is pictured in Figure 1.

       This setup tries to capture the distinction between trust and trustworthiness and

the impact both of these have on individual prosperity. Successful completion of a

transaction requires both a trusting approach of the initiator and a trustworthy ap-

proach of the respondent.4 In case either of them is missing, the transaction fails and

no net output is produced (although some existing wealth might be redistributed).

       Each period a subgroup of initiators interacts with a subgroup of respondents by

   2
     The assumptions of F and G being strictly increasing on the two supports are only made for
presentational convenience. None of the results is affected by dropping this assumption.
   3
     Note that we do not assume that d and m are distributed independently across individuals.
Indeed, they may be correlated. Whether they are correlated or not, however, is immaterial to the
subsequent analysis since each individual acts independently in his initiator and respondent roles.
   4
     Other interpretations of the transaction are possible, such as customer-firm.


                                                5
                                                       




                                   Initiate the                       Do Not Initiate
                                   Transaction                        the Transaction



                            

                                                                          



                    Honest                        Dishonest
                    Response                      Response




                                            




                  FIGURE 1: Extensive form of the transaction game


participating in an initiator-respondent match. Even though each individual has a

dual role in each period, acting both as an initiator in one match and a respondent

in another, it is helpful to separate these two roles and to think of the initiators and

the respondents as two separate groups of the same size.5 At the beginning of each

period there are equally sized groups of matched initiators and matched respondents

and equally sized groups of unmatched initiators and unmatched respondents. Those

matched participate in their ”surviving” matches from the previous period. Each

unmatched initiator gets matched with probability β ∈ (0, 1) to some unmatched

respondent and vice versa. Then, by the law of large numbers, β is also the fraction

of both the searching initiators and the searching respondents who get matched

in a new match within a period. If an initiator or a respondent is unmatched,

   5
    This simplification is valid since the two matches of an individual (one in the initiator role and
one in the respondent role) are generically different (their coincidence is a zero probability event).



                                                   6
his or her payoff for the current period is 0. If an initiator and a respondent are

matched (in a new or a surviving match), they play the transaction game outlined

above and collect their payoffs. If the transaction is completed successfully (i.e.

it is initiated and responded to honestly), the match survives to the next period

with probability α ∈ (0, 1). Otherwise it is dissolved and both participants will

enter the next period as unmatched. The latter is also the case if the transaction

is completed successfully but, conditional on that, the match does not survive until

the next period for exogenous reasons, which happens with probability 1 − α. In

turn, α is then also the fraction of matches with successfully completed transactions

that actually survive to the next period. Intuitively, even if the match is ”working”,

exogenous events such as population mobility or business turnover may cause the

match to break up. All individuals are risk neutral and have a discount factor

δ ∈ (0, 1). We assume that α > β, i.e., that a working match is more likely to

survive than a search is to result in a new match.

   To make the analysis tractable, we restrict our attention to steady states and

make the following additional assumptions.

   Assumption 1: All the disclosed or inferred information about a partner in a

transaction is specific to and lasts only during a given repeated match (i.e., there is

no social learning and no memory).

   Assumption 2: Both the initiators and the respondents condition their strate-

gies only on what happened within the current period, on whether the present match

is new or surviving and on the aggregate steady state probability of an initiator ini-




                                          7
tiating (p) and a respondent responding honestly (q) in a new match.6

       Assumption 3: If an initiator or a respondent is indifferent between two actions,

she or he chooses to initiate or respond honestly, respectively.

       In the next subsection, p and q are taken as given and the implied behavior

of individual initiators and respondents is derived. The following subsection then

aggregates these individual decisions to determine p and q endogenously.



2.2       Partial Equilibrium

       At the beginning of a period, after both the initiators and the respondents have

realized whether they are matched or not and whether the match is new or surviving,

an initiator (of type) m may find herself in the following states with their associated

discounted payoff values (or value functions):

       I1: Not matched: I1 (m, q)

       I2: Matched in a new match: I2 (m, q)

       I3: Matched in a surviving match: I3 (m, q)

       The value of q enters into the decisionmaking and value functions of initiators

   6
     This Markovian strategy assumption is made in order to simplify the analysis. Given that a
necessary condition for a match survival is a successful completion of the transaction in each period
while the match lasts, a general strategy space would allow strategies to condition on the age of the
match, since that is the only variable that may differ from one surviving match to another. Indeed,
one could envision an equilibrium in which, conditional on match survival, initiators of type m
initiate until period x(m) and respondents of type d respond honestly until period y(d), where x(·)
and y(·) are (weakly) increasing and potentially infinitely valued. In such an equilibrium, given
the age of a particular match, optimal initiator and respondent decisions would be determined by
the intrinsic behavioral propensities and the updated distributions of match partner types (where
the support of the latter only includes opponent types whose strategies prescribe cooperation until
at least the realized age of the match). Intuitively, we focus on equilibria where x(·) and y(·)
only assume values of zero or infinity. Although the general class of strategies and equilibria
may be interesting from a purely theoretical standpoint, we believe that the subclass we focus on
sufficiently captures the essentials of trust and trustworthiness in an equilibrium setting.




                                                 8
because it captures how likely one is to encounter an honest response in a new

match.7

       Based on the realization of whether he is matched or not, whether the match

is new or surviving and whether the initiator has initiated a transaction or not, a

respondent (of type) d may find himself in the following states with their associated

discounted payoff values (or value functions):

       R1: Not matched: R1 (d, p)

       R2: Matched in a new match, but without an initiated transaction: R2 (d, p)

       R3: Matched in a new match with an initiated transaction: R3 (d, p)

       R4: Matched in a surviving match, but without an initiated transaction: R4 (d, p)

       R5: Matched in a surviving match with an initiated transaction: R5 (d, p)

       The value of p enters into the decisionmaking and value functions of initiators

because it captures how likely one is to encounter a trusting initiator in a new

match.8

       First, consider the decisionmaking of a respondent d given p (for simplicity of

notation, we omit p from the list of arguments in the value functions). In states

R1, R2 or R4, there is no current decision to be taken and the respondent simply

collects a payoff 0 in the current period. Then he goes searching at the beginning

of the next period, since any existing match is dissolved at the end of the current

   7
      The value of p does not enter into the initiators’ decisionmaking because it only matters to
them to the extent it affects q. Hence q is a sufficient statistic from the point of view of the
initiators.
    8
      The value of q does not enter into the respondents’ decisionmaking because it only matters
to them to the extent it affects p. Hence p is a sufficient statistic from the point of view of the
respondents.




                                                9
period. This implies that

                                 R1 (d) = R2 (d) = R4 (d)                         (1)


In addition to getting the payoff 0 in the current period, in the next period the

respondent gets matched in a new match with probability β and, conditional on

the latter, he will face an initiated transaction with probability p. Therefore the

Bellman equation for R1 (d) is



              R1 (d) = 0 + δ [(1 − β)R1 (d) + β(1 − p)R2 (d) + βpR3 (d)]          (2)



Using (1), this gives


                                                     βδp
                    R1 (d) = R2 (d) = R4 (d) =               R3 (d)               (3)
                                                 1 − δ + βδp


   If in state R3 or R5, the respondent must decide whether to respond to the

initiated transaction honestly or dishonestly. If responding dishonestly, he collects

1 − d in the current period and goes searching at the beginning of the next period.

This is quantitatively equivalent to collecting 1 − d currently and being in state R1

currently. If responding honestly, with probability 1 − α the respondent collects a

in the current period and the match dissolves, in which case the respondent goes

searching at the beginning of the next period. This is quantitatively equivalent

to collecting a currently and being in state R1 currently. With probability α the

respondent collects a in the current period and the match survives.

   To be able to judge the value conditional on the survival of the match, the


                                           10
respondent has to form a belief about the initiator initiating in the next period in

such scenario. This poses no complication if the current state is R5 because of the

conditioning states used by the initiator in formulating her strategies (Assumption

2). In particular, the initiator will initiate again in the next period because she has

done so in the current period. In other words, the fact that the initiator initiated in

the current period perfectly reveals what action her strategy prescribes for surviving

matches. Hence, in state R5 and conditional on the survival of the match, the

respondent will again find himself in state R5 in the next period. Therefore the

Bellman equation for R5 (d) is



         R5 (d) = max {1 − d + R1 (d); (1 − α) [a + R1 (d)] + α [a + δR5 (d)]}     (4)



The first term in the maximand corresponds to the value of responding dishonestly

while the second term corresponds to the value of responding honestly.

   Analyzing (4) gives the following result:


Lemma 1 All the respondents (irrespective of d) respond honestly in state R5.


   Intuitively, if in state R5, the respondent must have chosen to respond honestly in

the previous period (in state R3) even in the presence of uncertainty about whether

the initiator would or would not initiate in the current period. It then follows that

the respondent will also opt to respond honestly once it is certain that the initiator

will initiate in the next period.




                                          11
   This lemma and (4) then imply that



                   R5 (d) = (1 − α) [a + R1 (d)] + α [a + δR5 (d)]



which gives, by using (3),


                                a        (1 − α)βδp
                  R5 (d) =         +                      R3 (d)                 (5)
                             1 − αδ (1 − αδ)(1 − δ + βδp)


   If in state R3, however, it is not obvious from the fact that the initiator has

initiated in the current period that she will do so also in the next period (if the

match survives until then) because the initiator’s strategy may prescribe different

actions for states I2 and I3. Hence let k ∈ [0, 1] be the belief of the respondent

that the initiator will initiate in the next period if the match survives till then.

Because k is defined conditionally on the initiator initiating and the respondent

responding honestly in the current period, its value is, on the same conditioning

set, independent of d and m that characterize the two participants to the current

match. This is because, in the next period, the initiator will only observe that the

match has survived, if it does, not a particular value of d. Similarly, when forming

his belief, the respondent only observes that the transaction has been initiated in

the current period, not a particular value of m. If the initiator does not initiate,

the respondent will get to state R4. In the opposite case the respondent will get to




                                         12
state R5. Then, in analogy with (4),



R3 (d) = max {1 − d + R1 (d); (1 − α) [a + R1 (d)] + α [a + (1 − k)δR4 (d) + kδR5 (d)]}

                                                                                   (6)

Again, the first term in the maximand corresponds to the value of responding dis-

honestly while the second term corresponds to the value of responding honestly.

   Before continuing the analysis of respondents’ actions in state R3, it is useful to

consider the decisionmaking of the initiators. Hence consider the decisionmaking an

initiator m given q (for simplicity of notation, omit q from the list of arguments in

the value functions). If in state I1, there is no current decision to be taken and the

initiator simply collects a payoff 0 in the current period. In the next period she gets

matched in a new match, hence getting into state I2, with probability β and does

not get matched, hence getting into state I1, with probability 1 − β. Therefore the

Bellman equation for I1 (m) is



                       I1 (m) = 0 + δ [(1 − β)I1 (m) + βI2 (m)]                    (7)



giving
                                             βδ
                              I1 (m) =              I2 (m)                         (8)
                                         1 − δ + βδ

   If in states I2 or I3, the initiator must decide whether to initiate a transaction

or not. If not initiating, she collects −m in the current period and goes searching at

the beginning of the next period. This is quantitatively equivalent to collecting −m

currently and being in state 1 currently. If in state I3 and initiating, it follows by


                                           13
Lemma 1 that the respondent will respond honestly. Then with probability 1−α the

initiator collects a in the current period and the match dissolves, in which case the

initiator goes searching at the beginning of the next period. This is quantitatively

equivalent to collecting a currently and being in state I1 currently. With probability

α the initiator collects a in the current period and the match survives, in which case

the respondent will be in state I3 in the next period. Therefore the Bellman equation

for I3 (m) is



          I3 (m) = max {−m + I1 (m); (1 − α) [a + I1 (m)] + α [a + δI3 (m)]}         (9)



The first term in the maximand corresponds to the value of not initiating while the

second term corresponds to the value of initiating.

   If in state I2 and initiating, however, it is not certain that the respondent will re-

spond honestly. In particular, since the matching process is random, the probability

of the respondent responding honestly is q. If the respondent responds dishonestly,

the initiator will collect −1 in the current period and will go searching at the begin-

ning of the next period. This is quantitatively equivalent to collecting −1 currently

and being in state I1 currently. If the respondent responds honestly, reasoning

analogous to state I3 applies. Therefore



                  I2 (m) = max {−m + I1 (m); (1 − q) [−1 + I1 (m)]                  (10)

                        +q ((1 − α) [a + I1 (m)] + α [a + δI3 (m)])}




                                           14
Again, the first term in the maximand corresponds to the value of not initiating,

while the second term corresponds to the value of initiating.


Lemma 2 All the initiators (irrespective of m) initiate in state I3.


         Intuitively, if in state I3, the initiator must have chosen to initiate in the previous

period (in state I2) even in the presence of uncertainty about whether the respondent

would respond honestly or dishonestly. Consequently, the initiator will also initiate

once it is certain that the respondent will respond honestly.

         This lemma and (9) then imply that



                           I3 (m) = (1 − α) [a + I1 (m)] + α [a + δI3 (m)]



which gives, by using (8),


                                        a        (1 − α)βδ
                          I3 (m) =         +                     I2 (m)                        (11)
                                     1 − αδ (1 − αδ)(1 − δ + βδ)


         Note the importance of Lemma 1 and Lemma 2: they imply that a successful

completion of the transaction in the initial period of a match is a sufficient signal for

both sides for developing trust and trustworthiness between them. This manifests

itself in successful completion of the transaction in every subsequent period for as

long as the match lasts.9

         Now we can finalize the partial equilibrium analysis. Using the result of Lemma

2, k, which is the belief of the respondent in state R3 that the initiator will initiate

     9
         Once trust and trustworthiness have been established, the expected survival time of a match
      α
is   1−α   periods past the current period.

                                                   15
in the next period if the match survives until then, becomes 1 in (6). The latter,

combined with (3) and (5), then gives


                    ½                                                        ¾
                        1 − δ + βδp            1 − δ + βδp       αβδp
     R3 (d) = max                   (1 − d);                 a−        R3 (d)      (12)
                           1−δ               (1 − δ)(1 − αδ)    1 − αδ


where, as before, the first term in the maximand corresponds to the value of re-

sponding dishonestly, while the second term corresponds to the value of responding

honestly.


Lemma 3 A respondent d responds honestly in state R3 if and only if d ≥ d(p) ≡

         a
1−   1−αδ+αβδp
               .


   This result is a straightforward implication of (12) and Assumption 3 and its

proof is left to the reader.

   Lemma 3 says that, in a new match, respondents with a relatively high level

of intrinsic honesty will behave in a trustworthy way and reply honestly, while

respondents with a relatively low intrinsic honesty will not behave in a trustworthy

way and they will reply dishonestly. This is so because the latter group will find theft

attractive because of their low ”moral barriers”, even though it entails termination

of the match. On the other hand, the former group will not find theft attractive

either because of their high ”moral barriers” or because of reputation reasons, since

it is more profitable for them to continue the match, even though they would behave

dishonestly in a non-repeated setting. The threshold d(p) is an increasing function

of p, the aggregate steady state probability of an initiator initiating in a new match.

Note that this implies that trust breeds untrustworthiness. The more trusting the

                                            16
population, the more attractive acting in an untrustworthy way is. This is because

the more likely the initiators are to trust strangers, the easier it is to get into

state R3 (new match with an initiated transaction) if unmatched at the beginning

of a period, and hence the less costly it is to forego reputation (and hence break

up the match) by stealing relative to the gain from stealing, which is unchanged.

Consequently, more respondents will choose to respond dishonestly in a new match

with an initiated transaction. Note, however, that respondents with d ≥ 1 never

choose to behave dishonestly.

   In a similar way, using (8) and (11) for substitution into (10) yields


            ½                                                                   ¾
               1 − δ + βδ    (q + aq − 1 + αδ − αδq)(1 − δ + βδ)    αβδq
I2 (m) = max −            m;                                     −        I2 (m)
                  1−δ                  (1 − δ)(1 − αδ)             1 − αδ
                                                                                  (13)

where, as before, the first term in the maximand corresponds to the value of not

initiating, while the second term corresponds to the value of initiating.

Lemma 4 An initiator m initiates the transaction in state I2 if and only if m ≥
         (1−q)(1−αδ)−aq
m(q) ≡     1−αδ+αβδq
                        .

   Again, this result is a straightforward implication of (13) and Assumption 3 and

its proof is omitted.

   Lemma 4 says that, in a new match, initiators with a relatively high level of

intrinsic trust will behave in a trusting way and initiate, while initiators with a

relatively low intrinsic trust will not trust and thus will not initiate. The threshold

m(q) is a decreasing function of q, the aggregate steady state probability of a re-

spondent responding honestly in a new match. This is intuitive. The more likely the

                                          17
respondents are to behave honestly in a new match, the more initiators will choose

to trust them. In particular, a higher value of q implies a decreased likelihood of

theft and an increased likelihood of a mutually profitable long-term relationship.

       Lemmata 1through 4 completely characterize initiator and respondent behavior

in all states where they need to make a decision. They relate this behavior to

aggregate measures of trusting (p) and trustworthy (q) behavior in new matches. Of

course, the latter are not exogenous and should themselves be treated as aggregates

of individual behavior. The next section turns to this task.



2.3       General Equilibrium Analysis

       This section builds on Lemmata 1 through 4 in characterizing the general equi-

librium in the society. The central idea is simple: an equilibrium is a pair (p, q) that

is mutually consistent under the initiator-respondent interactions. To elaborate in

more detail, consider a particular value of p and how this value maps to a value

of q consistent with it. By Lemma 3, the respondents with d ≥ d(p) respond hon-

estly if called to respond in a new match, while the others respond dishonestly. To

simplify the language, call the former ones ”trustworthy” and call the latter ones

”untrustworthy”. It follows that the measure of trustworthy respondents is Q ≡

1 − F [d(p)] and the measure of untrustworthy respondents is 1 − Q = F [d(p)].10

  10
    To clarify the notation, note that q is the conditional steady state probability measure of
trustworthy respondents, where the conditioning is based on the set of searching respondents.
When multiplied by the steady state measure of searching respondents, it gives the measure of
searching respondents who stand ready to behave in a trustworthy way in the current period (or any
other specific period). On the other hand, Q is the unconditional steady state probability measure
of trustworthy respondents. That is, it is the measure of respondents who would behave in a
trustworthy way if they happened to find themselves in a new match with an initiated transaction
in the current period (or any other specific period).


                                               18
Since q is the aggregate steady state probability of a respondent responding honestly

in a new match, it must be equal to the fraction of trustworthy searching respon-

dents among the searching respondents. Because all the untrustworthy respondents

search at the beginning of each period (since they never participate in a surviving

match), we only need to find the fraction of trustworthy respondents that search in

order to deduce q. Denote the latter fraction hR . Since this fraction has to stay

constant over time in a steady state, in any period the measure of new matches

involving trustworthy respondents that survive until the following period has to be

equal to the measure of surviving matches involving trustworthy respondents that

get dissolved in the current period. As for the former, the fraction hR of trustwor-

thy respondents that search results in the fraction βhR of trustworthy respondents

involved in new matches, the fraction pβhR of trustworthy respondents involved in

new matches experiencing an initiated transaction, the fraction pβhR of trustworthy

respondents involved in new matches experiencing a successfully completed trans-

action and, finally, the fraction αpβhR of trustworthy respondents involved in new

matches that survive until the following period. As for the latter, the fraction 1−hR

of trustworthy respondents participating in surviving matches results in the fraction

(1 − α)(1 − hR ) of trustworthy respondents participating in surviving matches that

get dissolved in the current period. In equilibrium, then, αpβhR = (1 − α)(1 − hR ),

which gives
                                           1−α
                                 hR =                                           (14)
                                        1 − α + αβp




                                         19
                                                                  1−α
Consequently, the measure of searching respondents is F [d(p)]+ 1−α+αβp {1 − F [d(p)]}.

The previous analysis then implies that the value of q that is consistent with p is

given by q = T (p), where T : [0, 1] −→ [0, 1] is defined by


                               1−α
                            1−α+αβq
                                     {1 −   F [d(p)]}            (1 − α) {1 − F [d(p)]}
           T (p) ≡                  1−α                      =                                  (15)
                     F   [d(p)] + 1−α+αβq   {1 − F [d(p)]}        1 − α + αβpF [d(p)]


∀p ∈ [0, 1].

       Now consider a particular value of q and how this value maps to a value of p

consistent with it. By Lemma 4, the initiators with m ≥ m(q) initiate in a new

match, while the others do not. Call the former ones ”trusting” and the latter

ones ”mistrusting”. It follows that the measure of trusting initiators is P ≡ 1 −

G [m(q)] and the measure of mistrusting initiators is 1 − P = G [m(q)].11 Since p is

the aggregate steady state probability of an initiator initiating in a new match, it

must be equal to the fraction of trusting searching initiators among the searching

initiators. Because all the mistrusting initiators search at the beginning of each

period (since they never participate in a surviving match), we only need to find the

fraction of trusting initiators that search in order to deduce p. Denote the latter hI .

Then, following a similar logic as above, we get that


                                                  1−α
                                       hI =                                                     (16)
                                               1 − α + αβq

  11
     Again, to clarify the notation, note that p is the conditional steady state probability measure
of trusting initiators, where the conditioning is based on the set of searching initiators. When
multiplied by the steady state measure of searching initiators, it gives the measure of searching
initiators who actually behave in a trusting way in the current period (or any other specific period).
On the other hand, P is the unconditional steady state probability measure of trusting initiators.
That is, it is the measure of initiators who would behave in a trusting way if they happened to
find themselves in a new match in the current period (or any other specific period).

                                                 20
                                                                 1−α
Consequently, the measure of searching initiators is G [m(q)]+ 1−α+αβq {1 − G [m(q)]}.

The previous analysis then implies that a value of p that is consistent with q is given

by p = V (q), where V : [0, 1] −→ [0, 1] is defined by


                              1−α
                            1−α+αβq
                                      {1 − G [m(q)]}                   (1 − α) {1 − G [m(q)]}
        V (q) ≡                      1−α                           =                                 (17)
                      G [m(q)] +   1−α+αβq
                                             {1 − G [m(q)]}             1 − α + αβqG [m(q)]


∀q ∈ [0, 1].

      We now define a general equilibrium formally:


Definition 1 A general trust/trustworthiness equilibrium is a pair (p∗ , q ∗ ) ∈ [0, 1]2

that satisfies p∗ = V (q ∗ ) and q ∗ = T (p∗ ).1213

  12
    A reader may wonder why we do not impose an additional equilibrium condition requiring that
the measure of searching initiators be equal to the measure of searching respondents, i.e., that
                          1−α                                            1−α
      G [m(q ∗ )] +                 {1 − G [m(q ∗ )]} = F [d(p∗ )] +              {1 − F [d(p∗ )]}   (18)
                      1 − α + αβq ∗                                  1 − α + αβp∗
However, this additional requirement is redundant since this equality is guaranteed for any existing
equilibrium. To see that, the two equilibrium conditions imply that

                                                        (1 − p∗ )(1 − α)
                                        G [m(q ∗ )] =                                                (19)
                                                        1 − α + αβp∗ q ∗
and
                                                        (1 − q ∗ )(1 − α)
                                         F [d(p∗ )] =                                                (20)
                                                        1 − α + αβp∗ q ∗
Using these results, both sides of the (18) are equal to
                                                       1−α
                                             h=                                                      (21)
                                                  1 − α + αβp∗ q ∗

where h denotes a common measure of searching initiators and respondents in an equilibrium.
  13
     Given a particular general equilibrium (p∗ , q ∗ ) of aggregate steady state probabilities of initia-
tors initiating and respondents responding honestly in a new match, one can deduce the equilibrium
measures of trusting initiators and trustworthy respondents, that is P ∗ and Q∗ , by

                                             P ∗ = 1 − G [m(q ∗ )]                                   (22)

and
                                              Q∗ = 1 − F [d(p∗ )]                                    (23)




                                                        21
       The next theorem establishes existence of a general equilibrium.


Theorem 1 There exists a general trust/trustworthiness equilibrium.


       Although existence can be established by a routine argument, uniqueness is

not guaranteed by the previous assumptions. To see this, note that because d(.)

is increasing, T is decreasing. However, although m(.) is decreasing, an increasing

property of V cannot be deduced. Intuitively, an increase in p has two effects. First,

the trustworthiness threshold d(p) increases and hence there will be less trustwor-

thy and more untrustworthy respondents in the overall population of respondents.

Second, as can be seen from (14), a lower fraction of trustworthy respondents will

be searching. Ceteris paribus, each effect tends to reduce the share of trustworthy

searching respondents among the searching respondents. That is, both effects work

in the same direction and T (p) decreases as a result. Similarly, an increase in q

has two effects. First, the trust threshold m(q) decreases and hence there will be

more trusting and less mistrusting initiators in the overall population of initiators.

Second, as can be seen from (16), a lower fraction of trusting initiators will be

searching. Ceteris paribus, the first effect tends to increase the share of trusting

searching initiators among the searching initiators, while the second effect has just

the opposite impact. Hence the two effects work in opposite directions, and it is not

in general possible to say which one will prevail.14 Figure 2 illustrates a case when

both T and V are monotone, which results in a unique general equilibrium.

  14
     Facing a possibility of multiple equilibria, one may wonder whether there would be a convenient
sufficient condition that would rule such case out. (19) and (20) imply that

                               (1 − p∗ )F [d(p∗ )] = (1 − q ∗ )G [m(q ∗ )]                     (24)


                                                  22
                           p

                       1
                                                   T −1 (q)




                      p*




                                     V (q)
                                                     q*
                                                                                     q
                           0                                                  1

                        FIGURE 2: Illustration of general equilibrium


3      Empirical Predictions for Individual Prosperity

    We are interested in how individual prosperity depends on whether one trusts

or not and on whether one is or is not trustworthy. To be able to do that, we

need to pick a measure of prosperity. Because the inherent utility of honesty and

the inherent utility of trust are unobservable, our primary measure of individual

prosperity is an expected, or average, payoff in a single period, net of either type of

inherent utility.

    Conceptually, there is a particular steady state equilibrium in the background.

in any general equilibrium. Suppose there are at least two equilibria. Then (24) has to be satisfied
for at least two different equilibrium pairs (p∗1 , q1∗ ) and (p∗2 , q2∗ ), where, without loss of generality,
p∗1 < p∗2 . Since T is strictly decreasing, it must also be the case that q1∗ > q2∗ . Now consider
a shift from the first to the second equilibrium. Because m(.) is decreasing, the right-hand side
of (24) increases and hence so must the left-hand side to preserve the equality. Therefore a
convenient sufficient condition to rule out multiplicity of equilibria is to require that (1 − p)F [d(p)]
is nonincreasing in p. However, we do not wish to impose this assumption since it is not essential
for our objectives.


                                                     23
In that equilibrium, an individual, be it an initiator or a respondent, may find herself

or himself in five different outcomes at the end of a typical period.15 First, (s)he may

be matched in a surviving match. Second, (s)he may be unmatched. Third, (s)he

may be matched in a new match without an initiated transaction. Fourth, (s)he may

be matched in a new match with an initiated transaction and an honest response.

Fifth, (s)he may be matched in a new match with an initiated transaction, but with

a dishonest response. Let the steady state probabilities of these five outcomes be, in

the same order, π I (m, i) and π R (d, i), i ∈ {1, 2, 3, 4, 5}, for initiators of type m and

respondents of type d, respectively. The per period payoffs for both the initiators

and the respondents are a in outcome 1 and 4, 0 in outcome 2 and 3, and they are

−1 for the initiators and 1 for the respondents in outcome 5. Hence the expected

payoff ΠI (m) for an initiator of type m is


                              £                       ¤
                      ΠI (m) = π I (m, 1) + π I (m, 4) a − π I (m, 5)                   (25)



and the expected payoff ΠR (d) for a respondent of type d is


                               £                       ¤
                       ΠR (d) = π R (d, 1) + π R (d, 4) a + π R (d, 5)                  (26)



In order to be able to compute these expected payoffs, we need to find the steady

state equilibrium probability distribution over the five outcomes for each initiator

and for each respondent. This is the task to which we turn now.

  15
    Note that the concept of outcome is different from the concept of state. While states are
various ex ante decisionmaking situations, outcomes are various ex post payoff situations.



                                             24
   The first step in this process involves finding the fraction (or conditional mea-

sure) of initiators and the fraction of respondents of each type who search at the

beginning of a generic period. Given the latter, the probability distribution over

the individual outcomes for each type can be computed using the exogenous match-

ing probability β together with an equilibrium degree of trusting and trustworthy

behavior, both on the aggregate and the individual level. As in the previous sec-

tion, one only needs to distinguish between trusting and mistrusting initiators and

trustworthy and untrustworthy respondents, since behavior is uniform within each

of these groups. Let p : [0, 1] → [0, 1] be a function that maps initiator types to equi-

librium probabilities of (initiators of that type) initiating if having an opportunity.

By Lemma 6,

                           
                           
                           
                            1 if m ≥ m(q ∗ ) (trusting initiators)
                  p(m) ≡                                                            (27)
                           
                           
                            0 otherwise (mistrusting initiators)


Also let q : [0, 1] −→ [0, 1] be a function that maps respondent types to equilib-

rium probabilities of (respondents of that type) responding honestly to an initiated

transaction. By Lemma 5,

                        
                        
                        
                         1 if d ≥ d(p∗ ) (trustworthy respondents)
               q(d) ≡                                                               (28)
                        
                        
                         0 otherwise (untrustworthy respondents)


   Now let hI : [0, 1] −→ [0, 1] be a function that maps initiator types to equilibrium

fractions (of initiators of that type) that search at the beginning of each period and



                                           25
let hR : [0, 1] −→ [0, 1] be a function that maps respondent types to equilibrium

fractions (of respondents of that type) that search at the beginning of each period.

Then, using the results of the previous section, we get that

                         
                         
                         
                              1−α
                                         if m ≥ m(q ∗ ) (trusting initiators)
                I            1−α+αβq ∗
               h (m) =                                                            (29)
                         
                         
                                1       otherwise (mistrusting initiators)


and                 
                    
                    
                          1−α
                                     if d ≥ d(p∗ ) (trustworthy respondents)
           R             1−α+αβp∗
          h (d) =                                                                 (30)
                    
                    
                            1       otherwise (untrustworthy respondents)

   Given the functional forms of pI , pR , hI and hR , Figures 3 and 4 depict the prob-

ability distribution over the five outcomes for initiators of type m and respondents

of type d, respectively.

   Combining (25), (26) and the information from Figure 3 and Figure 4 then gives


                  £                            ¤
          ΠI (m) = 1 − hI (m) + q ∗ p(m)βhI (m) a − (1 − q ∗ )p(m)βhI (m)         (31)



   and


                    £                           ¤
            ΠR (d) = 1 − hR (d) + q(d)p∗ βhR (d) a + [1 − q(d)] p∗ βhR (d)        (32)



   Finally, after using (27), (28), (29) and (30) to substitute into (31) and (32), the

expected per period payoff for a trusting initiator is




                                              26
                                                     


                                         Fraction=1


                                                                      



                 h I ( m)                                        π (m,1) = 1 − h (m)
                                                                   I                        I




                                                                          




      π (m,2) = (1 − β )h (m)
           I                     I
                                                                       βh ( m )
                                                                             I




                                                           




               p (m) βh (m)
                        I
                                                        π (m,3) = [1 − p(m)]βh I (m)
                                                         I




                                                                  




     π (m,4) = q * p (m) βh (m)
       I                             I
                                                  π (m,5) = (1 − q*) p (m) βh I (m)
                                                    I



FIGURE 3: Probability distribution over outcomes for initiators of type m



                                                         


                                         Fraction=1


                                                                        



                 h R (d )                                        π (d ,1) = 1 − h (d )
                                                                   R                        R




                                                                          




      π (d ,2) = (1 − β )h (d )
           R                     R
                                                                       βh ( d )
                                                                             R




                                                           




                p * βh (d )
                      R
                                                         π (d,3) = (1 − p*) βh R (d )
                                                             R




                                                          




     π (d,4) = q (d ) p * βh (d )
       R                             R
                                                  π (d,5) = [1 − q(d )] p * βh R (d )
                                                    R



FIGURE 4: Probability distribution over outcomes for respondents of type d



                                              27
                                        β [q ∗ a − (1 − q ∗ )(1 − α)]
                        ΠItrusting =                                  ,                    (33)
                                                1 − α + αβq ∗

the expected per period payoff for a mistrusting initiator is



                                       ΠImistrusting = 0,                                  (34)



the expected per period payoff for a trustworthy respondent is


                                                    βp∗
                            ΠR
                             trustworthy =                  a,                             (35)
                                               1 − α + αβp∗


and the expected per period payoff for an untrustworthy respondent is



                                 ΠR                 ∗
                                  untrustworthy = βp .                                     (36)



   In general, ΠItrusting may be more or less than ΠImistrusting , depending on the

value of the parameters and the shapes of F and G. So it is not possible to con-

clude in general whether trust does or does not increase expected income (i.e., ”pay

off”). However, for q ∗ = 0 we have ΠItrusting = −β < ΠImistrusting , for q ∗ = 1 we

have ΠItrusting = βa/(1 − α + αβ) > ΠImistrusting , and ΠItrusting is continuous and

strictly increasing in q ∗ . Therefore we can conclude that trust does not pay off in

low trustworthiness societies, but it does pay off in high trustworthiness societies.

Furthermore, it pays off more the more trustworthy a society is. The threshold value

                                                       1−α
of q ∗ that makes the two payoffs equal is qb ≡       1−α+a
                                                            .   Hence trust pays off if q ∗ > qb



                                               28
               Π trusting
                 I
                          , Π mistrustin
                              I
                                         g




                 βa
            1 − α + αβ
                                   Π trusting
                                     I

                                                      Π mistrustin
                                                        I
                                                                   g




                       0                                                   q*
                                         q̂                            1


                    −β



FIGURE 5: Expected equilibrium payoffs of trusting and mistrusting initiators as
functions of q ∗


and it does not pay off if q ∗ < qb. This is illustrated in Figure 5.

   Similarly, ΠR                                     R
               trustworthy may be more or less than Πuntrustworthy and hence it is not


possible to conclude in general whether trustworthiness does or does not pay off. For

p∗ = 0 we have ΠR              R                      R
                trustworthy = Πuntrustworthy . Since Πtrustworthy is strictly increasing


and strictly concave in p∗ , three scenarios, depicted in Figure 6, are possible. First,

if a ≥ 1 − α + αβ, the ”high” case, trustworthiness pays off no matter what the

social level of trust p∗ is. Second, if 1 − α + αβ > a > 1 − α, the ”medium” case,
                                                                                   a−(1−α)
trustworthiness pays off for low levels of social trust, in particular p∗ ≤ pb ≡     αβ
                                                                                           ,

but it does not pay off for high levels of social trust, i.e. when p∗ > pb. Third, if

1 − α > a, the ”low” case, trustworthiness does not pay off for any level of social

trust.

   Interpreting Figures 5 and 6 is complicated by the fact that the fundamental


                                                29
          Π R trustworthy , Π R untrustworthy


                                Π R trustworthy (high)


                                                                    Π R untrustworthy




                                                               Π R trustworthy (medium)



                                Π R trustworthy (low)
              0                                           p̂   1
                                                                                  p*

FIGURE 6: Payoffs of trustworthy and untrustworthy respondents as functions of
p∗


aspects of countries that determine the equilibrium values of p∗ and q ∗ - the distri-

butions G(.) and F (.) of inherent attitudes, and the values of α, β, δ and a—also

affect the difference in expected income between trusting and not trusting for any

given level of q ∗ , and between being and not being trustworthy for any given level of

p∗ . For this reason, one cannot interpret Figures 5 and 6 as directly revealing how

the expected difference in income depends on the values of p∗ and q ∗ . Many of the

variations in fundamentals that affect p∗ and q ∗ will also affect the expected income

of a person conditional on their attitude.

   This stylized model of how individual attitudes combine to generate an equilib-

rium provides the framework we use in the empirical analysis of whether trust and

trustworthiness pay off that we develop in Sections 5 and 6. In particular, we will



                                                         30
examine the model’s prediction that the payoff to exhibiting each of these behav-

iors depends on the aggregate prevalence of the complementary attitude. Before we

begin the empirical analysis, though, we briefly review the empirical literature that

is related to our investigation.




4        Empirical Literature Review16

     There is some empirical evidence that trust and civic duty among a country’s

citizens contribute to growth. Knack and Keefer (1997) tested the impact of these

attitudes on both growth and investment rates in a cross-section of 29 countries,

using measures of trust and civic norms from the World Values Surveys of 1981 and

1990. They find that social capital variables exhibit a strong and significant positive

relationship to economic growth. As they note, the causality of this relationship

could go in either direction: trust could be a product of optimism generated by high

or growing incomes, or it could be that trust facilitates prosperity. However, they

find that trust is more correlated with per capita income in later years than with

income in earlier years, suggesting that the causation runs from trust to growth

more so than vice versa.

     Zak and Knack (2001) extend the Knack and Keefer framework by separately

testing for the effect on growth of proxies for the presence of formal institutions,

social distance, and discrimination and for whether their effect remains significantly

    16
    In this review, we focus on the impact of trust and trustworthiness on economic
outcomes. There is also literature studying the determinants of trust. See Alesina
and Ferrara (2000) for a recent contribution.




                                          31
correlated with growth controlling for measures of trust. They find that trust is

positively and significantly related to growth even in the presence of measures of

formal institutions or of social distance, but that most of the influence of the latter

on growth occurs through their impact on trust. The one exception is a measure of

property rights, which retains its independent positive association with growth even

in the presence of a trust variable. They justify this finding by noting that this index

includes government actions against private agents. In contrast, the trust measure is

“likely to be little affected by perceptions of the trustworthiness of government. . . ”

(p. 316)

   La Porta, Lopez-de-Silvanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1999) find that, across coun-

tries, a one-standard deviation increase in the measure of trust increases judicial

efficiency by 0.7 of a standard deviation and reduces government corruption by

0.3 of a standard deviation. Putnam (1993) examines cross-regional Italian data

and concludes that local governments are more efficient where there is greater civic

engagement.

   In what follows, we use a somewhat different empirical strategy by examining

household-level rather than country-level data from 18 countries. In particular,

we estimate regression equations explaining household income with a specification

that is based on the standard earnings equations from labor economics, but that is

augmented to test for the impact of trust, trustworthiness and their interaction with

aggregate levels of the complementary attitude. The theoretical model of Sections

2 and 3 frames our approach.




                                          32
5     Data

    Although the theory provides a consistent framework in which to evaluate data,

it leaves open the precise relationship between income and personal and country

characteristics. To shed empirical light on the issues discussed in the previous

section, one needs measures of individual well-being, personal trust, trustworthiness

and, preferably, some additional sociodemographic variables. To our knowledge,

only two datasets provide this information: the National Opinion Research Center’s

General Social Survey (GSS) and the World Values Survey (WVS). In order to

identify the impact of aggregate trust and trustworthiness within the society, we

must use WVS, as it, unlike the GSS, provides individual-level data for multiple

countries.

    The purpose of the WVS is to facilitate cross-national comparisons of values,

norms, and attitudes. The survey was conducted in multiple waves, with limited

national modifications, in several dozen countries. It asked about attitudes concern-

ing work, family, religion, politics, and contemporary social issues and gathered a

limited amount of demographic data as well. Although the data are subject to the

usual reservations about attitude surveys, and in particular cross-country attitude

surveys, the data has been widely and fruitfully used by political scientists and so-

ciologists, not to mention Knack and Keefer (1997) and Zak and Knack (2001). For

an extensive, albeit incomplete, list of its use in research, see Inglehart, Basanez,

and Moreno (1998). We use the data from the 1990-93 wave for 18 developed and




                                         33
developing countries.17 We excluded the former communist countries because their

economic and incentive structure as of the time of the survey was not conducive to

trust and trustworthiness having much effect on individual prosperity.18 We supple-

ment the WVS data with Summers and Heston (1991) Penn World Tables (PWT),

Mark 5.6 to be able to make real income comparisons across countries.

       Our measure of trust is based on the following WVS question: ”Generally speak-

ing, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you can’t be too careful

in dealing with people?” This question offered two responses: ”can’t be too careful”

and ”most people can be trusted”. We associate the former answer with ”mis-

trusting” individuals and the latter answer with ”trusting” individuals. Based on

these survey responses, we create a binary variable TRUST indicating the trusting

individuals. Our measure of trustworthiness is based on the following WVS ques-

tion: ”Please tell me whether you think lying in your own interest can always be

justified, never be justified, or something in between.” This question offered 10 re-

sponses ordered from 1 (never justified) to 10 (always justified). In order to measure

trustworthiness, we reversed the scale and call the resulting variable TRUSTW.

       Glaeser et al. (2000) measure trust and trustworthiness by conducting experi-

ments with monetary rewards. They find that the standard question used to measure

  17
     We use the following countries: Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Britain, Canada, Chile, Finland,
India, Italy, Japan, Mexico, The Netherlands, Portugal, South Africa, Spain, Turkey, USA, and
West Germany.
  18
     As for the remaining countries in the 1990-93 wave, we could not use Argentina, Denmark,
Ireland, Nigeria, Norway, Sweeden, and Switzerland because the income category thresholds that
we use for measuring real household income (see below) were not available. We could not use
France because the household income data records did not precisely match with the available
income category thresholds. We could not use Iceland because of the missing household income
data. Finally, we could not use South Korea because of the missing education data.




                                              34
trusting behavior - used in the WVS as well as the GSS - does not have a significant

correlation with trusting choices in either of two experiments. Two other questions,

specifically about trusting strangers, do, though, predict trust (of strangers, in their

experiments). Furthermore, the answers to questions about trustworthiness are not

significantly related to trustworthy behavior. Surprisingly, a self-reported trusting

attitude does appear to predict trustworthy behavior. Danielson and Holm (2002)

conduct a similar experiment in Tanzania. They confirm that the standard survey

question used to measure trust does not predict actual trusting behavior in their ex-

perimental setting. Unlike Glaeser et al. (2000), though, they find that the specific

trust questions do not predict actual trusting behavior and that the general trust

question does not predict trustworthy behavior. They also find that self-reported

trustworthiness does in fact predict trustworthy behavior, but this effect disappears

when donation motives are controlled for.

   Glaeser et al. (2000) and Danielson and Holm (2002) conclude that empirical

work based on the WVS/GSS survey questions about trust needs to be reinterpreted.

While we take seriously the possibility that self-reported attitudes and behavior

may not be highly correlated, we do find below that these self-reports help explain

individual incomes with a systematic pattern, and so we conclude that they do reflect

individual behavior in an important sense. Finally, although experimental evidence

could certainly extend our knowledge of these issues, we expect that such evidence

will not be available across countries in the near future, rendering the current study

infeasible from this angle.

   We measure individual prosperity by real household income based on the follow-


                                          35
ing WVS question: ”Here is the scale of incomes and we would like to know in what

group your household is, counting all wages, salaries, pensions and other incomes

that come in. Just give the letter of the group your household falls into, before taxes

and other deductions.” This question offered 10 country-specific ranges for income.

We convert the thresholds into 1990 purchasing power parity U.S. dollars using the

PWT measure of PPP-based exchange rates. Our measure of real household income

is a midpoint of each range and 150% of the highest threshold for the top range.

Summary statistics for household income, trust and trustworthiness by country are

reported in Table 1.

   Because individual trust and trustworthiness are certainly not to be the only

determinants of individual income, we examine additional sociodemographic infor-

mation provided by WVS. Our measure of respondent education is based on the

following WVS question: ”At what age did you or will you complete your full time

education, either at school or at an institution of higher education? Please exclude

apprenticeships.” This question offered a 10-point scale ranging from 1 (12 years

of age or earlier) to 10 (21 years of age or older). In addition, we use the data on

respondent age and gender. It is important to note that the measure of income we

investigate relates to the household, but both the attitude indicators and sociode-

mographic variables refer to the respondent. We will have more to say later about

how that affects the interpretation of our results.




                                          36
            TABLE 1: Summary statistics of real household income, trust and trustworthiness by country
                          HOUSEHOLD INCOME                      TRUST                      TRUSTWORTHINESS
      COUNTRY              Obs. Mean Std. Dev.             Obs. Mean Std. Dev.             Obs. Mean Std. Dev.
      Austria              1414 18.28    11.65             1301 0.318    0.466             1440  8.27     2.04
      Belgium              1705 21.14    13.29             2576 0.332    0.471             2730  7.04     2.62
      Brazil               1679  6.36     9.69             1766 0.067    0.249             1774  8.20     2.73
      Britain              1101 24.80    17.47             1440 0.436    0.496             1473  8.17     2.08
      Canada               1461 35.88    23.50             1673 0.524    0.500             1712  8.18     2.24
      Chile                1470  6.74     7.22             1458 0.227    0.419             1495  8.65     2.23
      Finland               586 29.52    15.13              558 0.627    0.484              580  8.13     1.97
      India                2429  4.77     3.87             2365 0.343    0.475             2480  8.76     2.03
      Italy                1424 21.52    23.12             1932 0.371    0.483             1987  8.33     2.19
      Japan                 896 32.39    18.98              911 0.417    0.493              968  8.75     1.83
      Mexico               1451 19.29    29.68             1384 0.335    0.472             1513  6.76     2.95




37
      Netherlands           790 23.60    15.26              965 0.558    0.497             1010  7.49     2.11
      Portugal             1124 13.24    10.27             1149 0.214    0.410             1169  7.47     2.68
      South Africa         2456 24.68    18.69             2594 0.283    0.450             2681  8.05     2.89
      Spain                3431 11.19     8.04             3887 0.338    0.473             4042  8.07     2.32
      Turkey               1007 12.50    18.27             1012 0.100    0.300             1017  8.72     2.23
      USA                  1696 34.83    22.44             1782 0.500    0.500             1821  8.59     2.02
      West Germany         1932 23.68    14.27             1725 0.378    0.485             2013  7.46     2.34
      TOTAL               28052 20.24    19.28            30478 0.354    0.478            31905  8.06     2.40
     Notes: All summary statistics are weighted averages based on survey weights provided with the data, with the sums
     of weights equalized across countries.
6        Empirical Results

6.1       Baseline Results

       Table 2 reports our baseline results.19 It presents the results of regressing the

logarithm of real household income against variables that are standard in micro earn-

ings equations plus indicators of the individual’s level of trust and trustworthiness,

sometimes interacted with the mean level of these variables in the respondent’s coun-

try. All of the regressions include country dummy variables (coefficients of which are

not reported here), and so all the estimated coefficients are identified from within-

country variation only. In all reported specifications, these country dummies are

jointly significant at 1 percent level. The specification in Column (1) contains only

the standard variables in an earnings equation. The results are in line with the

empirical literature discussed above, lending credence to the survey-based measures

of income, education, age, and gender. The marginal return to the respondent’s ed-

ucation level is always positive within the observed range (between 6 and 15 years),

although decreasing. Based on the estimated coefficients, going from zero to ten

years of education adds 87 percent to income. Furthermore, the marginal return is

11.1 percent per year at 0 years, and falls to 6.29 percent at 10 years. These results

are within the range reported in the literature , as discussed earlier.20 The respon-

  19
     The regressions are calculated using observations unweighted within countries and with sums
of weights equalized across countries. We have also estimated analogous regressions without any
(cross-country) weight adjustment and with weighting within and across countries combined. None
of the principal results reported in this section are affected by this change.
  20
     In the human capital earnings approach standard in labor economics, more recent estimates
of the return to education fall anywhere between 0.023 (Isacsson (1999)) and 0.153 (Harmon and
Walker (1995)) per additional year of schooling, depending on the dataset used, the set of control
variables and the econometric technique. Card (1999) provides a good summary of this literature.



                                               38
                TABLE 2: Regressions results: The impact of trust and trustworthiness on real household income
                                                             Dependent variable: Log of Real       Household Income
                                     (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)                (5)           (6)               (7)
      Education                      0.111           0.111        0.109         0.110              0.112         0.106             0.108
                                     (0.0175)***     (0.0180)*** (0.0176)*** (0.0181)***           (0.0180)*** (0.0176)***         (0.0181)***

      Education Squared              0.241           -0.247         -0.230          -0.244         -0.250          -0.217          -0.235
      ×10−2                          (0.0778)***     (0.0799)***    (0.0781)***     (0.0802)***    (0.0799)***     (0.0781)***     (0.0801)***

      Age                            0.368           0.362          0.374           0.370          0.361           0.375           0.370
      ×10−1                          (0.0192)***     (0.0198)***    (0.0193)***     (0.0199)***    (0.0198)***     (0.0193)***     (0.0199)***

      Age Squared                    -0.474          -0.469         -0.477          -0.474         -0.469          -0.479          -0.475
      ×10−3                          (0.0204)***     (0.0211)***    (0.0206)***     (0.0212)***    (0.0211)***     (0.0205)***     (0.0212)***

      Male                           0.0837          0.0866         0.0822          0.0855         0.0870          0.0836          0.0874
                                     (0.0108)***     (0.0111)***    (0.0109)***     (0.0111)***    (0.0111)***     (0.0109)***     (0.0111)***




39
      Trust                                          0.0733                         0.076          -0.448                         -0.394
                                                     (0.0118)***                    (0.0118)***    (0.197)**                      (0.198)**

      Trustworthiness                                               -0.117          -0.124                         -0.362         -0.347
      ×10−1                                                         (0.0246)***     (0.0251)***                    (0.0718)***    (0.0721)***

      Trust*Av.Trustworthiness                                                                     0.0647                         0.0581
                                                                                                   (0.0241)***                    (0.0243)**

      Trustworthiness*Av.Trust                                                                                     0.0750         0.0685
                                                                                                                   (0.0193)***    (0.0192)***

      Country Fixed Effects          Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
      Observations                   26046           24544          25675           24235          24544           25675           24235
      R-squared                      0.42            0.42           0.42            0.43           0.42            0.42            0.43

     Note 1: The regressions are calculated using observations unweighted within countries and with the sums of weights equalized
     across countries.
     Note 2: Heteroscedasticity consistent robust standard errors are in parentheses. Significance level notation: ∗ at 10%, ∗∗ at 5%, ∗∗∗ at 1%.
dent’s age, which is undoubtedly partly a proxy for work experience, initially has a

positive impact on income, but its impact peaks at age 38.8, and it has a marginal

negative effect thereafter. The marginal return falls from 1.78 percent per year at

age 20 to –2.96 percent per year at age 70.21 Households with male respondents

have an 8.37 percent higher income. Although this is lower in absolute value than

the findings in the literature22 , the difference is unsurprising as our results relate

to household income rather than the respondent’s income. In the next subsection,

we restrict the sample to include only those households in which the major earn-

ers are the respondents and observe a much larger estimated male-female income

differential.

    Columns 2 through 4 show the estimated return to individual trust and trust-

worthiness, ignoring any country-level interaction effect. The results suggest that

trust, but not trustworthiness, is associated with higher income. Complete trust

increases income by 7.33 percent compared to no trust at all. In contrast, complete

trustworthiness decreases income by 10.53 percent compared to no trustworthiness

at all.23 A one standard deviation increase in trust increases income by 3.50 per-

Our marginal effect estimates lie within this range.
  21
     Angrist and Krueger (1999), using 1990 Census and March 1990 CPS samples, report coefficient
estimates on potential experience around 0.041 per year for the Census data and 0 or 0.013 for the
CPS data, depending on whether they do or do not use the allocated CPS values. The coefficient
estimates on potential experience squared are from -0.00057 to -0.00055 for the Census data and
they are statistically insignificant for the CPS data. Our results are similar to these estimates.
  22
     Altonji and Blank (1999), using the Current Population Survey (CPS) data, estimate the
coefficient on a female indicator variable to be -0.421 in 1979 when the additional controls are
education, experience and region, and -0.348 when occupation, industry and job characteristics
are controlled for as well. In 1995, these estimates are -0.272 and -0.221, respectively. When using
the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth data from 1994, the coefficient estimates on the female
dummy are approximately -0.24 to -0.20.
  23
     We obtain this numeric result by multiplying the coefficient of 1.17 percent by 9, which is the
numeric difference between maximum (10) and minimum (1) measured trustworthiness.




                                                40
cent, and a one standard deviation increase in trustworthiness decreases income by

2.81 percent. Column 4 shows that the point estimates are not notably changed by

including both variables at once.

   Columns 5 and 6 present our central results that allow for interaction between

personal characteristics and country-level means of trust and trustworthiness. Col-

umn 5 reveals that the personal return to trust is larger, the greater is the prevalence

of trustworthy people in the country. Moreover, the personal return to trusting be-

havior is negative unless these behavioral patterns are rewarded. The return to trust

is negative in countries that have average trustworthiness below 6.92, and is positive

in countries above that. All of the countries in our sample, except for Mexico, have

means greater than 6.90, and hence the return to trust is almost always positive in

our sample.

   Column 6 shows that the same pattern applies to trustworthiness: its effect on

individual income is negative unless one lives in a country where the level of trust is

above 0.48. In contrast to column 5, though, in all but four countries the mean level

of trust falls short of this figure, with the four exceptions being Canada, Finland,

the Netherlands and the U.S. Thus, our results suggest that trustworthiness is in

most countries not rewarded with higher income—dishonesty pays. How much it

pays varies widely. In a very low trust country like Brazil, a one standard deviation

increase in trustworthiness is associated with an 8.6 percent decrease in income.

   Column 7 shows that the principal results from columns 5 and 6 are unchanged

when both attitude variables and both interaction terms are included in the same

equation, although statistical significance decreases due to multicollinearity. The


                                          41
results in this column imply that the return to trust is positive if average trustwor-

thiness exceeds the threshold of 6.78 and the return to trustworthiness is negative

unless average trust exceeds 0.507.

   As suggested earlier by the gender differential estimates, a potential problem

with these results is that we use household real income as a dependent variable

and respondent attitudes and demographic characteristics as independent variables.

However, it has been shown (see, for example, Mare (1991) and the references con-

tained therein) that most married or cohabiting couples are characterized by as-

sortative matching by education, age and many other characteristics, thus lending

more credibility to our results. Another potential problem is that we restrict the

coefficient estimates to be the same across all the countries. It is also possible that

trust and trustworthiness are endogenous to income. We address all of these issues

in the next subsection.



6.2    Robustness Analysis

   In this subsection, we submit our baseline results to four robustness checks. The

first two of them pursue the possibility that the key interaction terms are estimated

with bias because they are picking up country-specific variations in the effect on

income of education, age, and gender. The third check returns to the issue of using

household rather than individual income as our dependent variable. Finally, we

discuss the implications for our results and remedies for dealing with a potential

endogeneity problem due to the possibility of reverse causal impacts running from

income to trust and trustworthiness.

                                          42
       In the first robustness test, we retain the structure of our baseline regressions, but

allow the coefficients on education, education squared, age, age squared and gender

to vary across countries. The coefficient estimates on the variables of interest after

enriching the regression specification in this way are shown in Table 3.24 The sign

pattern is completely unaffected. The absolute value of all the estimates are scaled

back toward zero, by between one-fifth and three-fifths. Because the standard errors

of these estimates fall only slightly, the t-statistics all decline, so that the confidence

with which we can say these coefficients are not zero also falls. Notably, though,

the relative magnitude of the individual and interaction terms in equations (5) and

(6) are only slightly changed, so that the estimated cutoff levels of aggregate trust

and trustworthiness are not much different.

       The second robustness test is even more rigorous. We conduct it in a two-

step procedure. In the first step, we estimate regression equations (2), (3) and

(4) separately for each country in the sample. This produces, for each equation, 18

separate estimates of the effect of trust or trustworthiness on real household income.

These first-step estimates are presented in Panel A and Panel B of Table 4.25 The

third panel in this table contains the average values of trust and trustworthiness in

each country for comparison purposes. In the second step, we regress the estimated

trust coefficients against the country average level of trustworthiness, and vice versa.

  24
     The regressions are calculated using observations that are unweighted within countries, but
with the sums of weights equalized across countries. We have also estimated analogous regressions
without any (cross-country) weight adjustment, and with weighting within and across countries
combined. In this case the coefficient estimates are quantitatively more sensitive to the particular
weighting scheme employed. However, the results are affected qualitatively only to the extent of
marginal changes in statistical significance.
  25
     These coefficient estimates are based on unweighted observations.




                                                43
     TABLE 3: Regressions results: impact of trust and trustworthiness on real household income when the
     coefficients on education, education squared, age, age squared and gender are allowed to vary across countries
                                                    Dependent variable: Log of Real Household Income
                                        (2)          (3)        (4)           (5)         (6)                          (7)
      Trust                             0.0665                  0.0680        -0.3140                                  -0.2738
                                        (0.0112)***             (0.0113)*** (0.1956)                                   (0.1970)

      Trustworthiness                                   -0.0581    -0.0644                             -0.183      -0.171
      ×10−1                                             (0.0237)** (0.0242)***                         (0.0701)*** (0.0706)**

      Trust*Av.Trustworthiness                                                          0.0472                         0.0423
                                                                                        (0.0240)**                     (0.0242)*

      Trustworthiness*Av.Trust                                                                         0.0380          0.0329




44
                                                                                                       (0.0188)**      (0.0188)*
      Observations                      24544           25675          24235            24544          25675           24235
      R-squared                         0.50            0.49           0.50             0.50           0.49            0.50
     Note 1: The regressions are calculated using observations unweighted within countries and with the sums of weights
     equalized across countries.
     Note 2: Heteroscedasticity consistent robust standard errors are in parentheses. Significance level notation: ∗ at 10%, ∗∗ at 5%,
     ∗∗∗
         at 1%.
     Note 3: Regression equations are numbered according to Table 2.
This procedure imposes much less structure on the form of the interaction between

individual characteristics and the average level of the complementary attitude.

   The results of the second-stage regressions are shown in Table 5. Panel A re-

veals that the country-specific estimates of the effect of trust on real income are not

significantly related to the average country level of trustworthiness, although the

coefficient estimates are positive. This is likely a consequence of the fact that there

are only 18 countries in our sample, and hence it is difficult to reach standard levels

of significance. However, Panel B shows that, even with only 18 observations, the

estimated country-specific effect of an individual’s trustworthiness on real income is

positively related to the average trust in the country, and the coefficient is signifi-

cantly different from zero at a 5% confidence level. Thus, this two-step procedure

does not corroborate the results of specification (5) in Tables 2 and 3, but it does

corroborate the findings in specification (6).

   The third robustness check returns to the issue of having household real income

as a dependent variable and respondent attitudes and demographic characteristics

as independent variables. As we mentioned already, this issue is likely to be less

important for the education and age variables (due to assortative matching of house-

hold members) than it is for the gender variable. In this check, we run our baseline

specifications (as in Table 2), but we include only those households where the re-

spondent coincides with a major or equal wage earner within the household. The

results are shown in Table 6. Compared to Table 2, the coefficient estimates are

similar and the country dummies are also jointly significant at 1 percent level. A

major difference is that the simple and interaction coefficients on trust now lose


                                          45
                                TABLE 4: First stage: Trust and trustworthiness coefficients by country
                                      A: Trust coefficient                      B: Trustworthiness coefficient             C: Country averages
                             Trustworthiness       Trustworthiness               Trust                 Trust               Trust    Trustwor-
                              not included             included              not included            included                          thiness
      COUNTRY                 Coef.    t-stat.      Coef.    t-stat.         Coef.    t-stat.     Coef.     t-stat.
      Austria                0.0789 2.0629         0.0786 2.0216           -0.0088 -1.1291      -0.0094 -1.1663            0.318           8.266
      Belgium                0.0543 1.7694         0.0635 2.0513           -0.0108 -1.8851      -0.0136 -2.2960            0.332           7.038
      Brazil                 0.0445 0.3773         0.0422 0.3568           -0.0116 -1.1192      -0.0115 -1.1035            0.067           8.198
      Britain                0.1018 2.0307         0.1051 2.0947            0.0021 0.1635        0.0004 0.0319             0.436           8.165
      Canada                 0.1297 3.5106         0.1337 3.6082           -0.0126 -1.5591      -0.0114 -1.3961            0.524           8.178
      Chile                  0.1663 3.0502         0.1647 3.0055            0.0150 1.5362        0.0135 1.3558             0.227           8.652
      Finland                0.0430 0.9212         0.0392 0.8372            0.0179 1.3506        0.0149 1.1570             0.627           8.128
      India                 -0.0059 -0.1853       -0.0023 -0.0722          -0.0150 -2.4410      -0.0163 -2.5946            0.343           8.762
      Italy                  0.1466 4.2170         0.1397 3.9651            0.0099 1.2870        0.0037 0.4778             0.371           8.327
      Japan                  0.1583 3.7541         0.1420 3.3091            0.0035 0.2974        0.0016 0.1322             0.417           8.747




46
      Mexico                -0.0575 -0.7492       -0.0469 -0.6089          -0.0009 -0.0795       0.0025 0.1969             0.335           6.761
      Netherlands            0.1056 2.1435         0.1032 2.0792            0.0147 1.3085        0.0111 0.9597             0.558           7.492
      Portugal               0.0122 0.2456         0.0105 0.2107           -0.0040 -0.5215      -0.0039 -0.4998            0.214           7.469
      South Africa          -0.0341 -0.8289       -0.0400 -0.9690          -0.0437 -6.3683      -0.0429 -5.9532            0.283           8.047
      Spain                  0.0748 3.3765         0.0800 3.5728           -0.0177 -3.6194      -0.0191 -3.7708            0.338           8.071
      Turkey                -0.0720 -0.6373       -0.0756 -0.6660          -0.0146 -1.0304      -0.0151 -1.0582            0.100           8.724
      USA                    0.1106 2.9761         0.1144 3.0617            0.0003 0.0303       -0.0031 -0.3378            0.500           8.593
      West Germany           0.0698 2.4208         0.0662 2.2289           -0.0030 -0.5128      -0.0046 -0.6996            0.378           7.459

     Note 1: The regressions are calculated using unweighted observations.
     Note 2: The first pair of columns in Panel A corresponds to specification (2) in Table 2. The first pair of columns in Panel B corresponds to
     specification (3) in Table 2. The second pairs of columns in both Panel A and Panel B correspond to specification (4) in Table 2.
     Note 3: Heteroscedasticity consistent robust standard errors are in parentheses. Significance level notation: ∗ at 10%, ∗∗ at 5%, ∗∗∗ at 1%.
TABLE 5: Second stage: The impact of average trustworthiness and trust on per-
sonal return to trust and trustworthiness
 Dependent variable:            A: Trust coefficient          B: Trustworthiness coefficient
 First stage:               Trustworth. Trustworth.           Trust         Trust
                            not included included             not included included
 Average                    0.0362         0.0312
 Trustworthiness            (0.0321)       (0.0310)

 Average                                                      0.0437         0.0383
 Trust                                                        (0.0181)**     (0.0169)**

 Constant                   Yes             Yes               Yes            Yes
 Observations               18              18                18             18
 R-squared                  0.09            0.07              0.19           0.17

Note 1: Ordering of columns corresponds to Table 4.
Note 2: Heteroscedasticity consistent robust standard errors in parentheses. Significance level
notation: ∗ at 10%, ∗∗ at 5%, ∗∗∗ at 1%.


statistical significance in specifications (5) and (7), although they retain the now-

familiar sign pattern. Note that the conclusions from this robustness check mirror

the ones from the previous check: the personal return to trust is not statistically

significantly related to the average level of trustworthiness in society, but the per-

sonal return to trustworthiness is positively and statistically significantly related

to the average level of trust in society. Also note that, as expected, the estimated

impact on income of being a male is now much higher, by a factor of four, compared

to Table 2.

   Finally, we return to the issue of what the WVS trust (and, to a lesser degree,

trustworthiness) responses really measure. Glaeser, in particular, has argued that

higher-income people are more likely to say they trust others, in part because rich

people can effectively punish those who act in an untrustworthy way towards them.

That is, they can “afford” to trust. To the extent this is true, there is causation

                                              47
     TABLE 6: Regressions results: The impact of trust and trustworthiness on real household income when only households
     with major earner respondents are included
                                                             Dependent variable: Log of Real       Household Income
                                     (1)             (2)          (3)           (4)                (5)           (6)               (7)
      Education                      0.149           0.145        0.148         0.144              0.146         0.145             0.142
                                     (0.0278)***     (0.0291)*** (0.0279)*** (0.0292)***           (0.0291)*** (0.0279)***         (0.0291)***

      Education Squared              -0.376          -0.364         -0.373          -0.361         -0.369          -0.358          -0.351
      ×10−2                          (0.122)***      (0.128)***     (0.122)***      (0.128)***     (0.127)***      (0.122)***      (0.128)***

      Age                            0.623           0.620          0.626           0.623          0.619           0.627           0.623
      ×10−1                          (0.0346)***     (0.0362)***    (0.0348)***     (0.0365)***    (0.0363)***     (0.0348)***     (0.0365)***

      Age Squared                    -0.691          -0.688         -0.692          -0.689         -0.688          -0.694          -0.690
      ×10−3                          (0.0341)***     (0.0356)***    (0.0343)***     (0.0358)***    (0.0356)***     (0.0343)***     (0.0359)***

      Male                           0.346           0.345          0.350           0.349          0.345           0.351           0.350
                                     (0.0206)***     (0.0214)***    (0.0207)***     (0.0215)***    (0.0214)***     (0.0207)***     (0.0215)***




48
      Trust                                          0.0652                         0.0689         -0.395                         -0.338
                                                     (0.0185)***                    (0.0186)***    (0.377)                        (0.378)

      Trustworthiness                                               -0.103          -0.114                         -0.429         -0.417
      ×10−1                                                         (0.0396)***     (0.0413)***                    (0.104)***     (0.107)***

      Trust*Av.Trustworthiness                                                                     0.0571                         0.0503
                                                                                                   (0.0459)                       (0.0459)

      Trustworthiness*Av.Trust                                                                                     0.0983         0.0916
                                                                                                                   (0.0264)***    (0.0270)***

      Country Fixed Effects          Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes             Yes             Yes
      Observations                   12579           11869          12399           11715          11869           12399           11715
      R-squared                      0.45            0.44           0.45            0.45           0.44            0.45            0.45

     Note 1: The regressions are calculated using observations unweighted within countries and with the sums of weights equalized
     across countries.
     Note 2: Heteroscedasticity consistent robust standard errors are in parentheses. Significance level notation: ∗ at 10%, ∗∗ at 5%, ∗∗∗ at 1%.
running from income to the trust (and possibly trustworthiness) response, and the

coefficients estimated here do not measure the structural effect of attitudes on in-

come.

       A natural approach to this concern is to identify a set of instrumental variables

that are correlated with trust (or trustworthiness), but which are not influenced by

income. With this objective, we investigated a wide variety of survey responses.26

In the case of trust, the instruments that we considered either lacked statistically

significant explanatory power for trust and trust interacted with aggregate trustwor-

thiness in the first stage or, alternatively, led to very imprecise (as measured by the

standard errors) and unstable (across various specifications) estimates of the coeffi-

cients on predicted trust and trust interacted with aggregate trustworthiness in the

second stage. In contrast, we could identify apparently appropriate instruments for

trustworthiness, and two-stage least squares estimates yielded qualitatively similar

results to those reported in the paper.27 Thus, with respect to the trust measure we

regard the issue of potential reverse causation as unsettled, and an important topic

for future research. We are less concerned that this is a problem for our estimates

of the impact of individual trustworthiness and its interaction with aggregate trust

  26
      To be specific, we investigated answers to whether the respondent considers himself/herself
to be a religious person, whether religion is important in his/her life, whether he/she was raised
religiously, whether he/she thinks it is important to teach children responsibility, whether he/she
would mind having (each category individually) people with criminal record, emotionally unstable
people, heavy drinkers, and drug addicts as neighbors, whether he/she considers having friends
and acquaintances to be an important aspect of life, whether he/she considers meeting people to
be an important job attribute, and whether he/she has confidence in the civil service.
   27
      In particular, using religious variables as instruments for trustworthiness and their interactions
with aggregate trust as instruments for trustworthiness interacted with aggregate trust, the coeffi-
cient on trustworthiness in specifications (3) and (4) of Table 2 was reduced to about −0.1, and the
sign pattern and the relative magnitude of the coefficients on trustworthiness and trustworthiness
interacted with aggregate trust was preserved in specifications (6) and (7), with all these estimates
being statistically significant.


                                                  49
on income.




7     Conclusions

    Earlier research has established that countries with a high proportion of trusting

citizens tend to have higher per capita income and to grow faster. What had not

been established is the incentive people have to act in a trusting and trustworthy

manner. In this paper we address this issue by developing an equilibrium model

of trust and trustworthiness and empirically investigating whether the return to

behaving this way depends on the mean amount of the complementary behavior

in the society. We find evidence that the personal return to trustworthiness is

nonpositive in countries with low levels of average trust, but it is increasing in the

latter and eventually positive. On the other hand, the personal return to trust is

positive on average, but we are unable to conclude at standard levels of statistical

significance that this return is increasing in the average level of trustworthiness in

the society.

    What our empirical results suggest is that personal attitudes matter for personal

prosperity and that the payoff to trustworthiness is related to the aggregate trust

level in society. These empirical regularities should inform future theories of the role

and interaction of trust and trustworthiness. Although these results are interesting

and suggestive in many dimensions, more research is necessary to further refine

these findings. First, given the difficulty in linking the survey measure of trust to

observed behavior in trust game experiments, we need to verify the validity of our



                                          50
current measure in other settings and/or develop and implement a more reliable

survey instrument. Second, more work is necessary to sort out the causal links

between trust, trustworthiness and prosperity.




References

[1] Alesina, A. and E. La Ferrara. 2000. ”The Determinants of Trust.” NBER Work-

   ing Paper No. 7621, March 2000.


[2] Altonji, J. and R. Blank. 1999. ”Race and Gender in the Labor Market.” In

   Handbook of Labor Economics, eds. O. Ashenfelter and D. Card.


[3] Angrist, J. and A. Krueger. 1999. ”Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics.”

   In Handbook of Labor Economics, eds. O. Ashenfelter and D. Card.


[4] Arrow, K. 1972. “Gifts and Exchanges.” Philosophy and Public Affairs 1, no. 4:

   343-67.


[5] Axelrod, R. 1986. “An Evolutionary Approach to Norms.” American Political

   Science Review 80, no. 4: 1095-1111.


[6] Card, D. 1999. ”The Causal Effect of Education on Earnings”. In Handbook of

   Labor Economics, eds. O. Ashenfelter and D. Card.


[7] Chen, Y. 2000. ”Promises, Trust, and Contracts.” Journal of Law, Economics,

   & Organization: 209-232.




                                        51
[8] Coleman, J. 1990. Foundations of Social Theory. Cambridge, Massachusetts:

   Harvard University Press.


[9] Danielson, A. and H. Holm. 2002. ”Trust in the Tropics? Experimental Evidence

   from Tanzania.” Lund University Department of Economics Working Paper No.

   2002:12, April 2002.


[10] Dixit, A. 2001. ”On Modes of Economic Governance.” CESifo Working Paper

   No. 589.


[11] Fukuyama, F. 1995. Trust. New York: Basic Books.


[12] Glaeser, E. L., D. Laibson, J. A. Scheinkman, and C. L. Soutter. 2000. “Mea-

   suring Trust.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 115, no. 3 (August): 811-46.


[13] Harmon, C. and I. Walker. 1995. ”Estimates of the Economic Return to School-

   ing for the United Kingdom.” American Economic Review 85(5), December 1995:

   1278-86.


[14] Inglehart, R., M. Basanez and A. Moreno. ”Human Values and Beliefs: A

   Cross-Cultural Sourcebook.” Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1998.


[15] Isacsson, G. 1999. ”Estimates of the Return to Schooling in Sweden from a

   Large Sample of Twins.” Labour Economics 6, no. 4 (November): 471-89.


[16] Knack, S., and P. Keefer. 1997. “Does Social Capital Have an Economic Pay-

   off? A Cross-Country Investigation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112, no.

   4 (November): 1251-88.


                                       52
[17] La Porta, R, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. Vishny. 1999. ”The Qual-

    ity of Government.” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, no. 1:

    222-79.


[18] Mare, R.. 1991. ”Five Decades of Educational Assortative Mating.” American

    Sociological Review 56: 15-32.


[19] Putnam, R. (with R. Leonardi and R. Y. Nanetti). 1993. Making Democracy

    Work. Princeton: Princeton University Press.


[20] Summers, R. and A. Heston. 1991. ”The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An

    Expanded Set of International Comparisons, 1950-1988.” Quarterly Journal of

    Economics 106, no. 2 (May): 327-68.


[21] Tirole, J. 1996. ”A Theory of Collective Reputations (with applications to the

    persistence of corruption and to firm quality).” Review of Economic Studies 63:

    1-22.


[22] Zak, P. and S. Knack. 2001. “Trust and Growth.” Economic Journal 111 (April):

    295-321.




A      Appendix

    Proof of Lemma 1. Consider a respondent d. Suppose that the current match

lasted for two or more periods before the current period. In that case the respondent

must have been solving the problem identical to (4) in the previous period and he

must have chosen to respond honestly. Consequently, he will choose to respond

                                         53
honestly in the current period too. (This is, due to Assumption 3, true even if the

respondent is repeatedly indifferent between the two actions.) Now suppose that

the current match lasted for only one period before the current period. It is easy

to see from (4) (also using Assumption 3) that it is optimal for the respondent to

respond dishonestly if and only if



                      α(1 − δ)R1 (d) > −(1 − αδ)(1 − d) + a .



If d ≥ 1, this entails R1 (d) > a/ [α(1 − δ)]. However, the best possible sequence of

payoffs the respondent can get is a forever (because replying dishonestly pays off

1 − d ≤ 0 < a), which has discounted value a/(1 − δ) < a/ [α(1 − δ)]. But this

contradicts R1 (d) > a/ [α(1 − δ)]. Therefore if d ≥ 1, the respondent will respond

honestly in state 5. Intuitively, if d ≥ 1, the respondent will respond honestly

whenever the transaction has been initiated, since he has too high a disutility from

behaving dishonestly. If d < 1, then (1) and (4) imply that R5 (d) > R1 (d) = R4 (d),

which implies that the value associated with honest response in (4) is no less than

the value associated with honest response in (6), i.e. that



 (1 − α) [a + R1 (d)] + α [a + δR5 (d)] ≥

                            (1 − α) [a + R1 (d)] + α [a + (1 − k)δR4 (d) + kδR5 (d)]




                                            54
Because in the previous period the match was new and the respondent chose to

respond honestly, it must be the case that



      (1 − α) [a + R1 (d)] + α [a + (1 − k)δR4 (d) + kδR5 (d)] ≥ 1 − d + R1 (d)



and hence also



                 (1 − α) [a + R1 (d)] + α [a + δR5 (d)] ≥ 1 − d + R1 (d) .



Consequently, the respondent will choose to respond honestly in the current period.



   Proof of Lemma 2. Consider an initiator m. Suppose that the current match

lasted for two or more periods before the current period. In that case the respondent

must have been solving the problem identical to (9) in the previous period and she

must have chosen to initiate. Consequently, she will choose to initiate in the current

period too. (This is, due to Assumption 3, true even if the initiator is repeatedly

indifferent between the two actions.) Now suppose that the current match lasted

for only one period before the current period. It is easy to see from (9) (also using

Assumption 3) that it is optimal for the initiator not to initiate if and only if



                                α(1 − δ)I1 (m) > a + m .



If m ≥ 0, this entails I1 (m) > a/ [α(1 − δ)]. However, the best possible sequence

of payoffs the initiator can get is a forever (because not initiating pays off −m ≤


                                            55
0 < a), which has discounted value a/(1 − δ) < a/ [α(1 − δ)]. But this contradicts

R1 (d) > a/ [α(1 − δ)]. Therefore if m ≥ 0, the initiator will initiate in state 3.

Intuitively, if m ≥ 1, the initiator will initiate whenever matched if the respondent

is known to respond honestly, since she has a disutility from not initiating. If m < 0,

(9) and (10) imply that



                 I2 (m) ≤ max {−m + I1 (m); (1 − q) [−m + I1 (m)]

                        +q(1 − α) [a + I1 (m)] + qα [a + δI3 (m)]}

                        = qI3 (m) + (1 − q) [−m + I1 (m)]

                        ≤ qI3 (m) + (1 − q)I3 (m)

                        = I3 (m)



Because in the previous period the match was new and the initiator chose to initiate,

it must be the case that



   (1 − q) [−1 + I1 (m)] + q(1 − α) [a + I1 (m)] + qα [a + δI3 (m)] ≥ −m + I1 (m)



and hence also



      I2 (m) = (1 − q) [−1 + I1 (m)] + q(1 − α) [a + I1 (m)] + qα [a + δI3 (m)] .



Combining the previous three results gives



                               I3 (m) ≥ −m + I1 (m) .

                                          56
Consequently, the initiator will choose to initiate in the current period.

   Proof of Theorem 1. Let W : [0, 1]2 → [0, 1]2 be defined by



                   W (p, q) ≡ (V (q), T (p))       ∀(p, q) ∈ [0, 1]2



Since F : R → [0, 1] and G : R → [0, 1] are both continuous, it follows from this

definition and (23) and (22) that the mapping W is continuous. Since [0, 1]2 is a

closed, bounded and convex subset of R2 , it follows by the Brouwer Fixed Point

Theorem that W has a fixed point, i.e., a general trust/trustworthiness equilibrium

exists.




                                          57
