NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS TRADE GOOD OR BAD FOR THE ENVIRONMENT?
SORTING OUT THE CAUSALITY
Jeffrey A. Frankel
Andrew K. Rose
Working Paper 9201
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9201
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

The authors would like to thank for useful comments Ian Bowles, Bill Clark, Dan Esty, Arik Levinson, Joe
Nye, Edward Parson, Rob Stavins, M. Scott Taylor, Geoffrey Williamson and other participants in the NBER
Environmental Economics program meeting and the Environmental Economics, KSG Faculty Lunch and
International Economics seminars, all three at Harvard. Frankel would also like to acknowledge support from
the Savitz Family Fund for Environmental and Natural Resource Policy. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Jeffrey A. Frankel and Andrew K. Rose. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Is Trade Good or Bad for the Environment? Sorting Out the Causality
Jeffrey A. Frankel and Andrew K. Rose
NBER Working Paper No. 9201
September 2002
JEL No. Q2, F1
ABSTRACT
What is the effect of trade on a country’s environment, for a given level of GDP? Some have
observed an apparent positive correlation between openness to trade and measures of environmental
quality. But this could be due to endogeneity of trade, rather than causality. This paper uses
exogenous determinants of trade – geographical variables from the gravity model – as instruments
to isolate the effect of openness. The finding is that trade may indeed have a beneficial effect on
three measures of air pollution. Statistical significance is lacking for Particulate Matter, but is
moderate for NO2, and high for SO2. Results for broader environmental measures are not as
encouraging, but one can at least say that there is little evidence that trade has the detrimental effect
on the environment that the race-to-the-bottom theory would lead one to expect. The larger effect
appears to come via income itself: our results generally support the environmental Kuznets curve,
which says that growth harms the environment at low levels of income and helps at high levels, and
to support the proposition that openness to trade accelerates the growth process.
Jeffrey A. Frankel
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University, 79 JFK Street
Cambridge MA 02138-5801
and NBER
jeffrey_frankel@harvard.edu
http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/fs/jfrankel

Andrew K. Rose
Haas School of Business
University of California
Berkeley, CA 94720-1900
and NBER
arose@haas.berkeley.edu
http://haas.berkeley.edu/~arose

Is Trade Good or Bad for the Environment?

Sorting Out the Causality
Jeffrey Frankel and Andrew Rose

Opponents of globalization usually do not argue that trade is bad for economic
growth, as measured by GDP. Rather they fear adverse effects on such “non-economic”
objectives as environmental quality.1 If the term globalization is meant to capture the
totality of industrialization, then there is little question that, at least at the early stages of
economic development, environmental degradation is a consequence. If the human
species still consisted of a few thousand hunter-gatherers, for example, man-made
pollution would be close to zero. This is not the interesting question, however. The
interesting questions are (1) whether economic growth eventually brings environmental
improvement and (2) whether cross-border integration helps or hurts in this process.
That first question is the much-studied environmental Kuznets curve, while the second is
the focus of this paper.

1. Hypotheses

The paper seeks to disentangle a variety of simultaneous causal relationships, on a
cross-country data set. The question of central interest is the effect of international trade

1

The quotation marks are necessary around “non-economic,” because economists’
conceptual framework fully incorporates such objectives as environmental quality, even
though pollution is an externality that is not measured by GDP. Frankel (2002) reviews
recent controversies surrounding globalization and the environment.

2
on the environment, for a given level of GDP. We consider certain causal relationships
as already fairly well established:

1) Openness has a positive effect on countries’ real income per capita.
Economists have long made the theoretical case, from the Smith-Ricardo idea
of comparative advantage to the Helpman-Krugman model of trade under
imperfect competition. The empirical case is also moderately strong.

2) Output has a positive effect on pollution through the physical scale of
production, but at the same time,

3) At higher levels of income per capita, growth raises the public’s demand for
environmental quality, which, given the right institutions, can translate into
environmental regulation. People value both their economic standard of
living as measured by GDP and the environment as well. Environmental
regulation, if effective, then translates into a cleaner environment. The ratio
of pollution to GDP can be improved through a composition channel and a
technique channel. While the effects described under propositions (2) and (3)
go opposite directions, there is by now a rough conventional wisdom that the
negative effect of growth on environmental quality dominates at low levels of
income, while the positive effect may dominate at higher levels. This
proposition is:

3
4) The environmental Kuznets curve: the relationship between income per capita
and some kinds of pollution is roughly shaped as an inverted U. The World
Bank (1992) and Grossman and Krueger (1993, 1995) brought to public
attention this empirical finding.2 Growth is bad for air and water pollution at
the initial stages of industrialization, but later on reduces pollution, as
countries become rich enough to pay to clean up their environments. The
standard theoretical rationale is that production technology makes some
pollution inevitable, but that demand for environmental quality rises with
income. 3

2

Grossman and Kruger (1993, 1995) found the Kuznets curve pattern for urban air
pollution (SO2 and smoke) and several measures of water pollution. Selden and Song
(1994) found the pattern for SO2, suspended particulate matter (PM), NOx, and carbon
monoxide. Shafik (1994) found evidence of the U shape for deforestation, suspended
PM, and SO2, but less for water pollution and some other measures. Among more recent
studies, Hilton and Levinson (1998) find the U-shaped relationship for automotive lead
emissions and Bradford, Schlieckert and Shore (2000) find some evidence of the
environmental Kuznets curve for arsenic, COD, dissolved oxygen, lead and SO2, while
finding less evidence in the cases of PM and some other measures of pollution. Bimonte
(2001) finds the relationship for the percentage of land that is protected area, within
national territory. Harbaugh, Levinson, and Wilson (2000) point out that the relationship
is very sensitive with respect, for example, to functional form and updating of the data
set.
3

Theoretical derivations include Andreoni and Levinson (1998), Jaeger and Kolpin
(2000), Selden and Song (1995) and Stokey (1998), among others. Another explanation is
that the compositional pattern results from the stages of economic development, the
transition from an agrarian economy to manufacturing to services (Arrow, et al, 1995;
Panayotou, 1993). This explanation is not inconsistent with the usual view, but it is less
likely to require the mechanism of effective government regulation. In terms of our
testable implications, if the Kuznets curve results solely from this composition effect,
then high incomes should lead to a better environment even in the absence of democracy
at the national level and even when externalities arise at the international level.

4
To portray the Kuznets curve as claiming that if countries promote growth, the
environment will eventually take care of itself, would be an unfair caricature. This
optimistic view applies to pollution only if it is largely confined within the home or
within the firm.4 Most pollution, such as SO2, NOx, etc., is external to the home or firm.
For such externalities, higher income and a popular desire to clean up the environment
are not enough. There must also be effective government regulation, which usually
requires a democratic system to translate the popular will into action (something that was
missing in the Soviet Union, for example), as well as the rule of law and reasonably
intelligent mechanisms of regulation. That is at the national level; the requirements for
dealing with cross-border externalities are greater still.
We will be testing the environmental Kuznets curve, along with the other
propositions on this list. But it is not the central focus of the paper.
The central focus of the paper is, rather:
5) The effect of trade on the environment for a given level of income per capita.
This is an interesting question for two reasons. First, it is perhaps the most
relevant fundamental question for policy. If it were established that trade had an adverse
effect on the environment solely because openness raised countries’ incomes, and the
higher incomes damaged the environment, in practice few would conclude from this that

4

Perhaps 80 percent (by population) of world exposure to particulates comes from
cooking fire smoke in poor countries, which need not involve any externality.
Chaudhuri and Pfaff (2002) find a U-shaped relationship between income and indoor
smoke, across households. In the poorest households, rising incomes mean more cooking
and more indoor pollution. Still-higher incomes allow a switch to cleaner fuels. Engel
curves can produce the relationship, with no role for government regulation.

5
we should try to turn back the clock on globalization. Few would choose deliberate selfimpoverishment as a means to a clean environment.5
Secondly, the question is interesting because the answer is completely unknown.
There are possible effects in both directions. Most widely discussed is the race to the
bottom hypothesis, which says that countries that are open to international trade (and
investment) will adopt looser standards of environmental regulation, out of fear of a loss
in international competitiveness.6
Less widely recognized is the possibility of an effect in the opposite direction,
which we will call the gains from trade hypothesis. Trade allows countries to attain
more of what they want, which includes environmental goods in addition to marketmeasured output. How could openness have a positive effect on environmental quality,
even for a given level of GDP per capita? One widely identified possibility is an
international ratcheting up of environmental standards.7 A second possibility concerns

5

Meadows, et al (1972), and Daly (1993), could, however, be interpreted as arguing that
trade is necessarily bad because it raises measured GDP which in turn harms the
environment. For a general survey of the issues, see Esty (2001).
6

What is competitiveness? Economists tend to argue that concerns regarding
international competitiveness, if interpreted as fears of trade deficits, are misplaced,
which would seem to imply they would not affect rational policy-making. Or else, to the
extent competitiveness concerns can be interpreted as downward pressure on regulation
commensurate with cost considerations, economists figure that they may be appropriate.
But Esty and Gerardin (1998, p. 17-21) point out that competitiveness fears, under actual
political economy conditions, may have a greater effect on environmental standards than
is rational, particularly by creating a political drag against new regulation.
7

E.g., Vogel (1995), Porter (1995), and Braithwaite and Drahos (2000). This ratcheting
up may be more effective for product standards than for standards regarding production
processes and methods.

6
technological and managerial innovation.8 Multi-national corporations tend to bring
clean state-of-the-art production techniques from high-standard countries of origin, to
host countries where they are not yet known, for several reasons:
“First, many companies find that the efficiency of having a single set of
management practices, pollution control technologies, and training programmes
geared to a common set of standards outweighs any cost advantage that might be
obtained by scaling back on environmental investments at overseas facilities.
Second, multinational enterprises often operate on a large scale, and recognise
that their visibility makes them especially attractive targets for local enforcement
officials...Third, the prospect of liability for failing to meet standards often
motivates better environmental performance...” -- Esty and Gentry (1997, p.161)
Trade economists think that openness encourages ongoing innovation, that this may be
why countries that trade more appear to experience a sustained increase in growth rather
than just the one-time increase in the level of real income predicted by classical trade
theory. Trade speeds the absorption of frontier technologies and best-practice
management. It then seems likely that openness could encourage innovation that would
be beneficial to environmental improvement as well as economic progress.
Another possibility is that, because trade offers consumers the opportunity to
consume goods of greater variety, it allows countries to attain higher levels of welfare
(for any given level of domestically produced output), which, as under proposition (3)
above, will raise the demand for environmental quality. Again, if the appropriate

Esty and Gentry (1997, pp. 157, 161, 163) and Schmidheiny (1992). Eskeland and
Harrison (2002) find that, within given sectors in given developing countries, foreign
plants are significantly more energy efficient and use cleaner types of energy than
domestic plants.
8

7
institutions are in place, this demand for higher environmental quality will translate into
effective regulation and the desired reduction in pollution.9

Whether the race-to-the-bottom effect dominates the gains-from-trade effect is an
empirical question.

Figure 1 is a schematic illustration of the causal relationships that are
hypothesized above, and several others as well. Two controversial propositions are:
6) The pollution haven hypothesis: To the extent that countries are open to trade
and investment, some (e.g., those with low demand for environmental quality)
will adopt lax environmental standards to attract multinational corporations
and export pollution-intensive goods, while others (e.g., those with high
demand for environmental quality) will adopt high standards and import
pollution-intensive goods. It is worth emphasizing one of the differences
between the race-to-the-bottom hypothesis and the pollution haven
hypothesis: while the former implies an overall world level of environmental
regulation that is less than optimal, the latter does not. Some countries may

9

A final possibility is that globalization offers interest groups that care particularly about
the environment new weapons. Domestically, they can threaten to block the trend
toward free trade unless they are bought off. [This is by analogy with the “embedded
liberalism” identified by Ruggie (1982), a post-war quid pro quo that gave workers an
increased level of social protection, in exchange for an open international trading
regime.] Across borders, the new weapons include consumer labeling for imports and
corporate codes of conduct for multinationals.

8
choose high environmental standards for their own production, and import
from others goods that embody pollution.10

7) The Porter hypothesis: a tightening of environmental regulation stimulates
technological innovation and thereby has positive effects on both the economy
and the environment -- for example, saving money by saving energy.11 The
analytical rationale for this view is not entirely clear. (Is the claim that any
sort of change in regulation, regardless in what direction, stimulates
innovation, or is there something special about pro-environment regulation?
Is there something special about the energy sector?) Nevertheless the Porter
hypothesis is sufficiently widely discussed that it merits a position on our list
of propositions to be taken into account.

10

Some economists’ research suggests that environmental regulation is not a major
determinant of firms’ ability to compete internationally. When deciding where to locate,
multinational firms seem to pay far more attention to such issues as labor costs and
market access than to the stringency of local environmental regulation: Jaffe, Peterson,
Portney and Stavins (1995), Low and Yeats (1992), and Tobey (1990). Other empirical
researchers, however, have found more of an effect of environmental regulation: Lee and
Roland-Holst (1997) and Smarzynska and Wei (2001). Theoretical analyses include
Copeland and Taylor (1994, 1995, 2001) and Liddle (2001).
11

Porter and van der Linde (1995).

9

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN
TRADE AND ENVIRONMENT
Hypothesized causal relationships
Geography

Trade

Democracy

Factor cumulation

GDP

Environmental
regulation

Environmental
Quality
1. Economic gains from trade
2. Reverse causality from income to trade
3. Environmental Kuznets curve
4. Effect of regulation on productivity,
whether negative (usual) or positive (Porter Hypothesis)
5. Effect of trade on environment, whether adverse (race to the bottom) or positive
(environmental gains from trade)
6. Pollution haven hypothesis

10

2. Endogeneity

This list of propositions includes important possible causal arrows running in both
directions among each pair out of the three key endogneous variables – trade, income,
and the environment. In estimating a system of equations, the simultaneity problems are
formidable. Let us say that we find a positive correlation between trade and
environmental quality. Eiras and Schaeffer (2001, p. 4), for example, find: “In countries
with an open economy, the average environmental sustainability score is more than 30
percent higher than the scores of countries with moderately open economies, and almost
twice as high as those of countries with closed economies.” Does this mean that trade is
good for the environment? Not necessarily. It might be a result of the Porter hypothesis
-- environmental regulation stimulates productivity -- together with the positive effect of
income on trade. Or it might be because democracy leads to higher levels of
environmental regulation, and democracy is causally intertwined with income and trade.
A couple of studies seek to isolate the independent effect of openness. Harbaugh,
Levinson, and Wilson (2000, Table 4) report (in passing) a beneficial effect of trade on
the environment, controlling for income. Antweiler, Copeland and Taylor (2001), which
is probably the most careful existing study explicitly focused on the effects of trade on
the environment, estimates an effect that is favorable (though only of borderline
significance, statistically speaking). But neither study makes allowance for the problem
that trade may be the result of other factors rather than the cause.
Or let us say that we were to find a negative correlation between trade and
environmental quality. Does this mean that trade is bad for the environment? Not

11
necessarily. It might be a result of a negative effect of environmental regulation on
growth, together with the positive effect of growth on trade.12
The endogeneity of trade is a familiar problem in the empirical literature on whether
openness promotes growth. Rodrik (1995), for example, argues that the common finding of
a positive correlation between trade and per capita income is "quite misleading on the
importance it attaches to the role of export-orientation in the growth performance. It also
has backward the causal relationship between exports, on the one hand, and investment and
growth on the other."

Similarly, Helpman (1988, p.6) asks "Does growth drive trade, or is

there a reverse link from trade to growth?" Harrison (1995) concludes that "existing
literature is still unresolved on the issue of causality."
Quite a few stories of reverse causality, running from income to trade, are possible.
The mechanism that Rodrik, or Levine and Renelt (1992), have in mind runs as follows: an
exogenous increase in investment in a developing country with a comparative disadvantage
in producing capital goods will necessitate an increase in imports of such goods. Another
mechanism is that trade might rise with income because foreign goods are superior goods in
consumption. Many studies have sought to identify some direct measures of trade policy,
hoping that they are exogenous.

But, aside from difficulties in measuring trade policies,

which are typically serious enough, a fundamental conceptual problem of simultaneity
remains (e.g., Sala-i-Martin, 1991).

What if free-market trade policies are no more

important to growth than free-market domestic policies, but tend to be correlated with them?

12

The same ambiguity attaches to correlations among the other pairs of variables. For
example, Esty and Porter (2001) find a positive correlation between income and
environmental regulation. Their preferred interpretation is the Porter hypothesis, but they
are obligate to admit that “These findings do not establish causality.” (p. 26).

12
Then openness will be observed to be correlated with growth, even though trade does not
cause growth. A final possible mechanism is a pattern whereby poor countries tend to
depend fiscally on tariff revenue, and to reduce tariffs as they become more developed.
What is needed is a good instrumental variable, which is exogenous yet highly
correlated with trade. The gravity model of bilateral trade offers a solution. This model
says that trade is determined by indicators of country size (GDP, population, and land
area) and of distance between the pair of countries in question (physical distance as well
as dummy variables indicating common borders, linguistic links, and landlocked
status).13 Such geographical variables are plausibly exogenous. Yet when aggregated
across all bilateral trading partners these variables are highly correlated with a country’s
overall trade, and thus make good instrumental variables. Such gravity instruments have
recently been used to isolate the effect of trade in studies of growth (Frankel and Romer,
1999; Irwin and Tervio, 2001), studies of currency union (Frankel and Rose, 1996, 2002),
and studies of inequality (Chakrabarti, 2000, and Gurkaynak and Krashinsky, 2001).
Income too is endogenous.

We thus also use a second set of instrumental

variables, for income per capita, from the growth literature: lagged income (the
conditional convergence hypothesis), size (Frankel and Romer, 1999; Frankel and Rose,
2002), and rates of investment rates and human capital formation (the factor
accumulation variables familiar from neoclassical growth equations: Solow, 1956; Barro,
1991; Mankiw, Romer and Weil, 1992).
As always, there is the possibility that some of our instrumental variables are in
truth endogenous. This could be an issue with the factor accumulation variables in the
13

Frankel (1997) offers a comprehensive review of the gravity model.

13
income equation: Concern has been expressed that investment is endogenous, or that
human capital is.14 To us, the geographic variables seem the least likely to be
endogenous, not just in a causal sense, but also in the econometric sense, i.e., correlated
with the error term in the trade equation. These are the instruments we need for testing
our question of central interest, the effects of trade on the environment for a given level
of income.

3. Results

We estimate a system of two equations:
Growth equation:
ln(Y/Pop) 90,i = β 0 + α ([X + M]/Y) 90,i + β1ln(Pop) i + φZ i
+ γln(Y/Pop) 70,i + δ 1 (I/Y)i + δ 2 n i + δ 3 (School1)i + δ 4 (School2)i + u i

(1)

The dependent variable is the natural logarithm of GDP (Y) divided by total population
(Pop) at the end of 1990, measured in real PPP-adjusted dollars for country i. Aggregate
exports, aggregate imports, and gross investment are denoted “X”, “M” and “I”
respectively. The growth rate of population is denoted “n”. “School1” and “School2” are
estimates of human capital investment based, respectively, on primary and secondary
schooling enrollment rates. “Z” denotes other controls; Greek letters denote coefficients;
and “u” denotes the residual impact of other, hopefully orthogonal influences. We denote
by “controls” the variables that derive from neoclassical growth theory and appear on the
14

E.g., Bils and Klenow (1998) argue that investment in human capital is endogenous
with respect to growth. It is also possible that the political variables are endogenous,
with richer countries tending to become more democratic.

14
second line of the equation: initial income, investment, human capital and population
growth.15

Variables other than GDP per capita and openness are computed as averages

over the sample period. Following the norm in the growth literature, we measure
openness as the ratio of trade to output.

Environmental quality equation:

EnviroDamagei = ϕ 0 + ϕ 1 (Y / pop1 ) 90,i + ϕ 2 (Y / pop 2 ) 90,i

2

+ µ ([ X + M ] / Y ) 90,i + π ( Polity ) 90,i + λ ( LandArea / Cap ) 90,i + ei .

(2)

The dependent variable is any of three of measures of pollution or other measures of
environmental damage, each estimated as separate equations. The first two variables are
per capita income and per capita income squared, for country i. The EKC hypothesis
predicts that the coefficient on the latter is negative, so that the pollution curve eventually
turns down. As an alternative to the quadratic functional form, we also tried the three
segments of a spline (split at the .33 and .66 percentiles) fit to the natural logarithm of per
capita income. Per capita income is again defined as real 1990 GDP (Y) divided by total
population (Pop), taken from the Penn World Table 5.6, which is measured in real PPPadjusted dollars. Aggregate exports and aggregate imports as before are denoted “X” and

15

Frankel and Romer (1999) and Irwin and Tervio (2000) adopt a more stripped-down
specification by omitting these controls, following Hall and Jones (1999). They regress
output per capita against distance from the equator and measures of country size,
reasoning that the factor accumulation variables might be endogenous. Including the
controls in the output equation might result in a downward-biased estimate of α, if some
of the effect of openness arrives via factor accumulation. But inappropriately excluding
these variables would also produce biased results and could be expected improperly to
attribute too large an effect to trade. Our own preference is for the specification that
includes the controls, in part because it is likely to avoid a possible upward bias in the
openness coefficient.

15
“M”; Polity is a measure of how democratic is the structure of the government, ranging
from -10 (“strongly autocratic”) to +10 (strongly democratic).16 Land area per capita is
intended to allow for the likelihood that population density leads to environmental
degradation (for a given level of per capita income).17

Again, allowing for the

endogeneity of trade and income is the main new contribution of this paper.
We focus on results for three measures of air pollution:
SO2: sulphur dioxide, mean (in micograms per cubic meter), 1995
NO2: nitrogen dioxide, mean (in micograms per cubic meter), 1995
PM: Suspended Particulate Matter, mean total (in micograms per cubic meter), 1995

We have also looked at four other measures of environmental quality:
CO2/cap: Carbon dioxide emissions, industrial, in metric tons per capita
Def: annual deforestation, average percentage change, 1990-95
Energy: Energy depletion, in percent of GDP (“genuine savings”)18, and
Water: Access to clean water (percentage of rural population) 1990-1996.
Of these seven, the three measures of local air pollution -- SO2, NO2, and PM -- are the
most relevant. As noted, CO2 is a purely global externality, and unlikely to be addressed
16

It is taken from the Polity IV Project at the University of Maryland., described in
Marshall and Jaggers (2000). Barrett and Graddy (2000) also find that an increase in
civil and political freedoms significantly reduces some measures of pollution.
17

Cropper and Griffiths (1994) study deforestation and find that, in addition to the usual
Kuznets curve effect of per capita income, population density has a further adverse effect.

18

Energy depletion is a measure computed for the World Bank’s World Development
Indicators. It is equal to the product of unit resource rents and the physical quantities of
fossil fuel energy extracted (including coal, crude oil, and natural gas). Table 3.15,
available at http://www.worldbank.org/data/wdi2001/pdfs/tab3_15.pdf,
explains the data computations.

16
by regulation at the national level. Deforestation19 and Energy depletion are not
measures of pollution, and measuring them involves some serious problems of
composition and data reliability, as does water access. But we thought that it was worth at
least taking a look at these broader measures of environmental quality.

3.1 Results for the Growth Equation

We begin by estimating our output equation, equation (1), to replicate the
common finding that there is a statistical association between trade and income. In Table
I, we report OLS estimates of the impact of trade on output. The coefficient on initial
GDP is a highly significant 0.71, representing a plausible degree of conditional
convergence -- about 30 percent over a 20-year period. The estimated coefficient on
trade, 0.33 in the OLS version, says that, holding constant for 1970 income, income in
1990 was 1/3 per cent higher for every 1.0 percentage point increase in the trade/GDP
ratio. When multiplied by 3.45 (=1/(1-.71)) to convert to an estimated effect on long-run
income, the effect on output is 1.14 per cent for every 1.0 percentage point increase in
openness.
The effects of investment and both schooling variables are statistically significant
and reasonable. Population growth has the negative sign hypothesized by the
neoclassical model, but as in earlier work is the one growth determinant that is not
statistically significant.

19

It seems plausible that trade in wood products might lead to some chopping down of
trees. For example, Brooks, et al. (2001), estimate that the Accelerated Tariff
Liberalization initiative now underway in forest products may increase aggregate world
trade in this sector by 2 percent and increase the world timber harvest by 0.5 per cent.
But, as they note, this need not imply net deforestation, since planting increases as well.

17
[Table 1 about here.]
The next step is to estimate the corresponding output equation using IV estimation
to account for the possible endogeneity of openness. The instrumental variables we
choose come from a simple gravity model that uses as controls an aggregation of: the log
of distance, the log of partner country population, the log of area, and dummy variables
for common language, common land border, and landlocked status. After estimating the
gravity model for a large data set on pairwise trade, we aggregate the exponent of the
fitted values across bilateral trading partners to arrive at a prediction of total trade for a
given country. The correlation between actual trade shares and our generated instrument
is a reassuringly high value of .72.20 Table I also reports the IV estimate of equation (1).
The estimate of interest to us here is α, the coefficient on openness. When we include
initial income and other controls, the effect of trade on output is 0.43. The implied
steady state impact is 1.6 (=.43/(1-.73)).
The Porter Hypothesis reverses conventional economics wisdom by suggesting
that aggressive efforts to protect the environment can be good for productivity growth. A
crude way to test this hypothesis is to include measures of environmental quality on the
right-hand side of the growth equation, using the polity variable as an instrument to

20

See Frankel and Rose (2002) for results of the estimation of the bilateral trade equation
and details of the calculation of the gravity instrument, which corresponds closely to that
used here. That paper also includes a response to critiques from Rodriguez and Rodrik
(2001) and Rodrik (2000) regarding the gravity instruments. The most difficult part of
the controversy concerns whether trade can be assumed to have similar effects on growth
when the “globalization” arises from deliberate policy (such as trade liberalization) as
when it arises from geographic and technological factors (such as proximity or declining
shipping costs).

18
control for the endogeneity of environmental quality. When we tried this, we found no
support for the hypothesis of a positive effect on growth. [Results not reported here].

3.2 Results for Pollution: Race to the Bottom, or Gains from Trade?

Table 2 reports the results of OLS estimation of equation (2), where the
dependent variable is represented by the three measures of air pollution.

The estimated

effect of the polity variable on pollution is always negative, suggesting that improved
governance has a beneficial effect. It is generally significant statistically. The same is
true of land area per capita, offering some evidence that population density has an
adverse effect on pollution.
Of greater interest is the relationship with per capita income. The estimated
coefficient on the quadratic term is negative for all three measures of air pollution,
confirming the EKC hypothesis: after a certain point, growth is good for the environment.
Statistically, it is highly significant in the case of SO2 and NO2, and moderately
significant in the case of PM.
When we used a spline function in place of a quadratic, the results again tend to
support the EKC [Table A2]. That is, increases in income in the low-income countries
increases pollution, and in the high-income countries reduces it.

The adverse effect in

the low-income range is insignificant for SO2, but is highly significant for suspended
particulate matter. The effect in the high-income range is significant for PM, borderline
significant for SO2, and insignificant for NO2. The measure that does not exhibit a clear
Kuznets curve in the spline case is NO2, where the adverse effect does not show up until
the middle third of the spline.

19
The quadratic specification is far more common than the spline in the literature,
and is probably better. It is less arbitrary in its cut-off points and yet more sparing in
degrees of freedom. Also it allows one to try to identify the level of income at which
pollution peaks. The OLS point estimates say that PM peaks at an income level of
$2,882 per capita, SO2 at $5770 per capita, and NO2 at $7665 per capita.
[Table 2 about here.]
Our central interest is in µ, the coefficient on openness. The coefficient on
openness is negative for all three kinds of air pollution – insignificantly so for PM,
moderately significant for NO2, and highly significant for SO2. Apparently any adverse
“race to the bottom” effect on air pollution is outweighed by positive “gains from trade”
effects. When we use the spline for income, the same results emerge for openness [Table
A2].
The contribution of this paper is to address the possibility that these apparent
effects may be the spurious results of simultaneity. Table 3 estimates the environmental
equation via instrumental variables, where the gravity-derived prediction of openness is
the instrument for trade and the factor accumulation variables are the instruments for
income.
[Table 3 about here.]
The IV results are generally similar to the OLS results, though with somewhat
diminished significance levels in some cases. The EKC is still there for all three
pollutants: SO2, NO2, and PM. In the IV results of Table 3, the coefficient on
openness is negative for all three pollution measures. As in the OLS results, statistical
significance is high for SO2, moderate for NO2, and altogether lacking for PM. (When

20
the income relationship is estimated with a spline instead of a quadratic form, in Table
A3, the effect on pollution again turns down for all three measures. The general pattern
of coefficients on openness is the same as in the OLS estimates.)

3.3 Results for Other Environmental Measures

Air pollution is only one kind of measure of environmental quality. We also tried
these tests with some others: carbon dioxide, deforestation, energy depletion, and access
to clean water. As noted, the measurement difficulties tend to be much greater than with
air pollution. The OLS results are reported in Tables 4 (for the case of quadratic EKC)
and (for the spline). In most cases, the effects of polity, area, and quadratic income go in
the same direction as with the air pollution indicators. The Kuznets curve shows up with
high statistical significance for deforestation, energy depletion, and rural water access.
Beneficial effects of openness show up only for energy depletion and water access, and
are of borderline statistical significance. (In the case of water access, a positive
coefficient indicates a beneficial environmental effect, the reverse of the other six
indicators.)
[Tables 4 and 5 about here]
The case that would give an environmentalist the greatest concern is CO2. The
coefficient on quadratic income is positive and highly significant. In the spline version
as well, growth continues to have a positive, indeed increasing, effect through all three
segments in the case of CO2. This confirms findings of other researchers, as well as a
priori reasoning: CO2 is a purely global externality, so that there is no reason to expect
individual countries to address it on their own, no matter what their level of income.

21
Furthermore, the coefficient on openness is apparently positive, and of moderate
significance in the OLS case. This result could be viewed as one piece of evidence
supporting the idea that global warming cannot be addressed without an international
treaty, or at least has not been.21
The IV results are reported in Tables 5 (for the case of quadratic EKC) and A4
(for the spline). While some results, such as the Kuznets curve, differ very little from
OLS, in some other cases the use of instrumental variables makes a difference.
Encouragingly, the apparently detrimental effect of openness on carbon dioxide
emissions loses all significance, awhile the apparently beneficial effect on energy
depletion becomes significant (at the 10% level). On the other hand, the beneficial effect
on water access (which was not quite significant under OLS) disappears.
Thus the results continue to be generally supportive of both the Kuznets curve and
the proposition that openness is at least as likely to help the environment, for a given
level of income, as to hurt it. The only case where growth appears always detrimental for
the environment -- and openness perhaps to exacerbate the problem, though significance
disappears under IV -- is CO2. This is the one gas on our list that is a purely global
externality, where countries cannot expect to be able to address it by national regulation
on their own, and indeed where fears of adverse effects on competitiveness are most
acute.

21

Of course, we cannot rule out that emissions of CO2 also follow a Kuznets Curve, but
that the peak is not reached until higher levels of income than yet experienced by rich
countries. (Schmalensee, Stoker and Judson, 1996.) But, as Dua and Esty (1997, p. 74)
point out, that the ability to control pollution would diminish with the geographical
diffusion of the externality is exactly what one would expect.

22
3.4 Do Some Countries Have a “Comparative Advantage” in Pollution?

To summarize the results regarding openness so far, trade, if anything, appears
often to have a beneficial effect on measures of environmental quality, for given levels of
income. The cases where the effect is statistically significant, particularly SO2 and
NO2, are cases where the effect is beneficial. We interpret the absence of a general
upward effect of openness on environment degradation as evidence against the “race to
the bottom” hypothesis.22
Putting aside now the effects on the overall level of environmental quality
worldwide, one might also be concerned about a possible “pollution haven” hypothesis
according to which economic integration results in some countries exporting pollution to
others, even if the overall level of pollution does not rise. One version of the hypothesis
would be that countries that have a particularly high demand for environmental quality –
e.g., the rich countries -- specialize in products that can be produced cleanly, and they let
the poor countries produce and sell the products that require pollution.23 This hypothesis
can be readily tested by adding to the environment equation the product of openness and
22

Good economic practice forbids interpreting the absence of statistically significant
rejections of the null hypothesis as proof that the null hypothesis is true. The test can
have low power. Still, this is not one of those contexts where one would necessarily
expect low power on a priori grounds (as one would, for example, when testing the
hypothesis that a financial spot price follows a random walk -- Frankel, 1990). Many
observers claim to see in the world around them evidence that trade is bad for the
environment. Thus our inability to find it in when looking across countries has some
meaning.
23

E.g., Suri and Chapman (1998) find that middle-income countries’ growth only leads to
lower domestic pollution if they increase imports of manufactures. Muradian, O’Connor
and Martinez-Alier (2001) have found recent evidence that the imports of rich countries
embody more air pollution than their exports. Levinson and Taylor (2001) find that those
US industries experiencing the largest rise in environmental control costs have also
experienced the largest increases in net imports.

23
income per capita. If rich countries take advantage of trade by exporting pollutioncreating activities to poor countries, the interaction between openness and income should
have a negative effect on the level of a country’s domestic pollution. When we tried this
as an extension, we found that the estimated coefficient on the interactive term in most
cases not significant. The exceptions are PM and to some extent SO2; under either OLS
or IV estimation, openness interacted with income appears to have a positive effect on
these types of pollution. But this is the opposite of the sign predicted by the pollution
haven hypothesis, which says that it is poor countries for whom trade leads to
exploitation of the environment, with rich countries supposedly specializing in clean
products.
[Table 6 about here]
A second version of the pollution haven hypothesis would be that countries that
are endowed with a particularly high supply of environmental quality – e.g., those with
high land area per capita become pollution havens and import clean goods from those that
are more densely populated. We tested this by adding the product of openness and land
area per capita. Again, signs were divided between negative and positive, and
coefficients were usually not at all significant. The only two cases where the coefficient
on the interactive term was moderately significant -- IV for PM and OLS for CO2 -again showed the wrong sign, counterintuitively suggesting that to the extent countries
are open to trade, those that are sparsely populated have lower emissions than they
otherwise would, not higher. In any case, there is no evidence for the pollution haven
effect.
[Table 7 about here.]

24
A third possible source of “comparative advantage” derives from traditional trade
theory. If some countries have a comparative advantage in capital intensive sectors such
as mining or heavy manufacturing and other countries in labor intensive sectors, and if
the former sectors are more polluting than the latter, then trade may lead to an increase in
pollution among the capital-endowed countries and a decrease among the labor-endowed
countries. Note that this version of the comparative advantage hypothesis is likely to
imply that trade leads to lower pollution in poor countries, the opposite of the prediction
of the first version considered above. (Rich countries usually have higher capital/labor
ratios than poor countries, though not always.) We tested this version by including
interactive terms defined as openness times the country’s capital/labor ratio. The signs
were negative as often as positive. Standard errors were large. In only one case out of
14 did the interactive term appear statistically significant: in the OLS estimate for CO2,
the coefficient was positive and significant. This one case would suggest that
international trade encourages capital-intensive countries to emit more carbon, and laborintensive countries to emit less. The finding vanishes under IV estimation.
[Table 8 about here.]
To summarize this section, there is no evidence of that some countries use trade to
exploit a comparative advantage in exporting pollution and others in importing it. This
applies equally to versions that hypothesize countries deliberately setting pollution
regulation so as to respond to their environmental comparative advantage, and to the
version that says capital intensive countries will naturally pollute more as a side effect of
trading according to comparative advantage. The only cases where the coefficient on the
interactive term appears significant are of the wrong sign.

25

4. Conclusions

Trade can have several sorts of effects on the environment. We have found
evidence that, for any given level of income, trade appears to have a beneficial effect on
some measures of environmental quality, though not all. This is particularly true of
measures of air pollution, such as SO2. Even among other measures of environmental
quality, one can at least say that there is no evidence that trade has the detrimental overall
effect on the environment that the race-to-the-bottom theory would lead one to expect.
There is also no evidence for the pollution haven hypothesis, which claims that to the
extent countries engage in trade, some will specialize in dirtier environments and others
in clean. In addition, trade helps promote economic growth, which in turn is an indirect
channel of effect on the environment. At low levels of income this effect is detrimental
to the environment, at high levels beneficial.

4.1 A Sample Calculation

An interesting question is whether, within the class of low-income countries, the
direct beneficial effect of openness is large enough to offset the indirect effect via
income. The openness coefficient is too variable across measures of pollution and is
estimated too imprecisely to allow us to answer this question reliably. But an illustrative
calculation may still be instructive. The environmentally damaging phase of the Kuznets
curve is particularly strong for energy depletion, so let us take this case. Table 1 reports
that for every 1 percentage point increase in openness, income rises by an estimated 0.3

26
percentage points (over the subsequent 20 years). The relevant coefficient from Table A2
implies that, in a poor country, this economic growth in turn induces energy depletion of
8.5*0.3= 2.6. At the same time, the 1 percentage point increase in openness diminishes
energy depletion by an estimated 3.3 for a given level of income. Taking the difference
of the two effects produces an estimated beneficial net effect.
We must be sure not to read much into this calculation of the net effect. The
difference is not statistically significant. Furthermore, the estimated net effect is much
better than this for some of the measures of environmental damage, and much worse for
others. But if it is necessary to attempt an overall verdict, it is also worth recalling two
key points. Even if the two effects of trade on pollution cancelled out, that would still
leave the country with a higher level of income and no change in environmental quality.
Furthermore, once the country gets past the peak in the Kuznets curve, the two effects of
openness, indirectly via income and directly, go the same direction.

4.2 Summary of Conclusions

The results regarding the effects of trade and growth on air pollution, measured
here by SO2, NO2 and Particulate Matter, are generally good. We confirmed the pattern
of the environmental Kuznets curve, whereby growth eventually has a beneficial effect
on pollution, after the initial adverse relationship at low levels of income. Trade
accelerates the growth process. However the primary emphasis of the paper was on the
effect of openness for a given level of income. Here we found little or no evidence of
the race to the bottom hypothesis. To the contrary, a higher ratio of trade to income, for
a given level of income, seems if anything to reduce air pollution. The new contribution

27
of the paper is to address the likely endogeneity of trade, by means of instrumental
variables drawn from the gravity model. The relationship holds up, suggesting that the
observed correlation between trade and environmental quality is not attributable to other
factors.
The results are more mixed when one tries broader measures of environmental
quality. In particular, the optimistic story does not hold for the case of CO2. Here there
is no evidence that the Kuznets curve ever turns down on its own. Furthermore, openness
is estimated under OLS to have a detrimental effect even for a given level of income,
although, encouragingly, the latter effect disappears under IV estimation. In this case,
trade and growth alone won’t do it. International cooperation is also needed to address
this sort of global environmental problem.

* * *

28
References

Andreoni, James, and Arik Levinson 1998, “The Simple Analytics of the Environmental
Kuznets Curve,” NBER Working Paper no. 6739, September.
Antweiler, Werner, Brian Copeland and M. Scott Taylor, 2001, “Is Free Trade Good for
the Environment?” NBER Working Paper No. 6707. American Economic Review, 91,
no. 4, September, 877-908.
Arrow, K., R. Bolin, P. Costanza, P. Dasgupta, C. Folke, C.S.Holling, B.O. Jansson,
S.Levin, K.G. Maler, C.Perrings, and D.Pimentel, 1995, “Economic Growth, Carrying
Capacity, and the Environment,” Science 268, 520-521, April 28.
Barrett, Scott, and Kathryn Graddy, 2000, “Freedom, Growth, and the Environment,”
Environment and Development Economics 5, 433-456.
Barro, Robert, “Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, CVI (May 1991), 407-444.
Bils, Mark, and Peter Klenow, 1998, “Does Schooling Cause Growth or the Other Way
Around?” NBER Working Paper no. 6393, Feb.
Bimonte, Salvatore, 2001, "Model of Growth and Environmental Quality: A New
Evidence of the Environmental Kuznets Curve," Department of Economics, Universita di
Siena, April; available from the SSRN Electronic Paper Collection:
http://papers.ssrn.com/paper.taf?abstract_id=286740
Bradford, David, Rebecca Schlieckert and Stephen Shore, 2000, “The Environmental
Kuznets Curve: Exploring a Fresh Specification,” NBER Working Paper no. 8001.
Braithwaite, John, and Peter Drahos, Global Business Regulation, Cambridge University
Press, UK.
Brooks, D.J., J.A. Ferrante, J. Haverkamp, I. Bowles, W. Lange, and D. Darr, 2001,
Economic and Environmental Effects of Accelerated Tariff Liberalization n the Forest
Products Sector, Northwest Research Station, Forest Service, USDA.
Chakrabarti, Avik, 2000, “Do Nations That Trade More Have a More Unequal
Distribution of Income?” Journal of Economic Development, Dec.
Chaudhuri, Shubham, and Alexander Pfaff, 2002, "Economic Growth and the
Environment: What Can We Learn from Household Data?” Columbia University,
February.

29
Copeland, Brian, and M. Scott Taylor, 1994, “North-South Trade and the Environment,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 109, 755-787.
Copeland, Brian, and M. Scott Taylor, 1995, Trade and the Environment: A Partial
Synthesis,” American Journal of Agricultural Economics 77, 765-771.
Copeland, Brian, and M. Scott Taylor, 2001, “International Trade and the Environment:
A Framework for Analysis,” NBER Working Paper No. 8540, Oct.
Cropper, Maureen and Charles Griffiths. 1994. "The Interaction of Population Growth
and Environmental Quality." American Economic Review, AEA Papers and Proceedings
84(2): 250-254.
Daly, Herman, 1993, “The Perils of Free Trade,” Scientific American, Nov., 51-55.
Dua, Andre, and Daniel Esty, 1997, Sustaining the Asia Pacific Miracle: Environmental
Protection and Economic Integration, Institute for International Economics: Washington
DC.
Eiras, Ana, and Brett Schaefer, 2001, “Trade: The Best Way to Protect the Environment,”
Backgrounder, The Heritage Foundation no. 1480, September 27.
Eskeland, Gunnar, and Ann Harrison, 2002, “Moving to Greener Pastures?
Multinationals and the Pollution Haven Hypothesis,” NBER WP No. 8888, April.
Esty, Daniel, 2001, “Bridging the Trade-Environment Divide,” Journal of Economic
Perspectives, Summer 15, no. 3, 113-130.
Esty, Daniel, and Bradford Gentry, 1997, “Foreign Investment, Globalisation, and the
Environment,” Globalization and the Environment, edited by Tom Jones (Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development: Paris).
Esty, Daniel, and Damien Giradin, 1998, “Environmental Protection and International
Competitiveness: A Conceptual Framework,” J. of World Trade, 32, no. 3, June, 5-46.
Esty, Daniel, and Michael Porter, 2001, “Measuring National Environmental
Performance and Its Determinants,” Yale Law School and Harvard Business School,
April.
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1990, “Zen and the Art of Modern Macroeconomics: The Search for
Perfect Nothingness," in Monetary Policy For a Volatile Global Economy, W. Haraf and
T. Willett, eds., American Enterprise Institute, Washington, D.C..
Frankel, Jeffrey, 1997, Regional Trading Blocs in the World Trading System, Institute for
International Economics, Washington DC.

30
Frankel, Jeffrey, and David Romer, 1999, “Does Trade Cause Growth?” American
Economic Review, 89, no. 3, June, 379-399.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew Rose, 2002. “An Estimate of the Effect of Common
Currencies on Trade and Income,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May.
Grossman, Gene, and Alan Krueger, 1993, “Environmental Impacts of a North American
Free Trade Agreement,” in The U.S.-Mexico Free Trade Agreement, Peter Garber, ed.,
Cambridge MA, MIT Press.
Grossman, Gene, and Alan Krueger, 1995, “Economic Growth and the Environment,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 353-377.
Gurkaynak, Refet, and Harry Krashinsky, 2001, “What Does Trade Do? The Effect of
Trade on Inequality and Growth,” Princeton University, July.
Hall, Robert, and Charles Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, no.1 (Feb.
1999), 83-116.
Harbaugh, William, Arik Levinson, and David Wilson, 2000, “Reexamining the
Empirical Evidence for an Environmental Kuznets Curve,” NBER W P No. 7711, May.
Harrison, Ann, 1995, "Openness and Growth: A Time-Series, Cross-Country Analysis for
Developing Countries," NBER Working Paper No. 5221, August.
Helpman, Elhanan. 1988, "Growth, Technological Progress, and Trade," National Bureau of
Economic Research Reprint no. 1145.
Hilton, F.G. Hank, and Arik Levinson, 1998, “Factoring theEnvironmental Kuznets
Curve: Evidence from Automotive Lead Emissions,” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 35, 126-141.
Irwin, Douglas, and Marko Tervio “Does Trade Raise Income? Evidence from the
Twentieth Century,” NBER Working Paper 7745 (2000).
Jaeger, William, and Van Kolpin, 2000, “Economic Growth and Environmental Resource
Allocation,” August.
Jaffe, Adam, S. Peterson, Paul Portney and Robert Stavins, 1995, “Environmental
Regulation and the Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing: What Does the Evidence
Tell Us?” Journal of Economic Literature.
Levine, Ross, and David Renelt, 1992, "A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth
Regressions," American Economic Review 82, no. 4, 942-963.

31
Levinson, Arik, and M. Scott Taylor, 2001, “Trade and the Environment: Unmasking the
Pollution Haven Effect,” Georgetown University and University of Wisconsin.
Liddle, Brantley, 2001, “Free Trade and the Environment-Development System,”
Ecological Economics 39, 21-36.
Low, P., and A. Yeats, 1992, “Do ‘Dirty’ Industries Migrate?” in P. Low, ed.,
International Trade and the Environment, World Bank, 1992, 89-104.
Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer and David Weil, 1992, “A Contribution to the
Empirics of Economic Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics CVII, 407-437, 1992.
Marshall, Monty, and Keith Jaggers, 2000, “Political Regime Characteristics and
Transitions, 1800-1999: Dataset Users Manual,” Polity IV Project, University of
Maryland, College Park; www.bsos.umd.edu/cidcm/inscr/polity.
Meadows, Donella, Dennis Meadows, Jorgen Randers, and William Behrens, 1972, The
Limits to Growth, Universe Books, New York.
Muradian, Roldan, Martin O’Connor and Joan Martinez-Alier, 2001, "Embodied
Pollution in Trade: Estimating the 'Environmental Load Displacement' of Industrialised
Countries," FEEM Working Paper No. 57, July, Milan.
Panayotou, Theo, 1993, “Empirical Tests and Policy Analysis of Environmental
Degradtion at Different Stages of Development,” Working Paper WP238, Technology
and Employment Programme (International Labor Office: Geneva).
Pfaff, Alexander, and Shubham Chaudhuri, "Household Income, Fuel Choice and Indoor
Air Quality: Microfoundations of an Environmental Kuznets Curve," Columbia
University.
Porter, Michael, 1998, The Competitive Advantage of Nations (The Free Press,
MacMillan).
Porter, Michael, and Claas van der Linde, 1995, “Toward a New Conception of the
Environment-Competitiveness Relationship,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 9, No. 4.
Rodrik, Dani, 1995, "Getting Interventions Right: How South Korea and Taiwan Grew
Rich," NBER Working Paper No. 4964; Economic Policy, no. 20.
Rodríguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik, “Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A
Skeptic's Guide to the Cross-National Evidence,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2001
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001).
Rodrik, Dani, 2000, “Comment on Frankel and Rose,” unpublished, Kennedy School of
Government, Harvard University.

32

Ruggie, John, 1982, “International Regimes, Transactions, and Change: Embedded
Liberalism in the Postwar Economic Order,” International Organization 36, Spring.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, 1991, "Comment," NBER Macroeconomics Annual 6, 368-378.
Schmalensee, R., T. M. Stoker and R.A.Judson, 1996, “World Carbon Dioxide
Emissions: 1950-2050,” Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Selden, Thomas, and Daqing Song, 1994, “Environmental Quality and Development: Is
There a Kuznets Curve for Air Pollution Emissions,” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 27, 147-162.
Selden, Thomas, and Daqing Song, 1995, “Neoclassical Growth, the J Curve for
Abatement, and the Inverted U Curve for Pollution,” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 29, 162-168.
Shafik, Nemat, 1994, “Economic Development and Environmental Quality: An
Econometric Analysis,” Oxford Economic Papers 46, 757-773.
Smarzynska, Beata, and Shang-Jin Wei, 2001, “Pollution Havens and Foreign Direct
Investment: Dirty Secret or Popular Myth?” NBER Working Paper No. 8465, September.
Solow, Robert, 1956 “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 70, February, 65-94.
Stokey, Nancy, 1998, “Are There Limits to Growth?” International Economic Review 39,
no. 1, February, 1-31.
Suri, Vivek, and Duane Chapman, 1998, “Economic Growth, Trade and Energy:
Implications for the Environmental Kuznets Curve,” Ecological Economics 25, 2, May,
147-160.
Tobey, James A., 1990, “The Effects of Domestic Environmental Policies on Patterns of
World Trade: An Empirical Test,” Kyklos 43, 191-209.
Vogel, David, 1995, Trading Up: Consumer and Environmental Regulation in a Global
Economy, Harvard University Press.
World Bank, 1992, Development and the Environment, World Development Report
(Oxford University Press: NY).

33

Table 1: Income equations
. *
. * Income equation with controls, OLS, and IV (gravity)
. *
Number of obs =
106
F( 7,
98) = 378.1
R-squared
= 0.940
-------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
lreal gdp/cap|
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+------------------------------------------openness|
.003
.001
4.51
0.000
lpop |
.065
.021
3.17
0.002
lrgdpchi |
.711
.052
13.56
0.000
invrat |
.016
.006
2.75
0.007
popg |
-.055
.050
-1.10
0.273
sch1 |
.002
.002
1.04
0.299
sch2 |
.007
.002
3.37
0.001
_cons |
1.019
.446
2.29
0.024
----------------------------------------------------------

Number of obs =
102
F( 7,
94) = 329.25
R-squared
= 0.9382
---------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
lrgdpch |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------------openness |
.004
.001
4.28
0.000
lpop |
.078
.024
3.28
0.001
lrgdpchi |
.726
.057
12.71
0.000
invrat |
.013
.006
2.17
0.032
popg | -.047
.058
-0.82
0.416
sch1 |
.001
.002
0.83
0.407
sch2 |
.007
.003
2.82
0.006
_cons |
.750
.496
1.51
0.135
-----------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: openness
Instruments:
lpop lrgdpchi invrat popg sch1 sch2 elhsfs
------------------------------------------------------------

Table 2:
Air pollution equations - OLS (with quadratic income)
[comment PA4 Aug. 2002]
. *

. *
. * NO2
. *
OLS regression

Number of obs =
36
R-squared
= 0.1572
Root MSE
= 40.427
----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
NO2 |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-------------------------------------inc |
408.7414
121.7852
3.36
0.002
incsq | -22.84893
6.898182
-3.31
0.002
openness | -.2943246
.1666625
-1.77
0.088
polity | -3.202309
1.473066
-2.17
0.038
lareapc | -5.940883
5.930511
-1.00
0.324
_cons | -1697.314
517.8064
-3.28
0.003
---------------------------------------------------

. * Income Peak

7665.0902

34

. *
. * Sulfur Dioxide
. *
OLS regression

Number of obs =
41
F( 5,
35) =
11.99
R-squared
= 0.6763
Root MSE
= 23.106
----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
SO2 |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------inc |
287.2499
118.8063
2.42
0.021
incsq |
-16.584
6.781331
-2.45
0.020
openness | -.3063532
.0794114
-3.86
0.000
polity | -6.579158
2.048908
-3.21
0.003
lareapc | -2.921048
1.393917
-2.10
0.043
_cons | -1123.359
500.5334
-2.24
0.031
----------------------------------------------------* Income Peak 5770.1305

. *
. * Suspended Particles
. *
OLS regression

Number of obs =
38
F( 5,
32) =
13.03
R-squared
= 0.6227
Root MSE
= 59.799
----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
PM |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------inc |
566.6506
336.1893
1.69
0.102
incsq | -35.56644
19.05568
-1.87
0.071
openness | -.3741319
.3365302
-1.11
0.275
polity | -6.696519
3.416111
-1.96
0.059
lareapc | -13.02382
6.292223
-2.07
0.047
_cons | -1998.683
1464.379
-1.36
0.182
-----------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
2881.5566

Table 3:
Air pollution equations - IV (with quadratic income)
[Source note: pa4c]

. *
. * NO2
. *
IV (2SLS)

Number of obs = 35
F( 5,29) = 2.61
R-squared
= 0.1847
Root MSE = 38.992
----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
NO2 |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------inc |
460.8478
198.5226
2.32
0.027
incsq | -25.63361
10.88135
-2.36
0.025
pwtopen | -.3257459
.1889883
-1.72
0.095
polity | -3.772668
1.374741
-2.74
0.010
lareapc | -6.141273
6.42893
-0.96
0.347
_cons | -1934.291
868.1319
-2.23
0.034
-------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq
-------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
8015.4835

35

. *
. * Sulfur Dioxide
. *
IV (2SLS)
Number of obs = 40
F(5,34) = 7.17
R-squared
= 0.6677
Root MSE = 23.749
----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
SO2 |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-------------------------------------inc |
296.2443
139.5389
2.12
0.041
incsq | -17.14944
7.740589
-2.22
0.034
pwtopen | -.2270678
.0952128
-2.38
0.023
polity | -6.409379
2.272604
-2.82
0.008
lareapc | -1.541768
1.959461
-0.79
0.437
_cons | -1169.049
607.1931
-1.93
0.063
----------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq
----------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
5637.1921

. *
. * Suspended Particles
. *
IV (2SLS)
Number of obs = 37
F( 5, 31) = 10.31
R-squared = 0.6311
Root MSE = 59.278
----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
PM |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------inc |
681.1777
411.7603
1.65
0.108
incsq | -41.95689
23.24485
-1.80
0.081
pwtopen | -.3063286
.4091727
-0.75
0.460
polity | -7.779254
4.072516
-1.91
0.065
lareapc | -12.62894
6.838168
-1.85
0.074
_cons | -2506.845
1794.301
-1.40
0.172
----------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq

Table 4: Other environmental degradation equations-OLS (with quadratic income)
. *
. * CO2 per capita
. *
OLS regression
Number of obs =
100
F( 5,
94) =
46.66
R-squared
= 0.7517
Root MSE
= 2.4205
----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
CO2/cap |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------inc | -17.89567
4.397366
-4.07
0.000
incsq |
1.332968
.2857756
4.66
0.000
openness |
.0162143
.0082568
1.96
0.053
polity | -.0285954
.0225989
-1.27
0.209
lareapc |
.1374593
.1571698
0.87
0.384
_cons |
58.78729
16.46965
3.57
0.001
----------------------------------------------------. * Income Flat
822.80085

36

. *
. * Deforestation
. *
OLS regression
Number of obs =
96
F(5, 90) = 8.60
R-squared
= 0.2459
Root MSE = 1.1264
-----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
Defor |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------inc |
4.332887
1.323462
3.27
0.002
incsq | -.3102442
.0836911
-3.71
0.000
openness |
.0019005
.0026914
0.71
0.482
polity |
.0372964
.0302987
1.23
0.222
lareapc | -.1105794
.0752327
-1.47
0.145
_cons | -13.63388
5.205874
-2.62
0.010
----------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
1078.177

. *
. * Energy Depletion
. *
OLS regression
Number of obs =
98
F(5, 92) = 3.89
R-squared
= 0.1673
Root MSE = 6.8129
----------------------------------------------------Energy |
Robust
Depltn |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------inc |
38.11421
9.068405
4.20
0.000
incsq | -2.221143
.5226622
-4.25
0.000
openness | -.0140725
.0086366
-1.63
0.107
polity | -.4502979
.1631437
-2.76
0.007
lareapc |
.2913516
.4207371
0.69
0.490
_cons | -155.9837
38.3077
-4.07
0.000
----------------------------------------------------------. * Income Flat
5323.3903

. *
. * Rural access to clean water
. *
OLS regression
Number of obs =
57
F( 5,
51) =
29.48
R-squared
= 0.5977
Root MSE
= 18.154
----------------------------------------------------Rural H20 |
Robust
Access |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------inc | -79.80476
37.52545
-2.13
0.038
incsq |
5.966993
2.261655
2.64
0.011
pwtopen |
.1114468
.0779627
1.43
0.159
polity | -.3198072
.5366819
-0.60
0.554
lareapc | -9.462271
2.094926
-4.52
0.000
_cons |
332.356
154.2255
2.16
0.036
---------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
802.06048

37

Table 5: Other environmental degradation equations -IV (with quadratic income)
. *
. * CO2
. *
IV (2SLS)

Number of obs = 96
F(5, 90) =
51.90
R-squared= 0.7712
Root MSE = 2.0875
----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
CO2/cap |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------inc | -15.62027
3.790209
-4.12
0.000
incsq |
1.210887
.2490011
4.86
0.000
pwtopen |
.0001553
.0100028
0.02
0.988
polity |
-.083874
.0354992
-2.36
0.020
lareapc |
.0186855
.1594831
0.12
0.907
_cons |
49.92776
14.25378
3.50
0.001
----------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq
-------------------------------------------------. * Income Flat
632.65641

. * Deforestation
. *
IV (2SLS)
Number of obs = 92
F( 5, 86) = 11.55
R-squared
= 0.2559
Root MSE
= 1.1374
----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
Defor |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------inc |
5.353294
1.566078
3.42
0.001
incsq | -.3696913
.0973345
-3.80
0.000
pwtopen |
.0010038
.0035137
0.29
0.776
polity |
.0294181
.0260728
1.13
0.262
lareapc | -.0769178
.0827553
-0.93
0.355
_cons | -17.90421
6.134636
-2.92
0.004
----------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq
----------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
1394.4029

. *
. * Energy Depletion
. *
IV (2SLS)
Number of obs = 93
F( 5, 87) = 4.30
R-squared = 0.1644
Root MSE= 6.9883
-------------------------------------------------------Energy |
Robust
Depltn |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-----------------------------------------inc |
43.3005
9.624654
4.50
0.000
incsq | -2.510521
.5576702
-4.50
0.000
pwtopen | -.0342903
.0195457
-1.75
0.083
polity | -.5218554
.1813587
-2.88
0.005
lareapc |
.3640927
.5103971
0.71
0.478
_cons | -177.1147
39.62378
-4.47
0.000
------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq
-------------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
5562.526

38

. *
. * Rural access to clean water
. *
IV (2SLS)
Number of obs = 55
F(5, 49) = 33.57
R-squared
= 0.5760
Root MSE = 18.94
---------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
ruralan |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+------------------------------------------inc | -64.96357
47.91549
-1.36
0.181
incsq |
5.164893
2.799938
1.84
0.071
pwtopen | -.0665827
.2654793
-0.25
0.803
polity | -.3386013
.5783459
-0.59
0.561
lareapc | -8.402257
2.526703
-3.33
0.002
_cons |
273.6916
196.6735
1.39
0.170
--------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq
--------------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
538.59069

Table 6: Does openness lead poor countries to exploit
a comparative advantage in pollution?
. *
. * Openness * income interaction
. *
OLS regression
Number of obs =
100
F( 7,
92) =
35.49
R-squared
= 0.7672
Root MSE
= 2.3692
----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
CO2/cap |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+---------------------------------------inc1 |
.1203402
.6341995
0.19
0.850
inc2 |
1.19975
1.086426
1.10
0.272
inc3 |
5.776292
1.305655
4.42
0.000
openness| -.1192059
.0718369
-1.66
0.100
open*y|
.0154795
.0088929
1.74
0.085
polity |
.0016827
.0294482
0.06
0.955
lareapc |
.3136713
.1861
1.69
0.095
_cons | -.6098371
4.700176
-0.13
0.897
-----------------------------------------------------IV (2SLS)
Number of obs =
96
F( 7,
88) =
21.04
R-squared
= 0.5724
Root MSE
= 2.8864
--------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
CO2/Cap |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+----------------------------------------inc1 |
2.043932
2.034551
1.00
0.318
inc2 |
7.065352
4.42335
1.60
0.114
inc3 |
9.755345
4.996979
1.95
0.054
openness|
.4100573
.5188282
0.79
0.431
open*y| -.0462038
.0584844
-0.79
0.432
polity | -.1315086
.1079307
-1.22
0.226
lareapc | -.3942336
.6656567
-0.59
0.555
_cons | -18.09126
18.3905
-0.98
0.328
-------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 pwtopen
Instruments:
open*ypolity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
------------------------------------------------------

39

OLS regression

Number of obs = 96
F(7,88) = 7.34
R-squared = 0.2748
Root MS = 1.1171
------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
Defor |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-----------------------------------------inc1 |
.7187417
.3805059
1.89
0.062
inc2 | -.8738187
.4755121
-1.84
0.069
inc3 | -.8390258
.3312262
-2.53
0.013
openness|
.0269479
.0289467
0.93
0.354
open*y| -.0028786
.003156
-0.91
0.364
polity |
.0288022
.0296454
0.97
0.334
lareapc | -.1420845
.0882805
-1.61
0.111
_cons | -3.668555
2.74146
-1.34
0.184
----------------------------------------------------IV (2SLS)

Number of obs = 92
F(7, 84) = 3.08
R-squared = .
Root MSE = 1.759
------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
Defor |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+---------------------------------------inc1 |
1.688401
2.551697
0.66
0.510
inc2 |
2.117906
6.235248
0.34
0.735
inc3 |
1.588058
6.302834
0.25
0.802
openness|
.3527669
.7622332
0.46
0.645
open*y| -.0398898
.0867823
-0.46
0.647
polity | -.0146906
.1039573
-0.14
0.888
lareapc | -.4887307
.9524837
-0.51
0.609
_cons | -13.34922
23.862
-0.56
0.577
------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 pwtopen
Instruments:
open*ypolity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

OLS regression

Number of obs = 98
F(7, 90)= 2.63
R-squared = 0.1662
Root MSE = 6.8927
--------------------------------------------------------Energy |
Robust
Depltn |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+----------------------------------------inc1 |
7.021516
2.448437
2.87
0.005
inc2 |
4.655401
2.866341
1.62
0.108
inc3 |
-2.80314
2.179854
-1.29
0.202
openness|
.0344963
.1056991
0.33
0.745
open*y| -.0055399
.0119254
-0.46
0.643
polity | -.4541131
.1745755
-2.60
0.011
lareapc |
.1912074
.4854832
0.39
0.695
_cons | -47.98723
17.31681
-2.77
0.007
------------------------------------------------------IV (2SLS)

Number of obs = 93
F(7, 85) = 0.89
R-squared = .
Root MSE = 12.401
-------------------------------------------------------Energy |
Robust
Depltn |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+------------------------------------------inc1 |
16.00533
11.74501
1.36
0.177
inc2 |
23.49715
25.19547
0.93
0.354
inc3 |
16.92039
27.61245
0.61
0.542
openness|
2.386805
3.186188
0.75
0.456
open*y| -.2729026
.3610807
-0.76
0.452
polity | -.7815838
.5146158
-1.52
0.133
lareapc | -2.451553
4.304506
-0.57
0.570
_cons | -130.7502
105.3609
-1.24
0.218
-----------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 pwtopen
Instruments:
open*ypolity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
------------------------------------------------------

40

OLS regression

Number of obs = 36
F(7, 28) = 5.47
R-squared = 0.2087
Root MSE = 40.547
-----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
NO2 |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+----------------------------------------inc1 |
-391.314
254.7488
-1.54
0.136
inc2 |
174.4945
69.97776
2.49
0.019
inc3 | -14.98727
23.52335
-0.64
0.529
openness|
.542728
4.57788
0.12
0.906
open*y| -.0906906
.4873519
-0.19
0.854
polity | -3.888602
.9682091
-4.02
0.000
lareapc | -5.861136
6.170607
-0.95
0.350
_cons |
2864.241
1810.88
1.58
0.125
----------------------------------------------------IV (2SLS)

Number of obs = 35
F(6, 27) =
.
R-squared = 0.2267
Root MSE = 39.356
----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
NO2 |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+---------------------------------------inc1 | -386.3218
276.3737
-1.40
0.174
inc2 |
185.1002
87.96971
2.10
0.045
inc3 | -52.43732
36.52884
-1.44
0.163
openness| -6.530771
6.474132
-1.01
0.322
open*y|
.657162
.6997684
0.94
0.356
polity | -4.878152
.7820215
-6.24
0.000
lareapc | -7.214065
5.840496
-1.24
0.227
_cons |
2866.21
1958.397
1.46
0.155
------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 pwtopen
Instruments:
open*ypolity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

OLS regression

Number of obs = 41
F(7, 33) = 84.38
R-squared = 0.7275
Root MSE = 21.834
-----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
SO2 |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+----------------------------------------inc1 |
155.3254
94.3227
1.65
0.109
inc2 |
.5225823
20.25033
0.03
0.980
inc3 | -46.77605
15.7941
-2.96
0.006
openness|
-4.76608
2.187854
-2.18
0.037
open*y|
.4837392
.2323481
2.08
0.045
polity |
-6.15931
1.80856
-3.41
0.002
lareapc | -2.316554
1.626319
-1.42
0.164
_cons | -1009.304
665.3372
-1.52
0.139
-------------------------------------------------------IV (2SLS)

Number of obs = 40
F(7, 32) = 8.89
R-squared = 0.7297
Root MSE = 22.075
------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
SO2
|
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+----------------------------------------inc1 |
191.0826
152.0559
1.26
0.218
inc2 | -3.533549
46.19984
-0.08
0.940
inc3 | -67.68094
32.24662
-2.10
0.044
openness| -7.805166
4.571801
-1.71
0.097
open*y|
.8083979
.4891454
1.65
0.108
polity | -6.340865
1.855417
-3.42
0.002
lareapc | -2.270977
1.990991
-1.14
0.262
_cons | -1249.701
1085.205
-1.15
0.258
-----------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 pwtopen
Instruments:
open*ypolity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
------------------------------------------------------------------------------

41

OLS regression
Number of obs =
38
F( 7,
30) =
14.75
R-squared
= 0.7438
Root MSE
= 50.896
---------------------------------------------------|
Robust
PM |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+----------------------------------------inc1 |
302.4914
78.65209
3.85
0.001
inc2 | -143.3542
51.88573
-2.76
0.010
inc3 | -98.09078
33.43229
-2.93
0.006
openness| -7.812377
3.700031
-2.11
0.043
open*y|
.8556435
.401887
2.13
0.042
polity | -7.781859
2.882361
-2.70
0.011
lareapc | -8.695255
4.412314
-1.97
0.058
_cons | -1859.638
571.4924
-3.25
0.003
--------------------------------------------------------

IV (2SLS) regression
Number of obs =
37
F( 7,
29) =
13.21
R-squared
= 0.7853
Root MSE
= 46.759
------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
PM |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+---------------------------------------inc1 |
371.4085
110.7734
3.35
0.002
inc2 |
-160.822
63.55778
-2.53
0.017
inc3 | -100.5136
45.36372
-2.22
0.035
openness| -9.303708
4.179282
-2.23
0.034
open*y|
.995322
.4570525
2.18
0.038
polity | -8.643015
3.004949
-2.88
0.007
lareapc | -8.886813
4.505417
-1.97
0.058
_cons | -2334.084
801.3242
-2.91
0.007
--------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 pwtopen
Instruments:
open*ypolity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3

Table 7: Does openness lead sparsely populated countries
to exploit a comparative advantage in pollution?
. *
. * Add openness/area interaction
. *

OLS regression
Number of obs =
100
F( 7,
92) =
38.09
R-squared
= 0.7611
Root MSE
=
2.40
----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
co2perc |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-------------------------------------inc1 |
1.299684
.4221266
3.08
0.003
inc2 |
2.1362
.8239958
2.59
0.011
inc3 |
6.890616
1.235773
5.58
0.000
openness|
.0447978
.0203516
2.20
0.030
open*land| -.0035943
.0018404
-1.95
0.054
polity | -.0290418
.0220731
-1.32
0.192
lareapc |
.3705155
.1920085
1.93
0.057
_cons | -9.724961
3.156701
-3.08
0.003
------------------------------------------------------

42
IV (2SLS)

Number of obs = 96
F(7, 88) = 35.67
R-squared = 0.7596
Root MSE = 2.1642
------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
CO2/cap |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+---------------------------------------inc1 |
.4465435
.5833635
0.77
0.446
inc2 |
3.821037
1.083521
3.53
0.001
inc3 |
6.337574
1.370789
4.62
0.000
openness| -.0135278
.0371035
-0.36
0.716
open*land |
.0017062
.0037488
0.46
0.650
polity | -.0751272
.0375316
-2.00
0.048
lareapc | -.0640638
.258771
-0.25
0.805
_cons | -3.265222
4.090651
-0.80
0.427
----------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 pwtopen
Instruments:
openl polity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
------------------------------------------------------

OLS regression

Number of obs = 96
F(7, 88) = 6.75
R-squared = 0.2673 Root MSE = 1.1228
-----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
defp |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+----------------------------------------inc1 |
.5432714
.3500954
1.55
0.124
inc2 | -1.069021
.4629858
-2.31
0.023
inc3 | -1.028875
.3355678
-3.07
0.003
openness|
.0007328
.0067485
0.11
0.914
open*land |
.0001749
.0008616
0.20
0.840
polity |
.0331086
.030571
1.08
0.282
lareapc | -.1245322
.087913
-1.42
0.160
_cons | -2.258488
2.42957
-0.93
0.355
-------------------------------------------------------IV (2SLS)

Number of obs = 92
F(7, 84) = 7.79
R-squared = 0.2693
Root MSE = 1.1405
------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
defp |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-----------------------------------------inc1 |
.2748065
.545598
0.50
0.616
inc2 | -.6915597
.607778
-1.14
0.258
inc3 | -1.228064
.4950552
-2.48
0.015
openness| -.0112997
.0162695
-0.69
0.489
open*land |
.0017305
.0019063
0.91
0.367
polity |
.0331557
.029215
1.13
0.260
lareapc | -.1848112
.1722153
-1.07
0.286
_cons | -.6470294
3.796892
-0.17
0.865
---------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 pwtopen
Instruments:
openl polity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
----------------------------------------------------

OLS regression

Number of obs = 98
F(7, 90) = 2.75
R-squared = 0.1747 Root MSE = 6.8574
-------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
enrdam |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+---------------------------------------inc1 |
6.301647
2.235743
2.82
0.006
inc2 |
4.319096
2.871935
1.50
0.136
inc3 | -3.037144
1.845817
-1.65
0.103
openness| -.0609797
.048293
-1.26
0.210
open*land |
.0057844
.0058749
0.98
0.327
polity | -.4448992
.1690579
-2.63
0.010
lareapc | -.1398897
.6781088
-0.21
0.837
_cons | -42.73908
15.97659
-2.68
0.009
------------------------------------------------------

43

IV (2SLS) regression
Number of obs =
93
F( 7,
85) =
2.50
R-squared
= 0.1073
Root MSE
= 7.3078
------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
enrdam |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-------------------------------------------inc1 |
5.113796
3.127727
1.63
0.106
inc2 |
5.070123
3.631556
1.40
0.166
inc3 | -2.709335
2.382761
-1.14
0.259
openness| -.2138088
.1571853
-1.36
0.177
open*land |
.0234133
.0177814
1.32
0.191
polity | -.4554991
.2008395
-2.27
0.026
lareapc | -1.156387
1.374061
-0.84
0.402
_cons | -34.88446
21.95798
-1.59
0.116
--------------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 pwtopen
Instruments:
openl polity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
----------------------------------------------------------

OLS regression
Number of obs =
36
F( 7,
28) =
8.77
R-squared
= 0.2111
Root MSE
= 40.486
---------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
no2m |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-------------------------------------------inc1 | -395.9399
238.3117
-1.66
0.108
inc2 |
175.4628
63.49874
2.76
0.010
inc3 | -19.44896
14.25501
-1.36
0.183
openness| -.4422456
.2767019
-1.60
0.121
open*land |
.0198979
.0477338
0.42
0.680
polity | -4.114193
.974946
-4.22
0.000
lareapc | -6.368941
5.84243
-1.09
0.285
_cons |
2899.056
1701.499
1.70
0.099
----------------------------------------------------------

IV (2SLS) regression
Number of obs =
35
F( 6,
27) =
.
R-squared
=
.
Root MSE
= 53.433
--------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
no2m |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+------------------------------------------inc1 |
664.5396
3716.559
0.18
0.859
inc2 | -90.05426
984.4065
-0.09
0.928
inc3 | -11.22919
38.91062
-0.29
0.775
openness|
1.864164
5.839316
0.32
0.752
open*land | -.2966072
.7611961
-0.39
0.700
polity |
1.173267
17.99566
0.07
0.948
lareapc |
1.640181
22.13381
0.07
0.941
_cons | -4685.086
26608.97
-0.18
0.862
------------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 pwtopen
Instruments:
openl polity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
----------------------------------------------------------

44
OLS regression

Number of obs = 41
F(7, 33) = 54.09
R-squared = 0.6907
Root MSE = 23.261
-------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
sulfdm |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-----------------------------------------inc1 |
56.99028
65.26708
0.87
0.389
inc2 |
28.68848
16.23312
1.77
0.086
inc3 | -19.58229
8.962396
-2.18
0.036
openness| -.0816878
.1551855
-0.53
0.602
open*land |
-.029564
.0223639
-1.32
0.195
polity | -6.315455
2.065723
-3.06
0.004
lareapc | -1.961573
1.817273
-1.08
0.288
_cons | -321.8509
464.3563
-0.69
0.493
---------------------------------------------------------

IV (2SLS)

Number of obs = 40
F(7, 32) = 5.57
R-squared = 0.5249
Root MSE = 29.269
------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
sulfdm |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-----------------------------------------inc1 |
94.05603
193.2025
0.49
0.630
inc2 |
28.72237
56.78161
0.51
0.616
inc3 | -33.42498
16.23829
-2.06
0.048
openness|
.8672607
1.079806
0.80
0.428
open*land | -.1448065
.1298384
-1.12
0.273
polity | -5.218058
2.762123
-1.89
0.068
lareapc |
4.502931
7.009555
0.64
0.525
_cons | -588.0936
1395.034
-0.42
0.676
------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 pwtopen
Instruments:
openl polity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
-----------------------------------------------------

OLS regression

Number of obs = 38
F(7, 30) = 11.42
R-squared = 0.7156
Root MSE = 53.623
-----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
suspm |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------inc1 |
340.8696
105.7901
3.22
0.003
inc2 | -115.8087
54.30535
-2.13
0.041
inc3 | -47.30731
22.7261
-2.08
0.046
openness|
.2975468
1.153204
0.26
0.798
open*land | -.0493102
.0938695
-0.53
0.603
polity |
-7.66129
3.572705
-2.14
0.040
lareapc | -9.036961
5.648587
-1.60
0.120
_cons | -2187.683
761.71
-2.87
0.007
---------------------------------------------------------IV (2SLS) Number of obs = 37
F(7, 29) = 8.45
R-squared = 0.7191
Root MSE = 53.486
---------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
suspm |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+------------------------------------------inc1 |
515.1731
127.7988
4.03
0.000
inc2 | -169.1569
76.93958
-2.20
0.036
inc3 | -35.95014
26.73539
-1.34
0.189
openness|
2.503075
1.489398
1.68
0.104
open*land | -.2609476
.1356765
-1.92
0.064
polity |
-9.57346
3.991047
-2.40
0.023
lareapc | -2.147277
6.519563
-0.33
0.744
_cons | -3419.099
905.9681
-3.77
0.001
-------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 pwtopen
Instruments:
openl polity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
--------------------------------------------------------

45

Table 8: Does openness lead capital-intensive countries
to exploit a comparative advantage in pollution?
. *
. * NO2
. *
OLS regression
Number of obs =
26
F( 6,
19) =
2.24
R-squared
= 0.2168
Root MSE
= 46.319
----------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
NO2 |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------------inc |
432.0514
188.0021
2.30
0.033
incsq | -23.70455
11.29099
-2.10
0.049
pwtopen | -.4917429
.4001593
-1.23
0.234
open*K/L| -1.23e-06
.0000113
-0.11
0.915
polity | -3.065802
3.641632
-0.84
0.410
lareapc | -9.516824
9.431383
-1.01
0.326
_cons | -1815.632
789.0531
-2.30
0.033
---------------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
9074.8222

IV (2SLS) regression
Number of obs =
26
F( 6,
19) =
8.33
R-squared
= 0.0982
Root MSE
= 49.705
--------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
NO2 |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-------------------------------------------inc |
1076.193
389.2501
2.76
0.012
incsq | -62.06279
22.22047
-2.79
0.012
pwtopen | -.7970774
.3684829
-2.16
0.043
open*K/L |
.0000108
.0000111
0.97
0.346
polity |
.0504734
4.395518
0.01
0.991
lareapc | -8.710154
8.96786
-0.97
0.344
_cons | -4519.066
1711.041
-2.64
0.016
-----------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
open*K/L polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq
------------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
5826.6553
. *
. * Sulfur Dioxide
. *
OLS regression
Number of obs =
28
F( 6,
21) =
2.54
R-squared
= 0.4770
Root MSE
= 16.629
-------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
SO2 |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-------------------------------------------inc |
299.3936
161.0884
1.86
0.077
incsq | -17.97758
9.737551
-1.85
0.079
pwtopen | -.3902438
.2305415
-1.69
0.105
open*K/L |
4.71e-06
4.80e-06
0.98
0.338
polity | -1.415668
2.514041
-0.56
0.579
lareapc | -2.761184
1.840972
-1.50
0.149
_cons | -1170.302
662.7881
-1.77
0.092
--------------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
4133.4263

46

IV (2SLS) regression
Number of obs =
28
F( 6,
21) =
26.97
R-squared
= 0.3433
Root MSE
= 18.634
-------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
SO2 |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-----------------------------------------inc |
2.800528
475.6836
0.01
0.995
incsq | -.1549534
28.23113
-0.01
0.996
pwtopen |
.0118908
.4524283
0.03
0.979
open*K/L | -4.81e-06
.000011
-0.44
0.668
polity | -2.659234
4.263488
-0.62
0.540
lareapc | -3.025493
1.621803
-1.87
0.076
_cons |
49.87181
2009.666
0.02
0.980
-------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
open*K/L polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq
--------------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak 8405.8248

. *
. * Suspended Particles
. *
OLS regression
Number of obs =
28
F( 6,
21) =
3.84
R-squared
= 0.5705
Root MSE
= 57.516
--------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
PM |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
--------------------------------------------------------inc |
622.5589
528.4975
1.18
0.252
incsq | -39.71682
30.38049
-1.31
0.205
pwtopen | -.6369995
.6897447
-0.92
0.366
open*K/L |
8.58e-06
.0000132
0.65
0.522
polity |
-3.28841
7.639993
-0.43
0.671
lareapc |
-12.7323
6.16094
-2.07
0.051
_cons | -2190.734
2241.871
-0.98
0.340
------------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
2533.7881

IV (2SLS) regression
Number of obs =
28
F( 6,
21) =
17.51
R-squared
= 0.4480
Root MSE
= 65.199
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
PM |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-----------------------------------------inc | -187.8074
444.269
-0.42
0.677
incsq |
8.4942
26.82096
0.32
0.755
pwtopen |
.1409716
.5973184
0.24
0.816
open*K/L | -.0000149
.000014
-1.06
0.301
polity |
.6310163
8.962102
0.07
0.945
lareapc | -12.78864
6.434292
-1.99
0.060
_cons |
1130.471
1887.815
0.60
0.556
----------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
open*K/L polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq
-------------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
63261.672

47

. *
. * CO2
. *
OLS regression
Number of obs = 49
F( 6,
42) =
38.01
R-squared
= 0.8080
Root MSE
= 2.3645
-------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
co2perc |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
------------------------------------------------------inc | -6.264538
7.094734
-0.88
0.382
incsq |
.5238537
.4452012
1.18
0.246
pwtopen |
-.001938
.0190309
-0.10
0.919
open*K/L|
1.43e-06
6.88e-07
2.07
0.044
polity | -.0283246
.0568391
-0.50
0.621
lareapc |
.5101885
.3180515
1.60
0.116
_cons |
16.93333
27.42624
0.62
0.540
-----------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak 395.15627

IV (2SLS)
Number of obs =
48
F( 6,
41) =
35.66
R-squared
= 0.7870
Root MSE
=
2.047
------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
CO2 |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
------------------------------------------------------inc | -15.41636
25.83755
-0.60
0.554
incsq |
1.188027
1.533037
0.77
0.443
pwtopen |
.012921
.0152394
0.85
0.401
open*K/L | -4.14e-07
6.18e-07
-0.67
0.507
polity | -.0531901
.2083393
-0.26
0.800
lareapc |
.4163982
.2816945
1.48
0.147
_cons |
47.77544
106.7887
0.45
0.657
-----------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
open*K/L polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq
----------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
657.35105

. *
. * Deforestation
. *
Regression
Number of obs =
46
F( 6,
39) =
5.17
R-squared
= 0.3171
Root MSE
= 1.3794
------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
Defor |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+----------------------------------------inc | -.0148999
3.304742
-0.00
0.996
incsq | -.0532192
.1963267
-0.27
0.788
pwtopen |
.0131713
.0169437
0.78
0.442
open*K/L | -1.90e-07
3.47e-07
-0.55
0.588
polity |
.0644818
.0631231
1.02
0.313
lareapc | -.0001307
.1216412
-0.00
0.999
_cons |
3.58308
13.641
0.26
0.794
-----------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
.8693708

48
IV (2SLS)
Number of obs =
46
F( 6,
39) =
0.55
R-squared
=
.
Root MSE
= 2.9065
-----------------------------------------------------|
Robust
Defor |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------inc | -55.94889
51.26357
-1.09
0.282
incsq |
3.333191
3.060755
1.09
0.283
pwtopen |
.0186028
.0216911
0.86
0.396
open*K/L | -1.89e-06
1.53e-06
-1.23
0.225
polity |
.4319458
.4338433
1.00
0.326
lareapc | -.1944629
.4228314
-0.46
0.648
_cons |
230.9296
211.1499
1.09
0.281
----------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
open*K/L polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq
-----------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
4414.692

. *
. * Energy Depletion
. *
Regression
Number of obs =
47
F( 6,
40) =
1.19
R-squared
= 0.0465
Root MSE
= 8.4263
--------------------------------------------------energy |
Robust
depltn |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+---------------------------------------inc |
26.7365
19.83491
1.35
0.185
incsq | -1.694921
1.200254
-1.41
0.166
pwtopen |
-.021903
.0187968
-1.17
0.251
open*K/L |
8.53e-07
6.69e-07
1.27
0.210
polity | -.1618165
.2847076
-0.57
0.573
lareapc |
.2471363
.7446471
0.33
0.742
_cons | -99.94707
82.27169
-1.21
0.232
----------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
2663.0946

IV (2SLS)
F( 6,
40) =
0.36
Prob > F
= 0.8979
R-squared
=
.
Root MSE
= 13.093
--------------------------------------------------------energy |
Robust
depltn |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+------------------------------------------inc | -190.8061
182.2415
-1.05
0.301
incsq |
11.40254
10.85826
1.05
0.300
pwtopen | -.0151443
.0914005
-0.17
0.869
open*K/L| -4.34e-06
4.77e-06
-0.91
0.368
polity |
1.300636
1.53464
0.85
0.402
lareapc |
-.757164
1.753917
-0.43
0.668
_cons |
789.5366
750.7969
1.05
0.299
-------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
open*K/L polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq
--------------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
4301.968

49
. *
. * Rural access to clean water
. *
OLS regression
Number of obs =
27
F( 6,
20) =
10.37
R-squared
= 0.7044
Root MSE
= 19.013
----------------------------------------------------rural H20|
Robust
access |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-----------------------------------------inc | -105.6862
75.73808
-1.40
0.178
incsq |
7.226187
4.629826
1.56
0.134
pwtopen |
.0329863
.2089302
0.16
0.876
open*K/L|
1.13e-06
5.66e-06
0.20
0.843
polity |
1.20821
.9984656
1.21
0.240
lareapc | -9.759128
3.562662
-2.74
0.013
_cons |
454.7026
304.658
1.49
0.151
---------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak
1499.2562

IV (2SLS)
Number of obs =
27
F( 6,
20) =
1.79
R-squared
=
.
Root MSE
= 85.333
--------------------------------------------------------rural H20 |
Robust
access |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-----------------------------------------inc |
-1846.6
2286.727
-0.81
0.429
incsq |
115.325
141.9123
0.81
0.426
pwtopen |
.8095648
1.094208
0.74
0.468
open*K/L| -.0000733
.0000994
-0.74
0.470
polity |
12.21201
15.95724
0.77
0.453
lareapc | -1.595393
18.93578
-0.08
0.934
_cons |
7309.41
9030.419
0.81
0.428
------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc incsq pwtopen
Instruments:
open*K/L polity lareapc elhsfs incf incfsq
-----------------------------------------------------. * Income Peak 2999.1145

50

Appendix
Tables A2 and A4: Environmental degradation equations (with income spline)
. * Three-piece spline for real income per capita, split at the .33 and .66 percentiles.*

OLS regressions
. *
. * Estimation of pollution equation, a function of income, trade, democracy and size
. * [comment: p2a]
Number of obs =
100
F( 6,
93) =
37.07
R-squared
= 0.7526
---------------------------------------------------------emissions of |
Robust
co2 / cap |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-------------------------------------------inc1 |
1.037
.406
2.56
0.012
inc2 |
2.113
.827
2.55
0.012
inc3 |
7.049
1.282
5.50
0.000
openness |
.016
.008
1.97
0.052
polity |
-.025
.022
-1.13
0.263
lareapc |
.161
.154
1.04
0.301
_cons | -8.099
3.03
-2.67
0.009
-------------------------------------------------------------

Number of obs =
96
F( 6,
89) =
7.94
R-squared
= 0.2670
-------------------------------------------------------------annual
|
Robust
deforestation|
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-----------------------------------------------inc1 |
.558
.338
1.65
0.102
inc2 | -1.071
.460
-2.33
0.022
inc3 | -1.035
.338
-3.06
0.003
openness |
.002
.003
0.78
0.437
polity |
.033
.030
1.08
0.281
lareapc | -.112
.076
-1.49
0.141
_cons | -2.356
2.37
-0.99
0.323
-----------------------------------------------------------

Number of obs =
98
F( 6,
91) =
3.07
R-squared
= 0.1653
---------------------------------------------------------energy deple-|
Robust
tion (%GDP) |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+--------------------------------------------inc1 |
6.701
2.210
3.03
0.003
inc2 |
4.288
2.902
1.48
0.143
inc3 | -3.197
1.842
-1.74
0.086
openness | -.013
.009
-1.53
0.130
polity | -.446
.167
-2.68
0.009
lareapc |
.249
.419
0.59
0.554
_cons |-45.384
15.583
-2.91
0.005
-----------------------------------------------------------

51
Number of obs =
36
F( 6,
29) =
7.13
R-squared
= 0.2077
----------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
|
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
NO2
-------------+--------------------------------------------inc1 | -373.491
209.562
-1.78
0.085
inc2 |
169.749
57.176
2.97
0.006
inc3 | -19.707
14.786
-1.33
0.193
openness |
-.302
.159
-1.91
0.066
polity |
-3.854
.975
-3.96
0.000
lareapc |
-5.897
6.055
-0.97
0.338
_cons | 2740.844
1499.377
1.83
0.078
-------------------------------------------------------------

Number of obs =
41
F( 6,
34) =
40.04
R-squared
= 0.6789
-----------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
|
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
SO2
-------------+----------------------------------------------inc1 |
46.351
68.589
0.68
0.504
inc2 |
29.202
17.0379
1.71
0.096
inc3 | -16.540
8.827
-1.87
0.070
openness |
-.303
.082
-3.72
0.001
polity |
-6.561
2.081
-3.15
0.003
lareapc |
-3.223
1.398
-2.30
0.027
_cons | -248.434
488.917
-0.51
0.615
-------------------------------------------------------------. reg suspm inc1-inc3 openness polity lareapc, robust

Number of obs =
38
F( 6,
31) =
13.45
R-squared
= 0.7147
------------------------------------------------------------suspended |
Robust
PM
|
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+-----------------------------------------------inc1 |
332.443
100.885
3.30
0.002
inc2 | -113.061
54.189
-2.09
0.045
inc3 | -46.614
22.426
-2.08
0.046
openness |
-.256
.323
-0.79
0.435
polity |
-7.459
3.378
-2.21
0.035
lareapc | -10.514
4.576
-2.30
0.028
_cons |-2128.872
724.849
-2.94
0.006
-------------------------------------------------------------

52

Table A3 and A5: Environmental degradation equations (with income spline)

IV regressions
. *
. * Estimation of pollution equations, a function of income, trade, democracy and size
. * [comment: p3d]
.
Number of obs = 96

F( 6, 89) =
43.49
R-squared
= 0.7695
-----------------------------------------------------------emissions of |
Robust

CO2

per cap |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+---------------------------------------------inc1 |
.700
.479
1.46
0.147
inc2 |
3.754
1.043
3.60
0.001
inc3 |
6.322
1.318
4.80
0.000
openness |
-.001
.010
-0.06
0.949
polity |
-.080
.037
-2.19
0.031
lareapc |
.033
.163
0.20
0.840
_cons | -4.876
3.184
-1.53
0.129
-----------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 openness
Instruments:
polity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
------------------------------------------------------------

Number of obs =
92
F( 6,
85) =
10.69
R-squared
= 0.2756
-----------------------------------------------------------annual
|
Robust
deforestation|
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+---------------------------------------------inc1 |
.545
.436
1.25
0.215
inc2 |
-.736
.593
-1.24
0.218
inc3 | -1.262
.510
-2.48
0.015
openness |
.001
.003
0.37
0.713
polity |
.027
.027
1.00
0.320
lareapc |
-.078
.084
-0.94
0.351
_cons | -2.367
3.035
-0.78
0.438
-----------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 openness
Instruments:
polity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
------------------------------------------------------------

Number of obs = 93

F( 6,
86) =
3.57
R-squared
= 0.1601
-----------------------------------------------------------energy
|
Robust
depletion |
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+---------------------------------------------inc1 |
8.526
3.132
2.72
0.008
inc2 |
4.257
3.654
1.16
0.247
inc3 | -2.922
2.094
-1.40
0.166
openness | -.033
.020
-1.67
0.099
polity | -.521
.190
-2.74
0.007
lareapc |
.314
.505
0.62
0.536
_cons |-57.089
20.293
-2.81
0.006
-----------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 openness
Instruments:
polity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
------------------------------------------------------------

53

Number of obs = 35
R-squared
= 0.2120
-----------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
NO2 |
-------------+---------------------------------------------inc1 | -492.92
324.92
-1.52
0.140
inc2 |
207.14
100.29
2.07
0.048
inc3 |
-20.82
10.99
-1.89
0.069
openness |
-.324
.186
-1.75
0.092
polity |
-4.448
1.216
-3.66
0.001
lareapc |
-5.792
6.445
-0.90
0.376
_cons | 3593.957
2331.116
1.54
0.134
-----------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 openness
Instruments:
polity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3

Number of obs = 40
F(6,33)= 7.78
R-squared = 0.6618
-----------------------------------------------------------|
Robust
|
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
SO2
-------------+--------------------------------------------inc1 | -22.492
190.106
-0.12
0.907
inc2 |
39.992
58.752
0.68
0.501
inc3 | -20.144
9.920
-2.03
0.050
openness |
-.210
.089
-2.36
0.025
polity |
-6.359
2.437
-2.61
0.014
lareapc |
-1.420
2.230
-0.64
0.529
_cons | 240.566
1373.882
0.18
0.862
----------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 openness
Instruments:
polity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
---------------------------------------------------------

Number of obs = 37
F(6, 30) = 9.80
R-squared = 0.7024
-----------------------------------------------------------suspended |
Robust
PM
|
Coef.
Std. Err.
t
P>|t|
-------------+---------------------------------------------inc1 |
497.615
137.231
3.63
0.001
inc2 | -172.283
79.002
-2.18
0.037
inc3 |
-33.763
27.233
-1.24
0.225
openness |
.037
.293
0.13
0.900
polity |
-8.524
3.950
-2.16
0.039
lareapc |
-7.098
4.469
-1.59
0.123
_cons | -3325.855
973.424
-3.42
0.002
-----------------------------------------------------------Instrumented: inc1 inc2 inc3 openness
Instruments:
polity lareapc elhsfs incf1 incf2 incf3
--------------------------------------------------------

