                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          DOES INCOME INEQUALITY LEAD TO CONSUMPTION INEQUALITY?
                           EVIDENCE AND THEORY


                                               Dirk Krueger
                                               Fabrizio Perri


                                           Working Paper 9202
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9202


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      September 2002




We thank seminar participants at the SED meetings, ET Conference, NBER Summer Institute, NBER EFG
Meeting, Econometric Society Summer Meetings, Minnesota Macro Week, CEPR ESSET, Arizona State,
Board of Governors, Bocconi, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Carnegie Mellon, Chicago GSB, Di Tella, Duke,
the FEDs at Atlanta, Dallas, Minneapolis and Philadelphia, Iowa, Humboldt, Maryland, NYU, Penn,
Princeton, Roma La Sapienza, Rutgers, Stockholm School of Economics, Technical University Berlin, UCLA
and UC San Diego for many and very helpful comments. Thanks to Harris Dellas and Pierre-Olivier
Gourinchas for their thoughtful discussions and to Cristobal Huneeus for excellent research assistance.
Krueger acknowledges financial support from the NSF under grant SES-0004376. This paper was completed
while the first author was visiting the University of Pennsylvania and the second author was visiting Princeton
University. We thank both institutions for their hospitality. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Dirk Krueger and Fabrizio Perri. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Does Income Inequality Lead to Consumption Inequality? Evidence and Theory
Dirk Krueger and Fabrizio Perri
NBER Working Paper No. 9202
September 2002
JEL No. E21, D91, D63, D31, G22

                                           ABSTRACT


       This paper first documents the evolution of the cross-sectional income and consumption
distribution in the US in the past 25 years. Using data from the Consumer Expenditure Survey we
find that a rising income inequality has not been accompanied by a corresponding rise in
consumption inequality. Over the period from 1972 to 1998 the standard deviation of the log of
after-tax labor income has increased by 20% while the standard deviation of log consumption has
increased less than 2%. Furthermore income inequality has increased both between and within
education groups while consumption inequality has increased between education groups but mildly
declined within groups. We then argue that these empirical findings are consistent with the
hypothesis that an increase in income volatility has been an important cause of the increase in
income inequality, but at the same time has lead to an endogenous development of credit markets,
allowing households to better smooth their consumption against idiosyncratic income fluctuations.
We develop a consumption model in which the sharing of income risk is limited by imperfect
enforcement of credit contracts and in which the development of financial markets depends on the
volatility of the individual income process. This model is shown to be quantitatively consistent with
the joint evolution of income and consumption inequality in US, while other commonly used
consumption models are not.


Dirk Krueger                                                  Fabrizio Perri
Department of Economics                                       Department of Economics
Stanford University                                           New York University
579 Serra Mall                                                Stern School of Business
Stanford, CA 94305                                            New York, NY 10012
and NBER                                                      and NBER
dkrueger@leland.stanford.edu                                  fperri@stern.nyu.edu
1. Introduction

        The sharp increase in earnings and income inequality for the US in the last 25 years is a

well-documented fact. Many authors have found that the dispersion of US household earnings and

incomes have a strong upward trend, attributable to increases in the dispersion of the permanent

component of income as well as to an increase in the volatility of the transitory component of

income.2 If one is interested in the welfare impact of these changes, however, the distribution

of current income might not be a suﬃcient statistic. Since a significant fraction of variations of

income appear to be due to variations in its transitory component, current income may not be the

appropriate measure of lifetime resources available to agents, and thus the distribution of current

income might not measure well how economic well-being is distributed among households in the

US.3 Moreover the same change in current income inequality might have a very diﬀerent impact on

the welfare distribution, depending on the structure of credit markets available to agents to smooth

income fluctuations. For these reasons several authors have moved beyond income and earnings as

indicators of well-being and have focused on measures of individual consumption.4 Contributors

include Cutler and Katz (1991a,b), Johnson and Shipp (1991), Mayer and Jencks (1993), Slesnick

(1993, 2001), Deaton and Paxson (1994), Dynarski and Gruber (1997) and Blundell and Preston

(1998).5

        Our paper follows this line of research and aims at making three contributions, one empirical,

one theoretical and one quantitative in nature. On the empirical side it investigates how the cross-

sectional income and consumption distribution in the US developed over the last 25 years. Using data

from the Consumer Expenditure Survey, the paper extends and complements the studies mentioned

   2
     See Gottschalk and Smeeding (1997) or Katz and Autor (1998) for recent surveys of these empirical findings.
   3
     See, e.g., Gottschalk and Moﬃtt (1994).
   4
     Blundell and Preston (1998) provide theoretical conditions under which the cross-sectional distibution of current
consumption is is a suﬃcient statistic for the cross-sectional distribution of welfare.
   5
     Even the popular press has been occupied with the cross-sectional consumption distribution. The bestseller by
Cox and Alm (1999) argues that the last 25 years were a dazzling economic success story for (almost) all Americans
when judged from the consumption experience of households.
in the last paragraph. Our main finding is that despite the surge in income inequality in US in the last

quarter of the century, (the Gini index has increased about 10 percentage points while the standard

deviation of the logs displays an increase of around 20%) consumption inequality has increased much

less (around 2 percentage points in the Gini and less than 2% in the standard deviation of logs). We

also document another important diﬀerence between the two distributions: income inequality has

increased both between and within education groups while consumption inequality has increased

between-groups but has actually slightly declined within groups.

       Second, we go on to develop a theoretical explanation for these stylized facts. It is our

hypothesis that an increase in the volatility of idiosyncratic labor income has been an important

cause of the increase in income inequality, but that it has also caused a change in the development

of financial markets, allowing individual households to better insure against idiosyncratic income

fluctuations. Our theoretical contribution is to develop a model of endogenously incomplete markets,

building on earlier work by Alvarez and Jermann (2000) and Kehoe and Levine (1993, 2001) that

allows us to analytically characterize the relationship between income and consumption inequality.

In the model agents enter risk sharing contracts, but at any point of time have the option to renege

on their obligations, at the cost of being excluded from future risk sharing. Our main result is

that whenever there is some sharing of idiosyncratic income risk in the economy an increase in

the volatility of income, keeping the persistence of the income process constant, always leads to

a reduction in consumption inequality within the group that shares income risk. Intuitively, more

income volatility increases the value of risk sharing opportunities, therefore reducing the incentives

to default. As a consequence, more risk sharing is possible and the consumption distribution becomes

less dispersed.

       Finally, we assess whether the theory developed in the simple model is quantitatively con-

sistent with the stylized facts established in the empirical section of the paper. In our model a


                                                   2
large number of agents face a stochastic household labor income process. We calibrate this in-

come process to match the level and trend of income inequality, both between and within diﬀerent

gender-education groups. In particular, we also allow for changes in income inequality that are not

due to changes in income volatility. The extent to which agents can borrow to isolate consumption

from idiosyncratic income fluctuations is derived endogenously. It is a function of the volatility of

the stochastic income process, which, as before in the simple model, aﬀects the incentives to repay

loans by determining how valuable future access to credit markets is. Our model, for a given time

series of cross-sectional income distributions produces a time series of cross-sectional consumption

distributions. We demonstrate that this model is consistent with the joint observation of increasing

income inequality and fairly constant inequality in consumption over time. A standard incomplete

markets model along the lines of Huggett (1993) and Aiyagari (1994), on the other hand, predicts

a significant increase in consumption inequality in response to increasing income inequality.

       Our quantitative results are consistent with a recent empirical study by Blundell et al. (2002)

that rejects full consumption insurance, but documents that households are able to insure income

shocks to a larger extent than the permanent income hypothesis (whose general equilibrium extension

is the standard incomplete markets model we consider) predicts, pointing to risk sharing mechanisms

that we explicitly attempt to model with our endogenous incomplete markets model. Similarly,

Storesletten et al. (2000) document that both empirically and in a calibrated life-cycle version

of the standard incomplete markets model the cross-sectional dispersion of consumption increases

with cohort age, following a similar pattern for income. The increase with age is less pronounced for

consumption than for income, both in the data as well as in their model, but the model overpredicts

the life-cycle increase in consumption dispersion. Again, their study suggests that households appear

to have more powerful consumption smoothing abilities than simple self-insurance as in the standard

incomplete markets model.


                                                  3
        The paper is organized as follows: in Section 2 we document the main stylized facts. Section

3 develops a simple two-agent model that can be solved analytically and aims at providing intuition

for the quantitative results presented for the model with a large number of agents which is presented

in section 4. In Section 5 we lay out our quantitative thought experiment and in Section 6 we discuss

the calibration of both models. Section 7 presents our numerical results and assesses the success

of both models in explaining the stylized facts documented in Section 2. Section 8 concludes. The

recursive formulation of the models as well as computational details can be found in Appendix A1

and details about the data used in the paper are in Appendix A2.


2. Trends in Income and Consumption Inequality

        In this section we report our main empirical findings. In particular we document how US

income and consumption inequality has evolved over the last quarter of the century. For this purpose

our main object of analysis is the Consumer Expenditure (CE) Survey, which is currently the only

micro-level data set for US that reports comprehensive measures of consumption expenditures and

income measures for repeated large cross-sections of households.6

        Our sample is composed of all households in the CE who are complete income respondents,

with the reference person between the age of 25 and 64 and who report positive income and positive

total consumption expenditure for the interview year (1972-73 samples) or interview quarter (post

1980 samples). The selection generates a sample of around 6300 households per year for the income

and consumption distribution in the years 1972-1973, while for the post 1980 period it leaves an

average of 3000 households per quarter in the consumption distribution and 1500 households per

quarter in the income distribution.

    6
      The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) reports both income and consumption data. The consumption data,
however, contains only food consumption and therefore is of limited use for our analysis. As some others authors (for
example Cutler and Katz, 1991 a,b) have questioned the reliability of CE income data we also compare our measures
for income inequality with measures obtained from the the Current Population Survey (CPS), which samples a larger
cross-section of US households.



                                                         4
       On these distribution we compute two common measures of income and consumption in-

equality: the Gini coeﬃcient and the standard deviation of the logarithm. The evolution of these

measures is reported in Figure 1. The top panels report the actual values of inequality measures

while the bottom panels report, to facilitate the comparison of the trends, the deviation of the

indexes from their 1972 value. In each panel the solid line represents inequality of after tax labor

income including transfers while the dashed line represents inequality of nondurable consumption

expenditures plus expenditure in household equipment plus imputed services from houses and cars

(henceforth ND+ consumption expenditures). All variables are measured in constant 1982-84 dol-

lars, deflated by expenditure component-specific CPI’s. Income and consumption for each household

is divided by the number of adult equivalents in the household using the Census equivalence scale.7

The standard deviations are computed on the residuals from regressing income and consumption

for each cross section on a quartic in age and on a dummy for the race of the reference person in

the household. We treated the data in this way to control for compositional eﬀects stemming from

a potential change in the age/race/family structure of the US population over time. Finally the

thin dash-dotted lines are standard errors of the inequality measures, computed by performing a

bootstrap procedure with hundred repetitions.

       Figure 1 confirms the well-known fact that income inequality in US has increased significantly

in the last quarter of the century: the Gini index has risen by about 10 percentage points while the

standard deviation of the logs displays an increase of around 20%. The Figure also presents our main

empirical finding, namely that the increase in consumption inequality has been much less marked,

namely around 2 percentage points for the Gini and less than 2% in the standard deviation of logs.

Note that redistributive public policies are already included in our income definition so it cannot

   7
     See Dalaker and Naifeh, 1998. We also experimented with per-household (as opposed to per adult equivalent)
income and consumption measures and with diﬀerent equivalence scales. These changes aﬀect the level of inequality
measures but have very little eﬀect on the trends.




                                                       5
be responsible for the divergence between the two series. Although the evolution of consumption

inequality has been studied much less than the evolution of income inequality, some authors (Cutler

and Katz 1991a,b and Johnson and Shipp, 1991) have noted that the sharp increase in income

inequality of the early 80’s has been accompanied by an increase in consumption inequality. Our

measures also display an increase in consumption inequality in the early 80’s but less marked than

the increase in income inequality8 ; moreover in the 1990s income inequality has continued to raise

(although at a slower pace) while consumption inequality has actually slightly declined. This last

fact has also been also reported by the FED chairman Greenspan (1998) in his introductory remarks

on a symposium dedicated to income inequality and by Slesnick (2001). In the next subsection we

check the robustness of these findings to alternative measures of income and consumption inequality.


A. Alternative Measures of Income and Consumption Inequality

         In Table 1 we summarize various robustness checks of our main empirical finding. In the

first three columns we report the change in consumption inequality obtained using diﬀerent defini-

tions of consumption expenditures; the first column uses ND+ consumption expenditures (the same

definition used in Figure 1), the second column uses nondurable consumption expenditures (this is

the definition of consumption used by Attanasio and Davis, 1996), while the third column reports

the change in inequality for total consumption expenditures. Both alternative measures confirm

that consumption inequality has been quite stable relative to income inequality, with inequality

in nondurable consumption expenditures actually decreasing and inequality in total consumption

expenditures modestly increasing.

         It is important to keep in mind that total consumption expenditures include cash payments

for homes, purchases of cars and even cash contributions toward retirement, and therefore contains a

significant part of households’ savings which will bias the measured consumption inequality toward

  8
      Pendakur (1998) finds similar results for Canada between 1978 and 1992 for his preferred measure of consumption.


                                                           6
the measured income inequality. For this reason we think of the latter definition as an upper bound

for the true change in consumption inequality rather than as an accurate measure.

       The next two columns report the fraction of total after tax labor income plus transfers (labeled

LYA+) and ND+ consumption expenditures that accrues to the lowest 20% of the population

(where the quintiles are defined with respect to the according cross-sectional income or consumption

distribution) in a given period. We view this statistic as an important indicator of how the poorest

group in the population has fared in terms of income and consumption. The numbers in the table

reveal very similar patterns to those emerging from the data plotted in Figure 1. In particular, we

observe a decline of the income share earned by the poorest 20% of the population, from almost 6%

in 1972/73 to 4% in 1997/98. The share of ND+ consumption expenditures of the poorest 20% of

the population, however, has remained stable. These findings are consistent with those of Slesnick

(2001) that poverty rates for income went from 11.1% in 1973 to 13.8% in 1995, while poverty rates

for consumption in the same period declined from 9.9% to 9.5%.

       Columns 6 and 7 address the potential concern about the presence of top-coding in the CE

data set. In our empirical analysis we set top-coded data entries equal to the top-coding thresholds;

since these thresholds change over time our inequality measures may be aﬀected by these changes.

To partially control for these eﬀects we report a statistic that, although less informative about

overall inequality, is much less sensitive to the change in top coding thresholds. The 90/10 ratio

is the ratio between the income (or consumption) of the household at the 90% percentile and the

income of the household at the 10% percentile of the distribution. The 90/10 ratio, again, reveals

a similar pattern, displaying a large increase in income inequality and a much less marked increase

in consumption inequality.

       Finally, the last two columns address the issue of the quality of CE income data by comparing

the Gini coeﬃcient for income computed from the Current Population Survey, which draws a much


                                                  7
larger cross section of US households, to the Gini coeﬃcient computed from the CE. Note that,

although the two measures do not perfectly track each other, they both reveal an increase in income

inequality of similar magnitude.9


         Table 1. additional measures of income and consumption inequality

                    %∆ Std. Dev. Cons          % Share of Btm Quint.           90/10 Ratio        Gini Income∗

         Period     ND+      ND       TE       LYA+            ND+            LYA+      ND+        CE      CPS

         72-73        0        0        0       5.91            9.20           4.96      3.09     0.381    0.397

         80-81       NA      -4.6      0.4      5.22            9.57           6.59      3.15     0.410    0.405 ‘

         85-86       1.7     -2.6      7.9      3.91            9.45          10.24      3.13     0.444    0.422

         90-91       0.6     -4.5      5.6      4.41            9.67           8.47      3.14     0.428    0.428

         97-98       1.5     -4.0      7.4      4.01            9.24           9.13      3.35     0.456    0.458

         *The Gini Income refers to the income concept of household money income before taxes



B. Between and Within-Group Income and Consumption Inequality

        Before turning to the theoretical explanation for the empirical findings it is helpful to further

investigate the diﬀerences between income and consumption inequality by decomposing them in

between- and within-group inequality. Our theoretical explanation for the lack of consumption

inequality to increase with income inequality relies on better insurance of idiosyncratic shocks over

time, induced by higher volatility of the idiosyncratic part of income. If our theory is correct,

we should expect higher variability in the idiosyncratic, within-group component of income, but

constant or even declining variability of the idiosyncratic part of consumption (because of better

   9
    The CPS does not report taxes paid by households so we could not construct an income measure comparable
to LYA+. Therefore we report the Gini for total money income in the CPS (see Jones and Weinberg, 2000) and we
computed the Gini for the same income measure for the CE. In addition, for the years after 1980 we used NBER’s
TAXSIM to evaluate taxes paid by households in the CPS and constructed a Gini time series for LYA+ based on the
CPS. We found again that this time series displays an increase in inequality very similar to the one obtained from the
CE.



                                                          8
insurance). We thus decompose the inequality measures reported in Figure 1 into their between-

and within-group component.

        The empirical decomposition we employ is simple and widely used (see Katz and Autor,

1999). For each labor income and consumption expenditures cross section (from which we have

taken out age and race eﬀects) we regress income and consumption on education and sex of the

head of the household. We chose education and sex to define groups as the increase of the skill

premium and the decline of the gender gap are the two most important determinants of the changes

of between group income inequality in the last 25 years. We then denote the cross sectional variance

explained by education and sex as “Between Group” inequality and the residual variance as “Within

Group” inequality. By construction the two variances sum to the total variance.

        Figure 2 shows the evolution of between and within group income (panel a) and consumption

(panel b) inequality, measured by the log-standard deviation.10 Note that for income both the

between- and within-group component display an increase. For consumption, on the other hand

the between group component displays an increase, not very diﬀerent in magnitude from that of

income.11 But, most importantly for our purposes, for consumption the within-group idiosyncratic

part is actually slightly declining over time, oﬀsetting the increase in between-group inequality.

        To summarize, the data presented in this section document the well-known increase in income

inequality in the last 25 years and the surprising lack of an increase in consumption inequality. These

findings are robust to diﬀerent definitions of consumption and income and to diﬀerent measures of

inequality. We have also shown that consumption inequality has diverged from income inequality

mainly because within-group income inequality has increased significantly while within-group con-

sumption inequality has actually slightly decreased. The remaining part of the paper first develops

  10
     We show changes in the standard deviations since these are easier to interpret than changes in variances.
  11
     This finding is highly consistent with the results by Attanasio and Davis (1996), which suggest that changes in
relative wages between education groups are fully reflected in consumption changes of these groups. We will revisit
this point below in our model-based quantitative exercise.


                                                         9
a simple analytical and then a richer dynamic general equilibrium model helping us to understand

these facts. In the next section we start with a simple model in which we can analytically charac-

terize the relation between income and consumption inequality within a group of ex-ante identical

agents and show how the endogenous expansion of risk sharing may lead to a decline in within-group

consumption inequality in the wake of increasing income inequality.


3. A Simple Model

       We analyze a pure exchange economy similar to Kocherlakota (1996), Alvarez and Jermann

(2000) or Kehoe and Levine (2001). Time is discrete and the number of time periods is infinite.

There are two agents i = 1, 2 and there is a single, nonstorable consumption good in each period.

In each period one consumer has income 1 + ε and the other has income 1 − ε, so that the aggregate

endowment is constant at 2 in each period. Let st ∈ S = {1, 2} denote the consumer that has

endowment 1 + ε. We assume that {st }∞
                                     t=0 follows a Markov process with transition matrix
                                 
                      δ   1−δ 
                              
       π=                        
                                 
                   1−δ      δ

Note that δ ∈ (0, 1) governs the persistence of the endowment process while ε ∈ [0, 1) measures the

variability of the income process.

       Let st = (s0 , . . . , st ) denote an event history and π(st ) the time 0 probability of event history

                                    1
st . We assume that π(s0 ) =        2   for all s0 ∈ S, so that both agents are ex ante identical. An allocation

c = (c1 , c2 ) maps event histories st into consumption. Agents have preferences representable by
                            ∞ X
                            X
       U(ci ) = (1 − β)                 β t π(st )u(cit (st ))
                            t=0 st

where β < 1 and u is continuous, twice diﬀerentiable, strictly increasing and strictly concave on

(0, ∞) and satisfies the Inada condition limc→0 u0 (c) = ∞. Define as
                                ∞ X
                                X
           i       t
       U(c , s ) = (1 − β)                    β τ −t π(sτ |st )u(ciτ (sτ ))
                                τ =t sτ |st


                                                                  10
the continuation utility of agent i from allocation c, from event history st onwards and denote by

e = (e1 , e2 ) the autarkic allocation of consuming the endowment in each event history.

        In this economy both agents have an incentive to share their endowment risk. We assume,

however, that at any point in time both agents have the option of reneging on the risk sharing

arrangement obligations and bear the associated costs, which we specify as exclusion from intertem-

poral trade. This implies that any risk sharing mechanism must yield allocations that deliver to each

consumer a continuation utility at least as high as from the autarkic allocation, for all event histories

st . This is formalized by imposing the following individual rationality constraints on allocations:
                                            ∞ X
                                            X
             i   t          i
(1)     U(c , s ) ≥ U(e ) = (1 − β)                       β τ −t π(sτ |st )u(eiτ (sτ ))   ∀i, st
                                            τ =t sτ |st

An allocation (c1 , c2 ) is constrained eﬃcient if it satisfies the resource constraint

        c1 + c2 = e1 + e2

and the individual rationality constraints (1). Alvarez and Jermann (2000) show how constrained

eﬃcient allocations can be decentralized as competitive equilibria with state dependent borrowing

constraints. Here we will study the cross-sectional consumption distribution associated with a

constrained eﬃcient allocation; we are particularly interested in how this distribution changes in

response to an increase in income inequality ε.


A. The Constrained Eﬃcient Consumption Distribution

        We focus on symmetric allocations.12 In order to analyze how the constrained eﬃcient

consumption allocations vary with ε it is convenient to solve analytically for the value of autarky.

In this simple economy the continuation value from the autarkic allocation is given by


                            1
        U(1 + ε) =            {(1 − β) u(1 + ε) + β(1 − δ) [u(1 + ε) + u(1 − ε)]}
                            D
  12
     A consumption allocation is symmetric if c1t (st ) = c2t (s̃t ), for all t and all st , s̃t such that sτ = 1 implies s̃τ = 2
for all τ ≤ t.


                                                                   11
                      1
       U(1 − ε) =       {(1 − β) u(1 − ε) + β(1 − δ) [u(1 + ε) + u(1 − ε)]}
                      D

            £                      ¤
where D = (1 − βδ)2 − (β − βδ)2 /(1 − β) > 0. Here U(1 + ε) denotes the continuation utility of

autarky for the agent with the currently high income and U(1 − ε) denotes the continuation utility

of the agent with the currently low income. The continuation utility from autarky is a convex

combination of utility obtained from consumption today, (1 − β) u(1 + ε) or (1 − β) u(1 − ε) and the

expected utility from tomorrow onwards.

       Notice that the value of autarky for the agent with high income is strictly increasing in ε

at ε = 0, is strictly decreasing in ε as ε → 1 and is strictly concave in ε, with unique maximum

ε1 = arg maxε U(1 + ε) ∈ (0, 1). For small ε the direct eﬀect of higher consumption today outweighs

the risk faced by the agent from tomorrow onward and U(1 + ε) increases with ε. As ε becomes

larger and consumption from tomorrow onwards more and more risky, U(1 + ε) declines with ε, as

the risk eﬀect dominates the direct eﬀect. On the other hand, the value of autarky for the agent with

low income is strictly decreasing (and concave) in ε (see Figure 3), since an increase in ε reduces

consumption today and makes it more risky from tomorrow onward for this agent.

       Using these properties of the continuation utilities from autarky and the results by Alvarez

and Jermann (2000) and Kehoe and Levine (2001) (in particular their proposition 5) one immediately

obtains the following characterization of the consumption distribution for this economy.


Proposition 1. The constrained eﬃcient symmetric consumption distribution is completely char-

acterized by a number εc (ε) ≥ 0. Agents with income 1+ε consume 1+εc (ε) and agents with income

1 − ε consume 1 − εc (ε). The number εc (ε) is the smallest non-negative solution of the following

equation

       U(1 + εc (ε)) = max(U F B , U(1 + ε))

where U F B = u(1) is the lifetime utility of the first best allocation in which there is complete risk

                                                  12
sharing and consumption of both agents is constant at 1, and U(1 + εc (ε)) is the continuation utility

of the consumption allocation characterized by εc (ε).


       Note that if U F B ≥ U(1 + ε) the only solution to the above equation is εc (ε) = 0 and the

constrained eﬃcient allocation implies full risk sharing. If U F B < U(1 + ε) the equation above has

in general two solutions, with εc (ε) = ε (autarky) being always a solution, but not necessarily the

smallest one.

       The intuition for this result is simple: in any eﬃcient risk-sharing arrangement the currently

rich agent has to transfer resources to the currently poor agent. To prevent the rich agent to walk

away from the risk-sharing arrangement, with positive time discounting she needs to be awarded

suﬃciently high current consumption in order to be made at least indiﬀerent between the risk

sharing arrangement and the autarkic allocation. The proposition simply states that the eﬃcient

consumption allocation features maximal risk sharing, subject to providing the currently rich agent

with suﬃcient incentives not to walk away.


B. Income Variability and Consumption Inequality

       The following proposition characterizes how the constrained eﬃcient symmetric consumption

distribution varies with the variance of income ε


Proposition 2. For fixed δ ∈ (0, 1), starting from a given income dispersion ε = ε0 a marginal

increase in ε leads to a strict decrease in consumption inequality in the constrained eﬃcient sym-

metric consumption distribution if and only if 0 < εc (ε0 ) < ε0 (that is, in the initial distribution

there is positive, but not complete risk sharing).


       The proof of this proposition follows immediately from proposition 1 and the properties of

U(1 ± ε). We aim at providing some intuition for the proposition above using Figure 3 in which we

plot the value of autarky in the two states and the value of full risk sharing as a function of the

                                                     13
dispersion on income (ε). We can divide all possible values for ε into three regions. If ε ≥ ε2 then

the value of autarky in both states is below the value of full risk sharing, hence the full risk sharing

allocation (εc = 0) satisfies the individual rationality constraints (1) and thus is the constrained

eﬃcient consumption allocation. Obviously an increase in ε in this range has no eﬀect on the

consumption distribution.

        Suppose now that ε1 < ε < ε2 . Consider for example the point ε = εh . From proposition 1

the constrained eﬃcient consumption allocation is given by the smallest solution to U(1 + εc (εh )) =

U(1 + εh ), and from the figure it is immediate that the solution is εc (εh ) = εl . In this allocation the

agent with high income will receive a continuation utility equal to the value of autarky, while the

agent with low income receives a continuation utility strictly higher than the value of autarky. Notice

from the figure that in this range there is partial but positive risk sharing (0 < εc (εh ) = εl < εh ).

Now a marginal increase in ε from εh (an increase in income inequality) reduces the value of autarky

for the rich agent and she has less of an incentive to walk away from the risk sharing arrangement.

A smaller current level of consumption is required to make her not default (εl moves to the left),

thereby reducing the amount of consumption inequality in this economy.

        Finally, if ε < ε1 (consider for example ε = εl ) then autarky is the constrained eﬃcient

allocation and εc (εl ) = εl . Note that in this case there is no risk sharing and a marginal increase in

income inequality leads to a one-to-one increase in consumption inequality.13

        To summarize, in this environment an increase of income dispersion can have ambiguous

eﬀects on consumption inequality, but in general, if the amount of risk sharing in the economy is

  13
     It is also straightforward to show that an increase in persistence δ leads to an increase in consumption inequality
in the constrained eﬃcient consumption distribution. This increase is strict if initially there is some, but not complete
risk sharing. For a proof of this result, see Kehoe and Levine (2001).
   The intuition for this result is again simple: the value of autarky for the agent with high current income increases
(as the agent is more likely to have high income in the future with higher persistence), which makes the individual
rationality constraint more stringent and leads to less transfers to the poor agent being sustainable. Graphically, in
Figure 2, the graph for U (1 + ε) tilts around the origin, upwards for an increase in δ. For a given ε = εh with partial
risk sharing, the corresponding consumption allocation εc (ε, δ) = εl shifts to the right due to this increase in δ.




                                                           14
positive (full), an increase in income inequality will reduce (not increase) consumption inequality.

The intuition behind the result is that an increase in income inequality, by making exclusion from

future risk sharing more costly, renders the individual rationality constraint less binding. It thereby

allows individuals to share risk to a larger extent and thus reduces fluctuations in their consumption

profiles. It is important for this result that income shocks are not perfectly permanent (although

they may be highly persistent), because it is the fear of being poor again in the future that makes

a currently rich agent transfer resources to his currently poor counterpart.

       This analysis suggests that the endogenous evolution of credit markets can indeed generate a

declining within-group consumption inequality despite an increasing within-group income inequality.

In the next section we will consider the same mechanism an economy with a continuum of agents

which face a more realistic income process that also allows for changes in between group inequality.

Our goal is to evaluate the quantitative relevance of this evolution of credit markets.


4. The Model with Large Number of Agents
A. The Environment

       There is a continuum of consumers of measure 1. Individuals are of types i ∈ {1, . . . M},

with pi denoting the fraction of the population being of type i. We interpret these diﬀerent types

or “groups” of agents as capturing heterogeneity in the population with respect to sex and edu-

cation, fixed characteristics that aﬀect an individuals’ wage and therefore income. Since relative

wages for educated individuals and women have increased substantially over the last 25 years, and

thus are partially responsible for the recent trends in income inequality, an incorporation of this

type of heterogeneity appears to be critical for any quantitative study on income and consumption

inequality.

       There is a single, nonstorable consumption good. An individual of type i has a stochastic

endowment process {αit yt } where αit is the deterministic type-specific, possibly time-varying mean


                                                  15
endowment and {yt } follows a Markov process with finite support Yt , a set with cardinality N.

Let πt (y0 |y) denote the transition probabilities of the Markov chain, assumed to be identical for all

agents. The set Yt and the matrix πt are indexed by t since we will also allow for the idiosyncratic

part of the income process to change over time. Furthermore we assume a law of large numbers, so

that the fraction of agents facing shock y 0 tomorrow with shock y today in the population is equal to

πt (y 0 |y). Finally we assume that π0 (y 0 |y) has a unique invariant measure Π(.). Let denote by yt the

current period endowment and by y t = (y0 , .., yt ) the history of realizations of endowment shocks;

also π(y t |y0 ) = πt−1 (yt |yt−1 ) · · · π 0 (y1 |y0 ). We use the notation y s |y t to mean that ys is a possible

continuation of endowment shock history y t . We furthermore assume that at date 0 the measure

over current endowments is given by Π0 (.). At date 0 agents are distinguished by their type i, their

initial asset holdings (claims to period zero consumption) a0 and by the their initial shock y0 . Let

Φ0 be the initial distribution over types (i, a0 , y0 ). Finally agents’ preferences are exactly the same

as in the simple model described in the previous section.


B. Market Structures

       In this section we describe the market structure of two incomplete markets economies whose

quantitative properties we will contrast with the stylized empirical facts established in Section 2.


Endogenous Incomplete Markets

       An individual of type (i, a0 , y0 ) starts with initial assets a0 and trades Arrow securities subject

to pre-specified credit lines Ait (y t , yt+1 ) that are contingent on observable endowment histories and

an agents’ type14 and whose exact form is specified below. The prices for these Arrow securities

are denoted by qt (yt , yt+1 ), and depend only on an agent’s own endowment shock history and

time, in order to reflect deterministic changes in the income process and hence in the magnitude of

  14
    Note that we rule out any insurance against being of a particular “type” i. We will further comment on this
assumption and its implications in the calibation section.



                                                        16
endowment shocks αit yt .

       Consider the problem of an agent of type i with initial conditions (i, a0 , y0 ) (we suppress

the dependence of functions on i whenever there is no room for confusion). The agent chooses,

conditional on his endowment history, consumption {ct (a0 , y t )} and one-period Arrow securities

{at+1 (a0 , yt , yt+1 )} whose payoﬀ is conditional on his own endowment realization yt+1 tomorrow, to

maximize, for given (a0 , y0 )
                                                                                   
                                            ∞ X
                                            X                             ³        ´
                                                           t      t                t
(2)    (1 − β) u(c0 (a0 , y0 )) +                        β π(y |y0 )u ct (a0 , y ) 
                                            t=1 y t |y0




                                X
(3)    s.t. ct (a0 , y t ) +           qt (y t , yt+1 )at+1 (a0 , yt , yt+1 ) = αit yt + at (a0 , y t )               ∀y t
                                yt+1

(4)                                                   at+1 (a0 , yt , yt+1 ) ≥ Ait+1 (y t , yt+1 )                ∀y t , yt+1



       Now we will specify the short-sale constraints Ait (y t , yt+1 ) in more detail. Following Alvarez

and Jermann (2000) we will define “solvency constraints” that are not too tight. As before let

by UtAut (i, yt ) denote the continuation utility from consuming the endowment from period t on-

wards, given current endowment realization αit yt . Given a sequence of prices {qt }∞
                                                                                    t=0 and short-sale


constraints {Ait (yt , yt+1 }∞                                              t
                             t=0 define the continuation utility Vt (i, a, y ) of an agent of type i with


endowment shock history y t and current asset holdings a at time t as
                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                           ∞ X
                                                                                           X
       Vt (i, a, y t ) =                max                   (1 − β) u(ct (a, y t )) +                 β t π(y s |y t )u (cs (a, y s ))
                           {cs (a,ys ),as+1 (a,y s ,ys+1 )}
                                                                                           s=1 ys |y t

subject to (3) and (4). Short-sale constraints {Ait (y t , yt+1 }∞
                                                                 t=0 are not “too tight” if they satisfy



       Vt+1 (i, Ait+1 (y t , yt+1 ), y t+1 ) = Ut+1
                                                Aut
                                                    (i, yt+1 ) for all y t , yt+1


That is, the constraints are such that an agent of type i having borrowed up to the borrowing

constraint, at+1 (a, yt , yt+1 ) = Ait+1 (y t , yt+1 ) for state (y t , yt+1 ) is indiﬀerent between repaying his


                                                                      17
debt and defaulting, with the consequence of default being specified as exclusion from future access

to financial markets (i.e. being expelled into autarky), as in the simple model of the previous section.


Definition 1. Given Φ0 , a competitive equilibrium with solvency constraints {Ait (y t , yt+1 }∞
                                                                                               t=0 that

                                          ©                                       ª∞
are not too tight is allocations           cit (a0 , y t ), ait+1 (a0 , yt , yt+1 )   t=0,i∈M
                                                                                                , prices {qt }∞
                                                                                                              t=0 and measures


{Φt }∞
     t=1 such that


                                                              ©                                      ª∞
  1. (Optimization) Given prices, allocations cit (a0 , y t ), ait+1 (a0 , y t , yt+1 )               t=0
                                                                                                            maximize (2) subject

      to (3) and (4) and the solvency constraints are not “too tight”


  2. (Market clearing)

             Z X                                          Z X
                      cit (a0 , y t )π(y t |y0 )dΦ0   =           αit yt π(y t |y0 )dΦ0
                 yt                                         yt


  3. (Equilibrium Laws of Motion) Φt+1 = Ht (Φt )


       where the equilibrium laws of motion for measures {Ht } are induced by the transition prob-

abilities πt ’s and the functions ait (a0 , y t , yt+1 ). Now suppose that the deterministic part of income

is constant across time for all types, αit = αi . Then we define a stationary equilibrium (or steady

state) as an equilibrium for which, for all t ≥ 0 we have Φt = Φ and qt = q.

       Notice that the dispersion of the income process aﬀects the solvency constraints and thus

the extent to which individual agents can borrow in exactly the same way as it aﬀected the extent

of risk sharing in the simple model of Section 3. In particular, an increase in the dispersion of the

income process not only increases the necessity of extended borrowing to smooth consumption, but

also the possibility of extended borrowing, since the default option becomes less attractive. This

eﬀect is the driving force behind our main result that an increase in the cross-sectional dispersion

of income may not lead to a significant increase in the cross-sectional dispersion of consumption.



                                                                  18
Standard Incomplete Markets

       We compare our results to those obtained in a standard incomplete markets model, as in

Huggett (1993) or Aiyagari (1994). This model is a special case of the economy described above,

with Ait (yt , yt+1 ) = −αit B̄ and the absence of a full set of contingent claims. Let qtin denote the

price at period t of a sure claim to one unit of the consumption good in period t + 1. The sequential

budget constraints the agent faces are (again suppressing type indexation for the allocations)

(5)    ct (a0 , y t ) + qtin at+1 (a0 , y t ) = αit yt + at (a0 , y t−1 )

and the short-sale constraints become

(6)    at+1 (a0 , y t ) ≥ −αit B̄

                      1
We let by Rtin =     qtin
                            denote the risk free gross real interest rate in the standard incomplete markets

economy. The definitions of equilibrium and stationary equilibrium for this economy are similar

to the one discussed above and hence omitted. Notice that the only diﬀerence between the two

economies is the set of financial assets that are traded (a full set of contingent claims in our economy,

only a single uncontingent bond in the standard incomplete markets economy) and how the short-

sale constraints that limit these asset trades are specified.

       In order to compute calibrated versions of both economies we reformulate them recursively.

Note that the computation of the equilibrium in the endogenous incomplete markets model is non-

standard as one has to solve for both prices and borrowing constraints at the same time. For details

and for the computational algorithm employed please refer to Appendix A1.


5. The Quantitative Exercise

       We now explain the quantitative exercise we carry out below. It involves the following steps.


  1. We first choose parameter values for both economies so that the stationary equilibrium in

      both economies matches key features of the US economy in the early 70’s. This applies in

                                                                19
      particular to the deterministic and stochastic part of the income process, the key quantitative

      ingredient of our models.


   2. We then introduce a finite path of changes in the dispersion of the income process to mimic

      the increase in income inequality observed in US data as documented in Section 2. We assume

      that this change in the income process is unforeseen by agents, but that all future changes in

      the income process are fully learned once the first change has occurred.


   3. The change in the income process for a finite number of periods induces a transition in both

      models from the initial to a final stationary equilibrium corresponding to the income process

      that prevails once the path of income dispersion changes has been completed.


   4. Both models endogenously generate consumption distributions along the transition from the

      old to the new steady state. We compute measures of consumption inequality and other

      macroeconomic statistics of interest for both models and compare them to the main stylized

      empirical facts established in Section 2. In order to carry out these steps we first have to

      specify the parameters of both models in our calibration section.


6. Calibration

       We have to specify the following parameters: a) preference parameters: the time discount

factor β and the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion σ (as we will assume a constant relative risk

aversion utility function) b) the individual agents’ endowment process {αit yt }∞
                                                                                t=0 with yt ∈ Yt =


{y1t , y2t , . . . yNt } and αit ∈ At = {a1t , a2t . . . aMt } and the transition matrices πt for the stochastic

part of the endowment process c) the fractions of the population pi being of a particular type i and

d) the borrowing constraint B̄ for the standard incomplete markets model.




                                                      20
A. Income Process

        We take the length of a model period to be one year. An individuals’ income αit yt consists of a

type-specific, possibly time-dependent deterministic part αit and an idiosyncratic, type-independent

part yt . In order to map income inequality in our model to that in the data we have to give empirical

content to the notion of a “type” or “group” i and measure how the inequality of income between

types changed over the time period of interest. The residual cross-sectional variability of income

(and its changes over time) will then be attributed to the idiosyncratic part of income yt .

        In the empirical section our main measure of inequality was the standard deviation of the log-

arithm of income (and consumption) after age and race eﬀects were removed. The main remaining,

and therefore modeled, elements of observable heterogeneity are education and sex of the household.

We interpret the types i as standing in for this heterogeneity.

        As described in the empirical section, in order to decompose the cross-sectional variance of

household income into between-type and within-type variance we follow Katz and Author (1999)

and write the logarithm of income ln(eit ) as


        ln(eit ) = ln(αit ) + ln(yt )


and obtain σ2et = σ 2αt + σ2yt where σ2et = V ar [ln(eit )] , σ2αt = V ar [ln(αit )] and σ 2yt = V ar [ln(yt )] . For

each year we then regress the logarithm of income on household head education and sex dummies

and identify σ2αt with the part of the variance in log-income that is explained by the regression and

attribute the remainder of the variance to σ2yt , the variance of the idiosyncratic part.

        In doing so we end up with three time series from the data, {σ2et , σ2αt , σ 2yt }1998
                                                                                          t=1972 (where


{σ αt , σyt }1998
             t=1972 were plotted in Figure 2). Our calibration strategy is to choose parameters governing


the model income process so that a) in the initial stationary equilibrium both the between- and

within-type income variance of the model matches the data for the early 70’s and b) along the

transition trends in between- and within-type variances are reproduced by the model income process.

                                                         21
The results from this procedure to be described in detail below, along with the empirically estimated

standard deviations, are summarized in Figure 4.


Between Group Income Inequality

       We pick the number of types to be 2 with equal mass pi = 0.5 in the population. For the

initial stationary equilibrium we choose the type specific mean for type 1 as α1 = e−σα1972 and

for type 2 as α2 = eσα1972 . Similarly, using σ α1998 we obtain average group incomes for the final

steady state, persisting from 1998 into the indefinite future. For the transition path we then select

{α1t , α2t }1997                                                                                 15 See
            t=1973 so that the trend of between group income inequality follows that in the data.


Figure 4 for the results.

       Our specification of between-group income inequality deserves further discussion. First, re-

member that {α1t , α2t }1998
                        t=1972 is a deterministic sequence and second, notice that after 1998 between


group inequality is assumed to permanently remain at its higher, 1998 level. These facts imply,

in the context of both models considered in this paper, that the increase in between-group income

inequality unambiguously translates into an increase in between-group consumption inequality. Fur-

thermore, by construction, the change in between-group inequality does not aﬀect the quantitative

importance of the credit market mechanism at work for within-group stochastic income variability

described theoretically in Section 3.

       We chose this specification for two reasons. First, in an influential paper Attanasio and

Davis (1996) show that between-group consumption insurance spectacularly fails, and they conclude

that “the evidence is highly favorable to an extreme alternative hypothesis under which relative

consumption growth equals relative wage growth” (p. 1247). With our specification of average type

income changes in type-specific income are not (self-)insurable. Second, we will be able to quantify

  15
     We do not attempt to explain the high frequency movements in consumption inequality with our model and thus
do not fit the high frequency movements in income inequality in our calibration. For that reason we matched the
average variance between 1972 and 1973 in the initial steady state.


                                                      22
exactly to what extent the endogenous evolution of credit markets predicted by the endogenous

incomplete markets model is able to oﬀset the increase in between-group consumption inequality

via reducing within-group consumption inequality. The magnitude of this eﬀect depends on the

exact calibration of the idiosyncratic part of the income process, to which we turn next.


Within Group Income Variability

              We model the idiosyncratic part of an individuals’ income process, ln(yt ), as a simple AR(1)

process, as, for example, in Storesletten et al. (1998, 2000), Aiyagari (1994), Heaton and Lucas

(1996) and many others. In particular, we assume that


              ln(yt ) = ρ ln(yt−1 ) + εt


where εt is a serially uncorrelated and normally distributed random variable with zero mean and

variance σ2εt . Following Storesletten et al.’ (1998) estimates from PSID data we choose ρ = 0.98,

that is, idiosyncratic income shocks are quite persistent.16 We will report how sensitive our results

are to changes in the persistence of the income process below.

              The choice of σ2εt is governed by the same principle as the specification of between-group

income variability above. For the initial steady state we pick σ 2ε1972 so that the associated stationary

distribution of the stochastic process, discretized with the Tauchen method17 , has variance equal

to σ2y1972 as in the data. A similar procedure is followed for the final steady state. We then pick

{σ 2εt }1997
        t=1973 so that the variance of ln(yt ) implied by the model stochastic process follows the trend

  16
       After taking out individual fixed eﬀects, the process Storesletten et al. (1998) estimate can be written as

              ln(yt )   =   ηt + ν t
                  ηt    =   ρ̂η t−1 + ξ t

In the simple AR(1) process we use, the correlation between ln(yt ) and ln(yt−1 ) equals ρ, whereas in theirs it equals
       ρ̂σ2
          ξ
σ2 +(1−ρ2 )σ 2
                   = 0.97 with their empirical parameter estimates (see their Table 3, row 3). We choose our ρ so that the
 ξ           ν
implied correlation between ln(yt ) and ln(yt−1 ) of the discretized Markov chain equals 0.97, which requires roughly
ρ = 0.98 as input into the Tauchen procedure, as reported in the text.
  17
     We choose, as compromise between computational feasibility and realism, the number of states of the discretized
process to be N = 9.


                                                              23
in the within-group variance of log-income as measured in our data, {σ2yt }1997
                                                                           t=1973 . Again Figure 4


shows the result.18

        Note that after 27 model periods (1998 in real time) the change in the dispersion of the income

process is completed and the income process in the model does not change anymore. However, due

to the endogenous wealth dynamics in both models it may take substantially longer than these 27

years for both economies to complete the transition to the new stationary consumption and wealth

distribution.


B. Preference Parameters and the Borrowing Limit

        We assume that the period utility is logarithmic, u(c) = log(c). We then chose β to match

a real risk-free interest rate of 2.5%19 for the initial steady state of the endogenous incomplete

markets economy, which yields a value of β = 0.971. For the standard incomplete markets economy

we will report results for various combinations of the discount factor β and the exogenous borrowing

constraint B̄ to obtain a real risk free interest rate of 2.5%. As a benchmark we set B̄ = 2; we

normalize endowment in such a way that this borrowing limit corresponds to a generous 2 times the

average annual income for each type i. The time discount factor needed to obtain an interest rate

of 2.5% with this borrowing is β in = 0.9495.


7. Quantitative Results
A. Income and Consumption Inequality

        Figure 5 summarizes the main quantitative result of our paper. It shows the dynamics of

the standard deviation of log-consumption for US data and contrasts it with those generated by the

endogenous incomplete markets model as well as the standard incomplete markets model. Quanti-

tatively, the endogenous incomplete markets is much closer to the data as it slightly overpredicts

  18
     The calibrated income process not only tracks the income standard deviations in the data, but is also capable to
reproduce the trends of the income Gini coeﬃcient from the data.
  19
     This is the average real return of AAA municipal bonds (which are tax-exempt) for the sample period.


                                                         24
an increase in the standard deviation of log consumption of 7 percentage points while the standard

incomplete markets predicts an increase in the same measure of almost 20 percentage points, very

close to the increase in the log-income standard deviation (23 percentage points in both models).

Our findings for the standard incomplete markets model mirror those of Blundell et al. (2002) and

Storesletten et al. (2000) discussed in the introduction and suggest that households have ways of

insuring against consumption fluctuations beyond self-insurance. The quantitative results from both

models are robust to diﬀerent measures of inequality. A picture almost identical to Figure 5 would

appear if, instead of the standard deviation of log-consumption we would plot the Gini coeﬃcient.

Also, the standard incomplete markets substantially overpredicts the increase in consumption in-

equality even if consumption is measured as total consumption expenditures (20 percentage points

in the model v/s 7 points in the data).


B. Between- and Within-Group Consumption Inequality

       One important feature of the endogenous incomplete markets model, motivated by the em-

pirical findings of Attanasio and Davis (1996), is the diﬀerential response of consumption inequality

to increases in between- and within-group income inequality. The model implies that in response

to increases in within-group income inequality, within-group consumption inequality should decline,

due to improved intra-group risk sharing, whereas increases in between-group income inequality

should translate into increasing between-group consumption inequality. In the empirical section

above we documented that, in fact, the data shows exactly this diﬀerential response of between-

and within-group consumption inequality to increased income inequality.

       To what extent does our model predict this response correctly, in quantitative sense? Figure

6 shows the decomposition, for the data (as in Figure 2) and for both models. Panel (a) shows

that quantitatively the endogenous incomplete markets model reproduces the trends of consumption

inequality within and between groups fairly closely; the mechanism of endogenously expanding

                                                 25
credit leads to a decline of within-group consumption inequality of 1.7%, slightly smaller than

in the data, partially oﬀsetting the increase in between-group consumption inequality of 9.1%.

Combining these two observations the model predicts a moderate increase of consumption inequality

over the last 27 years. Panel (b) shows why the standard incomplete markets model overstates the

increase in consumption inequality relative to the data: that model predicts a substantial increase in

within group consumption inequality while in the data within-group consumption inequality actually

slightly declined.

        The empirical evidence of increasing between-group consumption inequality and slightly de-

clining within-group consumption inequality also speaks against the complete markets model. That

model, by allowing perfect consumption insurance between and within groups, predicts that between-

group, within-group and total consumption inequality remains unchanged over time.


C. Expansion of Credit is the Key

        The mechanism through which agents, in the endogenous incomplete markets model, keep

their consumption profiles stable in the light of more volatile income, is an expansion in the amount

of non-collateralized credit available to consumers. Did this expansion take place in the data? One

simple (even if partial) measure of the credit available and used by US consumers is the ratio of

unsecured consumer credit to disposable income. In Figure 7 we plot the trends for the ratio of

aggregate consumer credit to disposable income from US data for the last 40 years, and again the

income Gini.20 Both are quite flat until the mid 1970s and then show a similar upward trend.

Combining this figure with our consumption inequality observations may suggest that consumers

could and in fact did make stronger use of credit markets exactly when they needed to (starting in

  20
     The series for consumer credit is from the 2002 Economic Report of the President, table B77. The inequality
index is the Gini Index for income of families that is available starting in 1959 in the US Census Historical Income
Inequality Tables, Table F4. We eliminate the cyclical components from each series using a Hodrick-Prescott filter
with a smoothing parameter equal to 100.




                                                        26
the mid 1970’s) in order to insulate consumption from bigger income fluctuations. Interpreting the

extent of consumer credit as a measure of sophistication of private asset markets we see indeed that

the rise in income inequality has been accompanied by a corresponding increase in the development

of credit markets, the heart of our theoretical hypothesis with which we set out to explain our

stylized facts.


D. Sensitivity Analysis

          In this section we document how sensitive our main findings are to changes in the param-

eterization of the model. In particular, we want to investigate whether the relative failure of the

standard incomplete markets model is due to the fact that borrowing constraints are set tight or

that income shocks are assumed to be very persistent.

          In Table 2 we present results for diﬀerent (β, B̄) combinations that lead to an interest rate

of 2.5% in the initial steady state of the standard incomplete markets model. For comparison we

repeat the corresponding results from the endogenous incomplete markets model and the empirical

findings. All numbers give the change in consumption inequality between 1972 to 1998 in percentage

points.

           Table 2. Change in Consumption Inequality

           Economy                 ∆Std    ∆Stdp   ∆Stdt

           (β, B̄) = (0.9405, 1)    20.6    11.6    17.4

           (β, B̄) = (0.9495, 2)    19.4    11.0    16.4

           (β, B̄) = (0.957, 4)     19.0    10.7    16.0

           Endo. Inc. Markets        7.0     9.1    −1.7

           Data                      1.5     7.6    −2.2

          We observe that in the standard incomplete markets model, as the exogenous borrowing

limit is relaxed, the increase in consumption inequality induced by the increase in income inequality

                                                   27
declines. This is to be expected as looser borrowing constraints allow agents to better smooth

consumption by borrowing against future income. Increasing the borrowing constraint further below

B̄ = 4 does not result in a substantial further decline in the consumption inequality increase: in the

light of persistent income shocks an individuals’ willingness to borrow against future income and to

pay interest on the corresponding loans is limited. Most importantly, independent of the borrowing

constraint the standard incomplete markets model tends to overpredict the increase in consumption

inequality quite substantially.

       At least since Friedman (1957) it is well-understood that more persistent income shocks are

harder to self-insure against than income shocks that are temporary in nature. Storesletten et

al. (1998) measure income shocks as being very persistent; we now document how the standard

incomplete markets model performs if income shocks weren’t as persistent as they appear to be in

the data. Table 3 documents our findings; all experiments take as given a borrowing constraint of

B̄ = 2, and adjust the time discount factor to obtain an interest rate of 2.5% in the initial steady

state of the corresponding model. Beside the benchmark value of ρ = 0.98 we experiment with a

ρ = 0.925 (which is an alternative estimate of the persistence parameter reported in Storesletten et

al. 1998) and with a ρ = 0.53, which is the value estimated by Heaton and Lucas (1996).




                                                 28
        Table 3. Change in Consumption Inequality

        Economy                            ∆Std     ∆Stdp    ∆Stdt

        Stan. Inc. Markets, ρ = 0.98       19.4     11.0     16.4

        Stan. Inc. Markets, ρ = 0.925      19.1     11.3     15.7

        Stan. Inc. Markets, ρ = 0.53       21.3     12.7     17.2

        Endo. Inc. Markets, ρ = 0.98       7.0      9.1      −1.7

        Endo. Inc. Markets, ρ = 0.925      8.4      9.2      −1.4

        Endo. Inc. Markets, ρ = 0.53       9.3      9.3      −0.0

        Data                               1.5      7.6      −2.2

       We see that the increase in consumption inequality does not decrease with the persistence

of the income shocks. This is true for both models, albeit for diﬀerent reasons. Note that, as the

persistence of the income shocks is reduced one has to increase their variability σ2εt in order to obtain

the same level of income inequality. In the endogenous incomplete markets model a reduction of ρ

and an increase in σ2εt reduces the value of default, therefore making more consumption insurance of

idiosyncratic shocks enforceable. Our mechanism for reducing within-group consumption variability

is weaker if there is less within-group consumption variability to start with. At the extreme, for a

ρ = 0.53 or lower all idiosyncratic income shocks (although not between-group income shocks) can

be perfectly insured in the initial steady state already, and no further reduction in within-group

consumption dispersion is possible.

       On the other hand, for the standard incomplete markets model, while Friedman’s intuition is

correct and less persistent shocks of the same magnitude can be smoothed better, in the presence of

borrowing constraints shocks of larger magnitude may not be, as Table 4 shows. Thus, if one adheres

to the principle that the model income process reproduces the empirical observations about trends

in income inequality, lowering the persistence of the income process does not help the standard

                                                   29
incomplete markets model in explaining the recent trends in consumption inequality.

          Therefore, even with persistence as low as ρ = 0.53, the standard incomplete markets model

seems to predict too strong an increase in consumption inequality, compared to what is observed in

US data.


E. Market Completeness or Endogenous Borrowing Constraints?21

          There are two main diﬀerences between our endogenous incomplete markets model and the

standard incomplete markets model. First, our model features a full set of Arrow securities and

second, borrowing constraints adjust endogenously to changes in the income process. It is therefore

instructive to analyze whether the result of roughly constant consumption inequality in our model

comes mainly from the fact that our set of assets completely spans the underlying uncertainty or

from flexible short-sale constraints.

          In Table 4 we summarize the predictions for consumption inequality implied by the endoge-

nous incomplete markets model, the standard incomplete markets model and two additional models.

The first is identical to our endogenous incomplete markets model, with the exception that we freeze

the short-sale constraints for Arrow securities at their initial levels, i.e. don’t let them respond en-

dogenously to changes in the income process over time. The other model, named after Zhang (1997),

is similar to the standard incomplete markets model in that agents can only trade a risk-free, uncon-

tingent bond. The borrowing constraint, however, is now allowed to vary over time. In particular,

agents can borrow to the maximum amount such that, in all possible states tomorrow, they are at

least weakly better oﬀ repaying than defaulting and living in financial autarky from thereon.


  21
       We thank Pierre Olivier Gourinchas for helpful discussions leading to this subsection.




                                                           30
       Table 4. Change in Consumption Inequality

       Economy                       ∆Std    ∆Stdp    ∆Stdt

       Endogenous. Inc. Markets        7.0      9.1     −1.7

       Standard. Inc. Markets         19.4     11.0     16.4

       Zhang Economy                  23.7     13.5     19.5

       Fixed Bor. Constraints         11.1      8.7      6.9

       Data:                           1.5      7.6     −2.2


       Table 4 suggests that the success of our model to generate fairly flat consumption inequality

requires the combination of both full spanning and endogenously evolving debt constraints. If these

constraints are not allowed to adjust, even with a full set of Arrow securities the increase in income

inequality is accompanied with a fairly substantial increase in consumption inequality, inconsistent

with the data. Not surprisingly, this diﬀerence to the endogenous incomplete markets model is due

to the fact that now within-group consumption inequality increases drastically, since the mechanism

by which better insurance against (higher) idiosyncratic income fluctuations is shut down.

       On the other hand, in the Zhang economy consumption inequality follows income inequality

almost one to one. With highly persistent idiosyncratic income shocks agents are hesitant to borrow

to smooth consumption. Therefore the value agents place to access to credit markets is not very

high (compared to autarky). Thus, credit lines are very tight and increase only minimally with the

rise in income volatility. Consequently the equilibrium allocation in this economy is very close to

autarky and consumption inequality follows income inequality.

       We conclude that, to explain the diverging trends of income and consumption inequality

requires, within the context of the models we explored, both a large scope of insurance markets (full

spanning) as well as an increase in the scale of credit markets (an expansion of credit lines).



                                                 31
8. Conclusions

       In this paper we use CE survey data to document that the increase in income inequality for

the US in the last 25 years has not been accompanied by a substantial increase in consumption

inequality. We propose a theory that provides a simple explanation for this observation. If the

increase in income inequality has been, at least partially, driven by an increase in idiosyncratic

labor income risk, then credit and insurance markets may play a bigger role in shaping consumption

allocations. If credit markets, as endogenous response to increasing income risk, become more

developed then agents can make more use of them. Individual consumption is better isolated

against (higher) income risk and the cross-sectional consumption distribution fails to fan out with

the cross-sectional income distribution. If, however, the structure of private financial markets does

not to respond to changes in the underlying stochastic income process of individuals, then only

imperfect hedging against the increasing risk is possible and the increase in income inequality leads

to a rise in consumption inequality. The evidence presented in this paper leads us to conclude

that credit markets did indeed develop and that this development was the crucial factor for the

divergence between income and consumption inequality in the last 25 years.

       Conditional on our findings a logical next step for future research is to identify the exact

mechanisms that enable better insurance against income risk over the last decades. A more detailed

analysis of cross-section micro-level data sets, with particular emphasis on variables that measure

in-kind transfers and other explicit or implicit income insurance mechanisms seems to be called for,

given the results put forward in this paper. We defer this to ongoing and future research.




                                                 32
References

 [1] Aiyagari, R. (1994), “Uninsured Idiosyncratic Risk and Aggregate Saving,” Quarterly Journal
     of Economics, 109, 659-684.

 [2] Alvarez, F. and U. Jermann (2000), “Eﬃciency, Equilibrium, and Asset Pricing with Risk of
     Default,” Econometrica, 68, 775-798.

 [3] Attanasio, O. and S. Davis (1996), “Relative Wage Movements and the Distribution of Con-
     sumption,” Journal of Political Economy, 104, 1227-1262.

 [4] Blundell, R. and I. Preston (1998), “Consumption Inequality and Income Uncertainty,” Quar-
     terly Journal of Economics, 113, 603-640.

 [5] Blundell, R., I. Preston and L. Pistaferri (2002), “Partial Insurance, Information and Consump-
     tion Dynamics,” mimeo.

 [6] Cox, M. and R. Alm (1999): Myths of Rich & Poor: Why We’re Better Oﬀ Than We Think,
     Basic Books, New York.

 [7] Cutler, D. and L. Katz (1991a), “Macroeconomic Performance and the Disadvantaged,” Brook-
     ings Papers on Economic Activity, 1-74.

 [8] Cutler, D. and L. Katz (1991b), “Rising Inequality? Changes in the Distribution of Income
     and Consumption in the 1980’s,” American Economic Review, 82, 546-551.

 [9] Dalaker, J. and M. Naifeh (1998), “Poverty in the United States: 1997,” Current Population
     Report P60-201, Bureau of the Census, Washington.

[10] Deaton, A. and C. Paxson (1994), “Intertemporal Choice and Inequality,” Journal of Political
     Economy, 102, 437-467.

[11] Díaz-Giménez, J., V. Quadrini and J.V. Ríos-Rull (1997), “Dimensions of Inequality: Facts on
     the U.S. Distributions of Earnings, Income, and Wealth,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
     Quarterly Review, 21, 3-21.

[12] Dynarski, S. and J. Gruber (1997), “Can Families Smooth Variable Earnings?,” Brookings
     Papers on Economic Activity, 229-303.

[13] Friedman, M. (1957), A Theory of the Consumption Function, Princeton University Press,
     Princeton.

[14] Greenspan, A. (1998), “Opening Remarks to the Symposium on Income Inequality: Issues and
     Policy Options,” Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

[15] Gottschalk, P. and R. Moﬃtt (1994), “The Growth of Earnings Instability in the U.S. Labor
     Market,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 217-272.

[16] Gottschalk, P. and T. Smeeding (1997), “Cross-National Comparisons of Earnings and Income
     Inequality,” Journal of Economic Literature, 35, 633-687.

[17] Heaton, J. and D. Lucas (1996), “Evaluating the Eﬀects of Incomplete Markets on Risk Sharing
     and Asset Pricing,” Journal of Political Economy, 104, 443-487.


                                                33
[18] Huggett, M. (1993), “The Risk-Free Rate in Heterogeneous-Agent Incomplete-Insurance
     Economies,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 17, 953-969.
[19] Johnson, D. and S. Shipp (1991), “Trends in Inequality using Consumer Expenditures: 1960
     to 1993,” Proceedings of the Section on Survey Research Methods, American Statistical Associ-
     ation, 1-7.

[20] Johnson, D. and T. Smeeding (1998), “Measuring the Trends in Inequality of Individuals and
     Families: Income and Consumption,” mimeo.
[21] Jones A. and D. Weinberg (2000), “The Changing Shape of the Nation’s Income Distribution,”
     Current Population Reports P60-204, U.S. Census Bureau.

[22] Katz, L. and D. Autor (1999),“Changes in the Wage Structure and Earnings Inequality,” in:
     Orley Ashenfelter and David Card (eds.), Handbook of Labor Economics.
[23] Kehoe, T. and D. Levine (1993), “Debt Constrained Asset Markets,” Review of Economic
     Studies, 60, 865-888.
[24] Kehoe, T. and D. Levine (2001), “Liquidity Constrained Markets versus Debt Constrained
     Markets,” Econometrica, 69, 575-598.
[25] Krueger, D. and F. Perri (1999), “Risk Sharing: Private Insurance Markets or Redistributive
     Taxes?,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staﬀ Report 262.
[26] Mayer, S. and C. Jencks (1993), “Recent Trends in Economic Inequality in the United States:
     Income versus Expenditures versus Well-Being,” in Papadimitriou, D and E. Wolﬀ (eds.),
     Poverty and Prosperity in the USA in the Late Twentieth Century, St. Martin’s Press, New
     York.
[27] Nelson, J. (1994), “On Testing for Full Insurance Using Consumer Expenditure Survey
     Data,”Journal of Political Economy, 102, 384-394.

[28] Pendakur, K. (1998), “Changes in Canadian Family Income and Family Consumption Inequality
     between 1978 and 1992,” Review of Income and Wealth, 44, 259-83.
[29] Slesnick, D. (1993), “Gaining Ground: Poverty in the Postwar United States,” Journal of
     Political Economy, 101, 1-38.
[30] Slesnick, D. (2001), Consumption and Social Welfare: Living Standards and Their Distribution
     in the United States, Cambridge University Press.
[31] Storesletten, K., C. Telmer and A. Yaron (1998), “The Risk Sharing Implications of Alternative
     Social Security Arrangements,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 50,
     213-59.

[32] Storesletten, K., C. Telmer and A. Yaron (2000), “Consumption and Risk Sharing over the Life
     Cycle,” mimeo.
[33] Tauchen, G. and R. Hussey (1991), “Quadrature-Based Methods for Obtaining Approximate
     Solutions to Non Linear Asset Pricing Models,” Econometrica, 59, 371-396.

[34] Zhang, H. (1997),“Endogenous Borrowing Constraints with Incomplete Markets,” Journal of
     Finance, 52, 2187-2209.

                                                34
                                                                 Appendix

A1. Recursive Formulation and Computational Algorithm
       Here we formulate the consumer problems for the endogenous incomplete markets recursively
and provide a sketch of the algorithm used to compute a stationary equilibrium. In the nonstationary
case (that is, along the transition) the logic remains the same but all functions have to indexed
by t. For simplicity here we will also omit the distinction by types. The equilibrium problem is
nonstandard as one needs to solve not only for prices but also for borrowing constraints.
       We first compute the value of autarky as the fixed point to the functional equation
                                              X
       U Aut (y) = (1 − β)u(y) + β                     π(y 0 |y)U Aut (y 0 )
                                              y 0 ∈Y

We then guess the risk free rate R = 1/q. No arbitrage implies that the prices of the Arrow securities
q(y 0 |y) are a function of our guess and given by qπ(y 0 |y).
         We then guess borrowing constraints Ai (y 0 ) and solve the consumer problem that takes as
given borrowing constraints Ai (y 0 ) and prices for Arrow securities qπ(y 0 |y):
                                                                                                                             
                                                                                   X                                         
                           V (y, a) =             max             (1 − β)u(c) + β           π(y 0 |y)V (i, a0 (y 0 ), y 0 )
                                            c,{a0 (y0 )}y 0 ∈Y                                                               
                                                                                    y0 ∈Y
                                    s.t.
             X
                       0      0   0
       c+           q(y |y)a (y ) = αi y + a
            y0 ∈Y

                                  a0 ≥ Ai (y 0 ).

We then check whether the borrowing constraints are not too tight by checking whether

       V (i, y 0 , Ai (y 0 )) = U Aut (i, y 0 )

for all y 0 . If the equalities hold, then we have solved for the borrowing constraints associated with
the guessed interest rate, if not, we update the guesses for Ai (y 0 ) until all equalities hold. Once we
found the borrowing constraints that are not “too tight” we use the associated optimal asset policies
a0 (y, a; y 0 ) together with the transition probabilities π to define the functional H that maps current
measures over wealth and shocks into tomorrow measures. We then compute the (unique) fixed point
of the functional H and denote it by Φ. Given Φ and the optimal consumption policies we can check
the market clearing condition. If market clearing holds we have found a stationary equilibrium, if
not we update our guess of the interest rate R = 1q . We implement this procedure numerically by
approximating value and policy functions with piece-wise linear functions over the state space. For
more details on the algorithm and on the theoretical characterization of the stationary equilibrium,
see Krueger and Perri (1999).

A2. Data Description
       Our statistics are based on repeated cross sections constructed from the Consumer Expen-
diture Survey (CE) for the years 1972-1973, 1980-81 and 1984 to 1998, as provided by the Bureau
of Labor Statistics. The 1972-1973 samples were conducted quarterly, but only annual total were
released; so for those years we have only two cross sections, each reporting consumption and income
for the year of the interview. The surveys from 1980 on were conducted quarterly so we have four
cross sections for each year. A fraction of the households in the survey is interviewed for four consec-
utive quarters. Households report consumption expenditures for the quarter preceding the interview


                                                                     35
and income data for the year preceding the interview. Income questions are asked only in the first
and fourth quarter. Following the suggestions by Nelson (1994) we exclude incomplete income re-
spondents from our sample. We also only include households with the reference person between the
age of 25 and 64 and who report positive income and positive total consumption expenditure for
the interview year (1972-73 samples) or interview quarter (post 1980 samples).

Income Data
Definition The income definition we use is total household after tax labor income plus transfers.
We construct labor income as total wages and salaries plus a fixed fraction of self-employment farm
and non farm income (The exact fraction is 0.864 and is taken from Diaz Jimenez, Quadrini and
Rios Rull 1996). From labor income we subtract reported federal state and local taxes (net of
refunds) and social security contributions paid by the household. We then add reported government
transfers: in particular we add unemployment insurance, food stamps and welfare.

Top Coding In the 1972 and 1973 years income is top coded and bottom coded and if the
total annual income before taxes of an household is below 2000$ or above 35000$ no component of
income is reported in dollar values, and only information about whether the household had received
a positive amount of income in that component is available. In this case we proceed as follows. If the
household does not report positive income in any of the component of after tax labor income plus
transfers (as defined above) we set its after tax labor income plus transfers to 0 (and thus exclude
the household from our sample) ; if it reports positive income in at least one of the components we
set its after tax labor income plus transfers to match average after tax labor income plus transfers
for households with a total income below 3000$ (in the case of bottom coded individuals) or with a
total income above 25000$ (in the case of top coded individuals). The latter two figures are obtained
from table 1 in the Bureau of Labor Statistics Bulletin (1978). For the samples starting in the first
quarter of 1980 when income components are top coded we set them to their top-coding threshold
We have experimented with changing the values of top-coded income components and inequality
measures are robust to these changes, as in general the number of top-coded households is very
small.

Aggregation Once we constructed an income measure for all households we compute all inequality
statistics, weighting the households by their sample weight provided by the CE. For the years 1972-
1973 we have only one cross section per year; hence there are no time aggregation issues. For
calendar years after 1980 each year we have four observations for each inequality statistic. The
annual statistic is then computed by taking a weighted average of the quarterly statistics. The
weights are proportional to the overlap between the calendar year and the year for which the income
is reported by the household. So for example the Gini for the first quarter of 1981 enters with a
weight of 1/4 in the 1981 Gini and with a weight of 3/4 in the 1980 Gini.

Consumption Data
Definitions In the paper we use three definitions of consumption expenditures. The first defini-
tion, labeled ND+, includes expenditures on nondurable goods and services, expenditures in house-
hold equipment and imputed services from houses and cars. Expenditures on nondurable goods and
services include consumption expenditures for food, alcoholic beverages, tobacco, utilities, personal
care, household operations, public transportation, gasoline and motor oil, apparel, education, read-
ing, health services and miscellaneous expenditures. Each component of consumption is deflated
by its corresponding monthly CPI from the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Expenditure in household
equipment include items such as furniture, appliances and floor coverings such as rugs. The reason

                                                 36
why we use expenditures and not imputed services is that in the CE no information is available on
the value or the inventory of the stock of this equipment and the panel dimension of the CE is too
short to carry out perpetual inventory techniques. With respect to vehicles, we impute services from
cars in the following manner, following closely the procedure outlined by Cutler and Katz (1991a).
From the CE data we have expenditures for purchases of new and used vehicles. We also have data
on the number of cars a consumer unit possesses. For each year we first select all households that
report positive expenditures for vehicle purchases, and run a regression of vehicle expenditures on
a constant, age, sex and education of the reference person of the consumer unit, total consumption
expenditures, excluding vehicle expenditures of the consumer, the same variable squared, total in-
come before taxes, family size and quarter dummies. We use the estimated regression coeﬃcients
to predict expenditures for vehicles for all households in that quarter (i.e. for those who did and for
those who did not report positive vehicle expenditures). Our measure of consumption services from
vehicles is then the predicted expenditure on vehicles, times the number of vehicles the consumer
                    1
unit owns, times 32   (reflecting the assumption of average complete depreciation of a vehicle after
32 quarters) plus other expenditures for cars, such as insurance, maintenance and finance charges.
With respect to housing services the CE provides information on rent paid for the residence of
the consumer unit, including insurance and other out of pocket expenses paid by the renter. To
impute housing services for those consumer households that own their residence we use a variable
from the CE that measures the market rent (as estimated by the reference person of the consumer
unit) the residence would command if rented out.22 This variable is not available for all years of
the sample, in particular not for the years 1980-81 and 1993-94; for those years we do not compute
inequality measures for ND+ consumption expenditures.23 As with nondurable consumption, all
imputed services from consumer durables and housing are deflated with the corresponding CPI.
        The second definition is nondurable consumption expenditure (as defined above). The third
definition is total consumption expenditure, which includes all direct out-of-pocket expenditures
made by the consumer units and is a variable reported in the CE.

Top Coding Top coded consumption expenditures are set equal to the top coding threshold.

Aggregation Weighting and time aggregation for consumption is done similarly to income. The
only diﬀerent issue is that inequality measures for 72-73 are based on annual consumption expendi-
tures, while post-1980 inequality measures are based on quarterly expenditures. In order to make
the measures comparable we use the following procedure: for the post-1980 sample we select only
households that are interviewed for 4 consecutive quarters (this procedure reduces the sample by a
half). For these households we aggregate consumption over the year and compute annual inequality
measures. We then use the average ratio between the annual and quarterly inequality measures to
re-scale the quarterly consumption inequality measures and make them comparable to the annual
measures of 1972-1973. We have also experimented with directly using the annual consumption
inequality measures for the post-1980 sample; the trends of consumption inequality were unaﬀected.
The time series, however, displays more volatility and higher standard errors due to the smaller
sample size.



  22
     The exact question that the reference person of the CU is asked is “If you were to rent your home today, how
much you think it would rent for monthly, without furnishings and utilities?”
  23
     We experimented using an imputation procedure similar to the one used for vehicles in order to obtain housing
services for the four missing years. Results were very similar and are available upon request.


                                                       37
                                                Figure 1. The Evolution of Income and Consumption Inequality in the US
                                                                     Gini Index                                                                                         Standard Deviation of Logs
                             0.45
                                                                                                                                                          1.1

                               0.4                                                                                                                          1

                                                                                                                                                         0.9
                             0.35
        Value




                                                                                                                                            Value
                                                                                                                                                         0.8

                               0.3                                                                                                                        0.7

                                                                                                                                                         0.6
                             0.25
                                                                                                                                                          0.5

                               0.2                                                                                                                       0.4
                                               75            80            85             90             95                                                       75       80          85    90            95

                              0.12
Deviations from 1972 value




                               0.1



                                                                                                                           Deviations from 1972 value
                                                                                                                                                         0.2

                             0.08
                                                                                                                                                         0.15
                             0.06
                                                                                                                                                          0.1
                             0.04
                                                                                                                                                        0.05
                             0.02

                                0                                                                                                                          0


                             -0.02                                                                                                                      -0.05
                                               75            80            85             90             95                                                       75       80          85    90            95
                                                                          Year                                                                                                    Year

                                                     After Tax Labor Income + Transfers                                                                 ND+ Consumption Expenditures                    2SE Bands
                                     Note: Circles represent actual data points. All indexes are computed on cross sections of households in the CE survey. Income and Consumption are per adult equivalent.
                                           Standard deviations are based on the residuals from regressing, in each cross section, household consumption or income on controls for age and race of the reference person
                                               Figure 2. Decomposition of Income and Consumption Inequality: Data

                                          (a) Decomposition of Std. Dev. of Log-Income                                                 (b) Decomposition of Std. Dev. of Log-Consumption
                              0.2                                                                                               0.2

                                                                                  Within-group


                              0.15                                                                                              0.15
Deviations from 1972 value




                                                                                                  Deviations from 1972 value
                               0.1                                                                                               0.1


                                                                                                                                         Between-group
                             0.05                                                                                              0.05
                                                                                  Between-group



                                0                                                                                                 0


                                                                                                                                             Within-group
                             -0.05                                                                                             -0.05
                                             75             80            85        90       95                                             75       80       85       90       95
                                                                         Year                                                                                Year
                                     Note: Circles represent actual data points
                                Figure 3. Characterizing the Efficient Allocation


                                              U(1+ε)
                                                                                        U(1+εc(εh))=U(1+εh)
                                                                                                               UFB




                                              U(1-ε)
Value of Allocations




                                 Autarky                    Partial Risk Sharing                 Full Risk Sharing



                       0   εl=εc(εh)=εc(εl)            ε1                          εh       ε2
                                                   Income Dispersion, ε
                                           Figure 4. Standard Deviation of Log-Income for Data and Models
                                   1.1

                                               Data
                                               Models                                      Total
                                     1



                                   0.9
Standard Deviation of Log-Income




                                                                                                   Within Group
                                   0.8



                                   0.7



                                   0.6



                                   0.5



                                   0.4
                                                         Between Group

                                   0.3

                                    1970          1975         1980      1985       1990                1995      2000
                                                                         Year
                                               Figure 5. Standard Deviation of Log-Consumption: Data and Models



                                         0.2
Standard Deviation of Log-Consumption




                                                                           Standard Incompl. Markets
                                        0.15



                                         0.1

                                                                                    Endogenous Incompl. Markets

                                        0.05

                                                                                Data: ND+ Consumption Expenditures

                                          0



                              -0.05
                                                    75          80            85             90             95
                                                                             Year
                                                 Figure 6. Decomposition of Standard Deviation of Log Consumption: Data and Models

                                     (a) Endogenous Incomplete Markets Model                                                             (b) Standard Incomplete Markets Model

                                         Data                                                                                            Data
                                         Model                                                                                           Model
                             0.15                                                                                         0.15
                                                                                                                                                                  Within Group
Deviations from 1972 value




                                                                                            Deviations from 1972 value
                              0.1                         Between Group                                                    0.1


                                                                                                                                 Between Group
                             0.05                         Between Group                                                  0.05                                         Between Group




                               0                                                                                            0
                                                                     Within Group


                                                                    Within Group                                                                           Within Group
                        -0.05                                                                                            -0.05

                                    75           80      85        90        95                                                     75           80       85        90           95
                                                        Year                                                                                             Year
                                      Figure 7. Income Inequality and Consumer Credit
                           0.46                                                                              0.23



                           0.44                                                                              0.22




                                                                                                                    Consumer Credit over Disposable Income
                           0.42                                                                              0.21
Income Gini for Families




                            0.4                         Income Inequality (Trend)                            0.2



                           0.38                                                                              0.19



                           0.36                                                                              0.18
                                                            Consumer Credit Over Disposable Income (Trend)


                           0.34                                                                          0.17
                             1960   1965    1970    1975      1980      1985        1990     1995      2000
                                                             Years
