NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE ROLE FOR DISCRETIONARY FISCAL POLICY
IN A LOW INTEREST RATE ENVIRONMENT
Martin Feldstein
Working Paper 9203
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9203
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Martin Feldstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

The Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy in a Low Interest Rate Environment
Martin Feldstein
NBER Working Paper No. 9203
September 2002
ABSTRACT
Although there is now widespread agreement in the economics profession that discretionary
“counter-cyclical”fiscal policy has not contributed to economic stability and may have actually been
destabilizing at particular times in the past, there is one important condition when discretionary
fiscal policy can play a constructive role: in a sustained downturn when aggregate demand and
interest rates are low and when prices are falling or may soon be falling.
This short note begins by summarizing the general case against using fiscal policy for
stabilization. It next considers the argument for using a “hyperexpansive” monetary policy to reduce
the risk that a low rate of inflation will lead to a deflationary situation in which monetary policy
becomes ineffective. Such a policy would increase the risk of asset price bubbles and of a
misaligned exchange rate.
Discretionary fiscal policy provides an alternative way to stimulate the economy when
aggregate demand and interest rates are low and when prices are falling or may soon be falling. A
stimulus can be achieved without increasing budget deficits if the fiscal policy acts by providing an
incentive for increased private spending. Specific examples for the U.S. and Japan are considered.

Martin Feldstein
NBER
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and Harvard University
mfeldstein@nber.org

The Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy in a Low Interest Rate Environment
Martin Feldstein*
There is now widespread agreement in the economics profession that deliberate
“countercyclical” discretionary fiscal policy has not contributed to economic stability and may
have actually been destabilizing at particular times in the past.1 Most economists agree that
monetary policy is the superior tool for macroeconomic stabilization.2
Despite this general presumption again discretionary fiscal policy as a tool of
stabilization (which I support), I believe that there is one important condition when
discretionary fiscal policy can play a constructive role: in a sustained downturn when aggregate
demand and interest rates are low and when prices are falling or may soon be falling. This
situation is of more than theoretical interest since it describes Japan’s current condition and some
analysts believe may also be relevant to the U.S. and to Germany.

*

Professor of Economics, Harvard University, and President of the National Bureau of
Economic Research. This note is based on my comments on Alan Auerbach’s paper, “Is There a
Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy?”, presented at the Jackson Hole Federal Reserve
Conference, August 30, 2002. Those comments are available at
www.nber.org/feldstein/auerbach2002.html
1

I distinguish between “deliberate” discretionary stabilization policy (i.e., aimed at
cyclical stabilization) and the incidental effect of fiscal changes done for other reasons. The tax
cuts enacted in 1981 and in 2001 were both planned during the earlier election campaigns as
structural changes designed to improve long-term incentives but happened to play a positive but
unintended stabilization role.
2

See for example recent papers by Auerbach (2002) , Giovazzi et. al. (2000) , and Romer
and Romer (1994) This view has developed over a long period of time. Even economists who did
not consider themselves to be monetarists came to this conclusion on the basis of their own
studies. Research by Otto Eckstein in the 1970s and by the Office of Management and Budget
of the Carter administration concluded that the timing of previous discretionary fiscal policies
had actually been destabilizing.
-1-

In discussing the case for discretionary fiscal policy in this context I will also emphasize
that an expansionary fiscal policy need not increase the full employment deficit. More
specifically, changes in fiscal incentives may be more useful than traditional fiscal policies that
increase budget deficits and work through income effects alone.

The Case Against Discretionary Fiscal Stabilization Policy
To explain why discretionary fiscal policy may be constructive in the special case that I
have identified, it is useful to begin by reviewing the now generally accepted case against using
discretionary fiscal stabilization policy under most circumstances when a change in aggregate
demand is desired.
This general consensus against discretionary fiscal policy is a really remarkable reversal
from the Keynesian view of appropriate policy that prevailed in the 1960s and even in the 1970s.
The basic view at that time was that a shortfall of aggregate demand could be and should be
reversed by a cut in taxes or an increase in government spending. The economics profession has
now rejected that prescription for three basic reasons:
First, the powerful multiplier effect assumed in the early textbook Keynesian models was
dramatically reduced when economists recognized that the marginal propensity to save out of
temporary tax cuts is likely to be relatively high and that the increase in money demand that
accompanies an economic expansion causes a demand-reducing rise in interest rates.
Second, more recent analyses summarized in Giavazzi et. al., (2000) have shown that tax
reductions or expenditure increases can actually depress economic activity. One important way
in which this can occur is by raising long term interest rates as bond investors react to the fear of

-2-

future deficits. This impact on long-term interest rates is different from the IS-LM model of the
effect of money demand on short term interest rates. A very small current budget deficit may
have little contemporaneous direct effect on demand but might cause such a large increase in the
expected future deficit, and therefore in the long term interest rate, that current demand actually
falls, lowering the short-term interest rate. This possibility of the changing shape of the yield
curve reconciles the “new” view that a budget deficit can reduce demand through higher interest
rates with the traditional IS-LM analysis.3
Third, the combination of fiscal policy lags (recognition lags, implementation lags, and
lags in the effect of spending and taxes on aggregate demand ) and the substantial uncertainty
about the magnitude of the economic response to fiscal changes increases the risk that wellintentioned fiscal policy will be destabilizing, a point emphasized many years ago by Milton
Friedman (1953). With the average recession lasting just 11 months from peak to trough, it
takes remarkably good luck to add fiscal stimulus at just the right time.
Reacting to the low fiscal multiplier by a more vigorous fiscal policy, i.e., a larger tax cut
or spending increase, has two unsatisfactory effects. First, it would leave the economy with a
permanently larger national debt. Although early Keynesians dismissed the burden of the debt
with the argument that “we only owe it to ourselves,” James Meade later taught us that even a

3

Elmendorf and Reifschneider (2002) show that this effect can be quantitatively
important although in the empirical rational-expectations model that they examine it is not
important enough to make a fiscal “stimulus” contractionary. The actual effect depends of
course on the extent to which market participants extrapolate current deficit increases into the
future. Evidence of the positive effect of expected future deficits on long-term interest rates is
presented in a recent paper by Canzonieri et. al. (2002).

-3-

domestically held national debt is a burden because of the deadweight loss associated with the
taxes needed to pay the interest on the debt. Second, the larger is the fiscal policy change, the
more likely it is to destabilize total aggregate demand by adding (or subtracting) a large stimulus
that is imperfectly correlated with the underlying shortfall (or excess) of demand.
Monetary policy is therefore generally regarded as the policy of choice when it comes to
reducing aggregate demand or stimulating a weak economy.

Monetary Policies to Counter Deflation
But what can be done in an economy in which the existing level of demand may cause
low inflation to become deflation despite low existing interest rates or in which prices are
already falling despite very low interest rates? 4
A widely cited Federal Reserve staff study by Ahearne et. al. (2002) points to the
Japanese experience in the 1990s and suggests that when inflation is very low and demand is
weak monetary policy should be pursued very aggressively, going beyond the interest rate cuts
that would normally seem appropriate for that combination of inflation and unemployment5.

4

There is of course no problem with low interest rates and low inflation or even deflation
if there is also a healthy positive rate of growth. There is no reason in theory why such a
combination is not possible or even, as Milton Friedman (1969) argued, preferable. Although his
argument ignored the revenue consequences of negative inflation in an economy in which the
taxation of capital income is not indexed for inflation, a more complete analysis might still imply
that the optimal inflation rate is negative. My own analysis of the benefits of price stability
(Feldstein, 1998, 1999) assessed the effect of reducing true inflation from 2 percent to zero (i.e.,
reducing measured inflation from about 4 percent to 2 percent) but did not derive an optimal
inflation rate and assumed that the real long-term growth rate is independent of the choice
among low inflation rates.
5

Although their emphasis is on monetary policy, they note the advantage of combining
very easy monetary policy with fiscal expansion.
-4-

Their reasoning, in brief, is that deflation can imply high real interest rates even if the nominal
interest rate is reduced to a near-zero level. Such high real rates would push the economy deeper
into recession and cause an even faster decline of prices. They conclude that to avoid this
vicious downward spiral, it is important to cut interest rates sharply while inflation is still
positive if there is a danger that it may evolve into deflation.
They argue, in effect, that with low interest rates, low inflation and weak demand, the
risks to the economy are asymmetric. If demand continues to decline, prices might start falling
and produce a condition that an expansionary monetary policy cannot correct. In contrast, if the
expansionary monetary policy turns out to have been unnecessary, the result will be a higher rate
of inflation which can later be brought down by a tighter monetary policy.
This is however an unnecessarily risky strategy. The “hyperexpansive” monetary policy
might cause an asset price bubble in securities and real estate markets or an excessive decline of
the exchange rate as well as a more rapid increase in the prices of goods and services.6 The
adverse effect when the asset price bubble later collapses or the exchange rate rises might be
severely destabilizing. An excessively easy monetary policy is a dangerous tool.
It is also an unnecessary tool. Monetary policy may be effective even when the shortterm interest rate is close to zero and fiscal policy can be effective even when monetary policy
cannot be. Even when the price level is falling, the lower bound on nominal interest rates may
not mean that monetary policy is ineffective. Although there is a lower bound on interest rates,
implying a positive real interest rate, a rapid increase in the base money supply achieved by

6

Ahearne et. al. (2002) acknowledge that excessively easy money may cause an
overshooting of asset prices and exchange rates.
-5-

buying long term assets and foreign exchange might still be able to stimulate the economy.
However, lower long term nominal rates may still leave positive real rates if deflation is rapid
and a sharp decline in the exchange rate might create destabilizing adverse “beggar thy
neighbor” effects on other economies.
In this situation, discretionary fiscal policy could be used either to prevent the economy
from slipping into deflation or, if deflation occurs, to bring it back to price stability .
Since I began by pointing out the difficulties of using discretionary fiscal policy under
normal circumstances, let me comment now on why it might be effective in the deflationary
situation of the type that Japan is now experiencing. First, the dampening effect of increased
short-term interest rates caused by an induced rise in money demand can obviously be offset in
this case by a monetary policy that holds short rates constant. Moreover, the problem of lags and
uncertainty is not relevant when we are considering a long-term situation of depressed demand
like that in Japan rather than the traditional business cycle downturn that lasts less than a
year.

Fiscal Expansion Without Budget Deficits
The final common objection to using discretionary fiscal policy is the possible
contractionary effect on current demand of an increase in the current or expected future deficit.
It is important therefore to emphasize that an expansionary fiscal policy need not involve a rise
in the full employment deficit if its expansionary impact is achieved by increasing the private
incentive to spend. A fiscal policy can be expansionary if it has a positive substitution effect
even if there is no income effect. Indeed, a fiscal incentive that succeeds in increasing economic

-6-

activity can actually reduce current and future budget deficits.
To be specific, I will now give two kinds of examples of discretionary targeted fiscal
incentives that I believe could stimulate economic activity in a situation characterized by low
demand, low inflation, and low interest rates.
Offsetting the Effect of Low Interest and Inflation Rates on Business Investment
Because tax rules do not distinguish between nominal and real interest rates, a fall in
inflation with a constant real interest rate causes the real net-of-tax interest rate to rise. Even
when inflation is zero or positive, a decline in inflation rate causes a higher real net-of-tax
interest rate. One way to offset this and maintain the same incentive to invest is to modify the
depreciation rules or the investment tax credit.
More formally, the real interest rate ( rn ) is related to the nominal interest rate (i) , the tax
rate ( t ) and the rate of inflation ( ) by rn = (1-t) i -  .

A change in inflation that does not

alter the real interest rate ( r = i -  ) implies di/d = 1 and therefore d rn / d  = - t. Consider for
example the implication if the real interest rate is 4 percent and the relevant tax rate is the
corporate rate of t = 0.35. If the inflation rate is 4 percent, the nominal interest rate is 8 percent
and the real net-of-tax interest rate is 1.2 percent [0.65(0.08) - 0.04 = 0.012] . If the inflation
rate drops to zero, the nominal interest rate drops to 4 percent but the real net-of- tax interest rate
more than doubles, going from 1.2 percent to to 2.6 percent [0.65 (.04) = 0.026].
The incentive effect on business investment of the decline in inflation is of course more
complicated because the fall in inflation also increases the present value of the nominal
depreciation allowances.7 This offsetting effect is more important for some types of assets than

7

See for example the discussion in Feldstein (1999).
-7-

for others, depending on the life of the asset and the depreciation rules. In the extreme,
inventory investment (for a firm that uses last-in-first-out inventory accounting) is depressed by
lower inflation because there is no offsetting change in the value of depreciation to balance the
rise in the real net-of-tax interest rate.
If the net effect of the lower inflation rate is to reduce the overall incentive for business
investment, the depressing effect on aggregate demand can be offset by a suitable investment tax
credit. This is true even if the inflation rate is negative.
Stimulating Demand by Households and Businesses in Japan
Japan has now experienced a decade of stagnation with growth rates that are far less than
Japan’s potential and with several years of declining prices. Although the short term interest
rate is essentially zero, the real rate is positive and could rise if the rate of deflation increases.
The large existing budget deficit (a primary deficit of about 5 percent of GDP) and the excessive
national debt (a national debt that exceeds 140 percent of GDP) make additional fiscal deficits
potentially counterproductive. In this context, I have previously discussed two targeted fiscal
policies that could increase aggregate demand without increasing the size of the budget deficit
(Feldstein, 2001).
The first option would increase consumer spending. The government of Japan has said
for some time that it wants to reduce its reliance on the income tax and increase its reliance on its
value added tax. The Japanese government could announce that it will raise the current 5
percent value added tax by 1 percent per quarter and simultaneously reduce the income tax rates
to keep revenue unchanged, continuing this for several years until the VAT reaches 20 percent.
This revenue neutral policy would imply consumer prices rising at the rate of four percent a year.

-8-

This tax-induced inflation would give households an incentive to spend sooner rather than
waiting until prices are substantially higher. And yet it would not change the size of the
structural budget deficit.
The second such revenue neutral targeted incentive policy could encourage business
investment by a Japanese government announcement that it was instituting a large investment
tax credit – say 30 percent – paid for by an increase in the corporate income tax and that the
investment tax credit rate would decline by 5 percentage points a year until it was eliminated
(with corresponding revenue neutral reductions in the corporate tax rate.) Companies, like the
consumers in the previous example, would have a substantial incentive to spend sooner before
the net price of investment goods rises. A similar declining tax credit could be applied to
investment in business structures and residential housing.
In summary, an expansionary fiscal policy based on a revenue neutral structural incentive
may be more productive and less risky than an excessively easy monetary policy as a way of
dealing with a deflationary situation or one that could become deflationary.
This possibility of using discretionary fiscal policy in any country assumes of course that
a political agreement can be achieved for legislative action in a timely enough fashion. If
partisan conflict prevents this, the central bank would have to weigh the consequences of a
potentially excessive monetary easing – including the consequences for security and real estate
markets and for the exchange rate – against the risks of deflation.

-9-

References

Ahearne, Alan et. al. “Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan’s Experience in the 1990s,”
International Finance Discussion Papers June 2002. The Federal Reserve Board,
Washington, D.C.

Auerbach, Alan “Is There a Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy,” paper prepared for the Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City conference on Rethinking Stabilization Policy, August 2931, 2002

Canzonieri, Matthew et. al, “Should the European Central Bank and the Federal Reserve be
Concerned about Fiscal Policy?”, paper prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas
City conference on Rethinking Stabilization Policy, August 29-31, 2002

Elmendorf, Douglas and David Reifschneider, (2002) “Short-Run Effects of Fiscal Policy with
Forward-Looking Financial Markets,” National Tax Journal, forthcoming

Feldstein , Martin “The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation to Price Stability,” in
Monetary Policy and Price Stability, C. Romer and D. Romer (eds.) (Chicago: Chicago
University Press, 1998)

-10-

Feldstein, Martin “Capital Income Taxes and the Benefit of Price Stability,” in M.Feldstein (ed.)
The Costs and Benefits of Achieving Price Stability (Chicago: Chicago University Press,
1999)

Feldstein, Martin (2001) “Japan Needs to Stimulate Spending,” Wall Street Journal, July 16,
2001

Friedman, Milton (1953) “The Effects of a Full-Employment Policy on Economic Stability: A
Formal Analysis,” in M. Friedman Essays in Positive Economics (Chicago: Chicago
University Press, 1953)

Friedman, Milton (1969) “The Optimum Quantity of Money,” in M. Friedman The Optimum
Quantity of Money and Other Essays (Chicago: Aldine, 1969)

Giavazzi, Francesco et. al. (2000) “Searching for Nonlinear Effects of Fiscal Policy,” European
Economic Review, June, pp 1259-89

Romer, Christina and David Romer, (1994) “What Ends Recessions?” in S. Fischer and J.
Rotemberg, eds. NBER Macroeconomics Annual , pp 13-57

-11-

-12-

