                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     COMPETITION, PAYERS, AND HOSPITAL QUALITY


                                        Gautam Gowrisankaran
                                            Robert Town


                                          Working Paper 9206
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9206


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




The views expressed herein do not reflect those of the National Bureau of Economic Research, the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco or the Federal Reserve System. We thank Tom Buchmueller, Vivian Ho, Tom
Holmes, Rajiv Tyagi, and seminar participants at the University of California, Irvine, for helpful comments,
and Anita Todd for editorial assistance.

© 2002 by Gautam Gowrisankaran and Robert Town. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Competition, Payers, and Hospital Quality
Gautam Gowrisankaran and Robert Town
NBER Working Paper No. 9206
September 2002
JEL No. I11, L1, L4

                                           ABSTRACT

     The objective of this study is to estimate the effects of competition for both Medicare and
HMO patients on the quality decisions of hospitals in Southern California. We use discharge data
from the State of California for the period 1989-1993. The outcome variables are the risk-adjusted
hospital mortality rates for pneumonia (estimated by the authors) and acute myocardial infarction
(reported by the state of California). Measures of competition are constructed for each hospital and
payer type. The competition measures are formulated to mitigate the possibility of endogeneity bias.
The study finds that increases in the degree of competition for HMO patients decrease risk-adjusted
hospital mortality rates. Conversely, increases in competition for Medicare enrollees are associated
with increases in risk-adjusted mortality rates for hospitals. In conjunction with previous research,
the estimates indicate that increasing competition for HMO patients appears to reduce prices and
save lives and hence appears to improve welfare. However, increases in competition for Medicare
appear to reduce quality and may reduce welfare. Increasing competition has little net effect on
hospital quality for our sample.



Gautam Gowrisankaran, Ph. D.                                  Robert Town, Ph. D.
Visiting Assistant Professor                                  Assistant Professor
Harvard University                                            Division of Health Services Research
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco                         and Policy
and NBER                                                      School of Public Health
gautam_gowrisankaran@nber.org                                 University of Minnesota
                                                              Mayo Code 729
                                                              420 Delaware St. S.E
                                                              Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                                              rjtown@umn.edu
Introduction

        Two types of insurers dominate the U.S. health care economy: the federal and

state governments, through the Medicare and Medicaid programs, and privately

purchased managed care or HMOs. These insurance systems reimburse health care

providers differently, which gives providers different and potentially offsetting incentives

to deliver quality care. Some argue that in a managed care environment competition will

provide the appropriate incentives for health care insurers and providers to deliver the

optimum level of care at prices that approach marginal cost (Enthoven (1993)). In

contrast, hospitals will have different incentives to provide quality care to Medicare

patients since they have little control over the reimbursement rates they receive from

Medicare.2 There is substantial evidence that since the rise of managed care, increasing

competition in hospital markets has led to lower prices.3 Insofar as hospital quality is

determined by hospital investments, the incentives for hospitals to make these

investments will depend, at least in part, on the return they receive for increasing hospital

quality. That return will be a function of the competitive environment and the

mechanisms of reimbursement. This line of reasoning suggests that competition for

Medicare and HMO patients may have differing impacts on hospital quality, and any

analysis of the impact of competition on hospital quality should attempt to account for

this possibility.

        In this paper we seek to estimate the effects of competition for both Medicare and

HMO patients on the quality outcomes of hospitals in Southern California. We examine

2
  See McClellan (1997) for a discussion of cost sharing under prospective payment and the ability of
hospitals to affect the level of reimbursement for Medicare patients.
3
  For recent surveys of the relationship between hospital prices and competition see Gaynor and Vogt
(2000) and Dranove and Satterthwaithe (2000).


                                                 3
two diagnoses, pneumonia and acute myocardial infarction (AMI), in order to verify the

robustness of any findings. Our basic method of analysis is simple: we regress quality of

care on levels of competition. However, we address a number of issues that complicate

such an analysis. First, standard measures of competition are likely to be endogenous.

This is because high unobserved quality for one hospital is likely to lead it to have a high

market share and hence lead to a less competitive market. To address this issue, we

develop measures of competition based on patient flows predicted using only exogenous

characteristics.4 Second, we account for competition for both HMO and Medicare

patients by measuring quality as a function of the level of competition for each payer type

multiplied by the predicted number of patients of that payer type. Third, hospital quality

is notoriously difficult to measure. We address this issue separately for our two

diagnoses. For pneumonia, we use quality measures that we developed in a previous

work. As patient severity of illness is likely an important determinant of hospital

mortality for pneumonia, our measures control for observed and unobserved severity of

illness with an instrumental variables type of identification.5 For AMI, where the urgency

of care limits the choice of hospital and thus likely makes unobserved severity of illness

quantitatively less important, we use publicly available quality measures that control for

observed severity of illness.6 For our estimation, we focus on a single geographic area,

Los Angeles County, and pool data from a four-year period. Thus, the identification of

our parameters will come from examining how variations in competition and patient

types across different parts of the area are related to hospital quality.



4
  We follow Kessler and McClellan (2000) in using this technique.
5
  See Geweke, Gowrisankaran, and Town (2001).
6
  These measures are provided by Luft and Romano (1997).


                                                   4
       In contrast to the large body of work on the pricing effects of competition, the

literature on the effect of hospital competition on medical outcomes is relatively sparse.

Shortell and Hughes (1988), Ho and Hamilton (2000), and Mukamel, Zwanziger, and

Tomaszewski (2001) find no significant effect between hospital competition and quality.

In contrast, Kessler and McClellan (2000) find that increases in competition increased

patient mortality from 1986-1989, but decreased patient mortality from 1991-1994.

Additionally, they find that competition unambiguously reduced mortality only in states

with above-median HMO penetration. Propper, Burgess, and Green (2002) find that

increased competition between hospitals in Britain’s National Health Service reduced

mortality rates for AMI. Our analysis is most similar to the Kessler and McClellan study.

However, our work differs from theirs in several important ways as we examine the

effects of competition for patients with different types of insurance, and over two very

different diseases. Perhaps most importantly, our findings imply different relationships

between competition and hospital quality.


Competition and Payers: Why Competition for Different Types of
Patients May Impact Quality of Care

    In this article we examine the relationship between competition for patients with

differing insurance arrangements and hospital quality. It is reasonable to ask why

competition over different payer classes may have a different impact on hospital quality.

There are two key assumptions that, if met, will imply that competition for different

payer types will impact the optimal, profit-maximizing hospital quality. The first

assumption is that patients (or their agent physicians) directly or indirectly through their

insurance choice select hospitals, at least in part, on the basis of perceived quality. The



                                             5
second assumption is that the hospital cannot choose to offer different quality levels to

patients based on their insurance type. If these conditions hold and if increasing quality is

costly, then hospitals will have an incentive to adjust their quality for all patients in

response to changes in their competitive environments.

     For example, consider two hospitals, A and B. Suppose hospital A faces substantial

competition for Medicare patients, while hospital B does not. Hospitals, in general,

cannot affect their Medicare payment level. If Medicare reimburses hospitals below some

threshold at which it is undesirable for them to attract Medicare patients, the hospital will

have an incentive to reduce overall quality to shed patients.7 The ability of the hospital to

shed patients will depend on the options these patients face. Because patients at hospital

A have more choices, it will be easier for hospital A to shed patients by reducing quality

than for hospital B. Thus, if Medicare marginal payments are below the threshold, then,

all else being equal, A will have an incentive to have lower quality than B. Conversely, if

Medicare pays above the threshold, then A will have an incentive to have higher quality

than B.

     Theoretically, the impact of competition on quality for patients enrolled in managed

care plans is less clear. Different economic models yield differing predictions on the

relationship between competition and price because they incorporate different underlying

assumptions.8 As it is very difficult to determine which assumptions are likely to be

empirically correct, we have no clear guidance on the directional impact of increased

hospital competition on hospital quality. Furthermore, the institutional differences

between hospital competition for HMO patients and the generic economic model of

7
  It is important to note that this threshold is not necessarily marginal cost. Ultimately, the threshold will
depend on the nature of the entire cost relationship and elasticities of demand of the different payer groups.
8
  See Shaked and Sutton (1983), Motta (1993), Moorthy (1988), and Spence (1975).


                                                      6
oligopoly competition makes it difficult to map these theories into our analysis. The

theoretical difficulty is that decreasing competition puts direct upward pressure on prices

and direct downward pressure on quality. However, the direct price effect leads to an

indirect quality impact that works in the opposite direction of the direct quality

effectthe higher the margins are per patient the greater the incentive to increase quality.

While the theoretical models provide little guidance, our view is that most economists

would predict that increases in competition for HMO patients would likely increase

hospital quality.

    Importantly, the incentive to increase quality may also vary by diagnostic and

procedure category. The margins on Medicare payments vary considerably across DRGs

(McClellan 1997), and the profitability of treating a given diagnosis varies across payers

(Chernew, Gowrisankaran, and Fendrick 2002). Hospital reputations differ across

different disease or condition classes, which provides evidence that they can affect the

quality of care in one specific area. Hospitals that are even modestly approaching profit-

maximizing decisions for pricing and input choices must pay close attention to the net

revenues for high revenue health conditions such as pneumonia and cardiac conditions.

The span of the impact across different conditions of many of these investments is

limited. For example, opening or expanding a cardiac catheterization lab may well impact

the treatment of AMI but will not likely directly impact pneumonia care. Lastly, the

elasticity of demand is likely to vary across different conditions–for instance, we would

expect that AMI patients will have much less elastic demand than pneumonia patients

due to the urgency of treatment–which implies that the same payment margin will have

different effects across different conditions.




                                                 7
    If a hospital were to face a change in competitive conditions (e.g., a change in

Medicare payment policy) for a high revenue health condition the hospital could respond

by making disease–specific investments. Those investments could include recruiting

highly respected physicians, opening specialty treatment centers (e.g., catheterization

labs, critical care units), and constructing information technology infrastructures (e.g.,

electronic medical records integrated with physician practice records systems).

       In this paper we focus on the relationship between competition and hospital

quality for two diagnoses: AMI and pneumonia. In general, pneumonia patients can have

discretion over the hospital to which they are admitted. Differences of an hour in

transportation time between hospitals will not likely directly impact the patient’s

prognosis. Thus, our measures of competition for pneumonia should map directly into

capturing the competitive environment for this disease. However, this is not true for AMI.

A delay of several minutes in treatment can have a substantial impact on the patient’s

outcome.

       Since patients have less discretion in selecting their hospital when they suffer an

AMI, it is reasonable to ask: What are the competitive forces at work that affect

hospitals’ incentives to provide quality care for AMI? We believe there are at least two

forces at play. First, while hospitals may not compete directly for AMI patients, they do

compete to be part of an HMO’s network and, insofar as quality of care impacts the

HMO’s decision to include the hospital in the network, it will affect the hospital’s

incentive to provide quality care. Chernew, Scanlon, and Hayward (1998) find that HMO

enrollees are more likely to be admitted to better hospitals for coronary artery bypass

graft (CABG). Second, the quality of care for AMI is likely positively correlated with




                                            8
quality of care for other heart procedures and diagnoses, and for most of these diagnoses

patients do have discretion over the choice of hospital. For example, the successful

treatment of AMI requires mastery of a menu of procedures and treatments (e.g., CABG,

angioplasty). These procedures are often performed without the presence of AMI when

patients have the luxury of selecting a hospital based on characteristics other than their

proximity to the institution.


Methodology

       The purpose of this paper is to estimate the relationship between hospital quality

and competition for different payer types. To do this, we need to formulate a measure of

competition for each payer group. Besides controlling for payer groups, we have two

other broad concerns in measuring the level of competition. Traditionally, measures of

competition are formulated using a two-step method. The first step defines the extent of

the geographic and product market. In studying hospital competition, this is generally

done by defining the geographic markets (e.g., counties) in which hospitals compete. The

product market usually is a set of inpatient services. The second step involves measuring

market shares given the market definition.

       Both steps may introduce significant biases to the competition measure. For

example, the definition of the geographic market is usually based on geopolitical

boundaries (e.g. counties or standardized metropolitan statistical areas (SMSAs)) instead

of economic notions of markets and thus is often ad hoc. These ad hoc measures of

market concentration could lead to substantial biases. It is also difficult to model the fact

that hospitals are geographically dispersed within a given market with substitutability of

hospitals varying substantially within the market.



                                             9
       The second problem in formulating measures of competition is that one must

construct measures of hospital size. Measures of competition that are based on actual

patient flows will be endogenous: high quality hospitals may attract more patients from

farther away. Thus, an exogenous increase in the quality of a hospital would cause it to

appear to have more market power. This problem will be exacerbated with HMO patients

because HMOs typically form hospital networks, where the networks typically include

only a subset of the total set of hospitals. For example, consider a region with one HMO

and two hospitals. If the HMO negotiates a favorable rate with one hospital and includes

it in its network, a Hirschman-Herfindahl Index (HHI) measure of market concentration

based on actual HMO patient flows will be extremely high and will underestimate the

intensity of the actual hospital competition.

       Following Kessler and McClellan (2000) and Town and Vistnes (2001), we

compute a measure of competition that is based upon the results of a multinomial logit

model of hospital choice. Our specification for the choice model explicitly accounts for

geographic and product differentiation but is not based on endogenous hospital variables.

This allows us to formulate hospital–specific measures of competition for the different

insurance categories that satisfy both of our concerns. In the remainder of this section, we

discuss our model of hospital choice and our construction of competition and quality

measures.

Model of Hospital Choice
       We now detail our exact choice model. We posit that the indirect utility that a

patient with diagnosis s receives from being admitted to hospital j ∈ J , conditional on

deciding to be admitted to a hospital, is given by




                                                10
       (1)     u ijs = λ1s d ij + λ 2s beds j + λ 3s closeij + λ s4 d ij × emerg i + λ 5s closeij × emerg i + eijs ,

where d ij is the distance from the center of the patient’s zip code to the center of the

hospital’s home zip code, bedsj is the number of beds at hospital j, closeij is an indicator

variable taking the value of one if the hospital is the closest one to the patient’s home zip

code and zero otherwise, and emergi is an indicator variable taking the value of one if the

patient had an emergency admittance and zero otherwise. The error term, esij , is iid and

captures the effects of unobservable attributes on patient choice. For example, it is

possible that the patient’s physician plays a role in selecting the hospital, and we do not

have any information on the identity of a patient’s physician. The error term is assumed

to be distributed Type I extreme value. This is the standard conditional multinomial logit

framework and the parameters from (1) are estimated via maximum likelihood.

       A well-known drawback to the multinomial logit model with independent errors

is that it imposes the rather restrictive assumption of independence of irrelevant

alternatives (IIA). The IIA implication is particularly troublesome in combination with

the assumption of a homogeneous population as it implies that substitution patterns

between hospitals are proportional to market shares. Since we are using individual data

and there is variation across individuals and hospitals in the explanatory variables and

these variables explain a good deal of the actual hospital choices, in our case the

unappealing consequences of the IIA assumption are mitigated.

       We estimate the parameters of (1) using California patient discharge data. Ideally,

the parameters of (1) should be estimated separately for every payer group. The discharge

data, however, does not permit that approach. This is because the privately insured

patients in our patient-level data are covered by different HMOs, each of which defines a


                                                        11
different set of hospitals that its enrollees use. Without knowing the feasible choice set

for each HMO patient in the data set, we cannot calculate unbiased estimates for (1).

Instead, we estimate (1) using the hospital selection decisions of traditional Medicare

enrollees. We use this population because, in general, the price they pay for inpatient

services (essentially a small deductible) does not differ by hospital, and they are free to

choose any hospital.9 We then assume the parameter estimates of (1) hold for the HMO

population. Previous work (Town and Vistnes (2001)) has tested this assumption by

assessing how well this Medicare-based choice model describes hospital choices for a

very different patient population, Medicaid enrollees. While Medicaid enrollees’

preferences also likely differ from those of other patients, they find the Medicare-based

choice model translates quite well to the younger Medicaid population.


Formulating Measures of Market Concentration and the Geographic Dispersion of
Patients

         We use the estimated parameters of (1) to formulate hospital–specific measures of

competition for each type of payer category. For a given hospital choice set J, let P̂ijs be

the estimated probability that individual i with diagnosis s will be admitted to hospital j.

Under the logit assumption, P̂ijs is given by

                     exp(uˆ ijs )
(2)      Pˆijs =                        ,
                   ∑ exp(uˆ
                   k ∈J
                                s
                               ik   )




9
  As our data are from the early 1990s, the percentage of Medicare beneficiaries that is enrolled in HMOs is
small. We include those patients that were admitted to a Kaiser hospital. However, we have performed the
analysis excluding them and the results excluding the Kaiser patients are essentially quantitatively identical
to the results throughout this paper.


                                                     12
where û ijs is the expected utility of being admitted to hospital j as implied by the

parameter estimates of the logit model.

        In this framework the Herfindahl index is:

(3)      HHI izs = ∑ Pˆijs .10
                          2
                                 ( )
                          j∈ J



         HHI izs measures the degree of competition over each individual. The hospital

should care not only about the amount of competition it faces for each payer group but

also about the number of potential patients it may attract in each group. That is, we wish

to weight HHI izs by the number of potential patients. For a given patient, the “number of

potential patients” is just the probability of admission P̂ijs . Our measure of competition

for hospital j for patients z and s, which we denote as H sjz , is just the sum of this measure

over patients:

(4)      H sjz = ∑ Pˆijs (HHI izs ),
                 i∈I zs



where I zs is the set of patients with diagnoses s with insurance z. H sjz is, in essence, the

weighted sum of the estimated, patient-level HHI. Note that, H sjz will capture both the

effects of competition and number of patients.

        We formulate (4) for five different payer groups for each diagnosis. The five

groups are Medicare enrollees (MED), HMO enrollees (HMO), self-pay and indigent

patients (IND), traditional indemnity insurance enrollees (IDM), and enrollees in

California's Medicaid program, MediCal (MCD). The effects of competition for these
10
   The actual HHI that we use is somewhat different as there is cross-ownership across hospitals. We
calculate (3) for each separate hospital corporation, summing the probabilities across hospitals within the
corporation to calculate the corporation probability. Likewise, the summation in (4) is over hospital
corporations.


                                                   13
payer groups will depend on the generosity of the payments and the ultimate size of each

group.

         The measure of HHI in (4) is based solely on the parameter estimates of the

hospital choice equation and the geographic distribution of patients and hospitals. The

only hospital characteristic included in (4) besides a hospital’s location is the number of

beds. Importantly, this HHI measure does not account for hospital heterogeneity in

facilities (e.g., presence of open heart surgery capabilities, cardiac catheterization labs) or

reputation. Including other hospital characteristics in the hospital choice model may

provide a better measure of market power. However, we choose not to include those

characteristics in the market power measure implemented here as it puts the measure at

increased risk for endogeneity. Hospitals that have unobservably higher quality may also

invest more in the observable characteristics (e.g., cardiac catheterization labs), and, if

true, this investment could lead to a biased coefficient on H sjz .

         There are two sources of variation that identify the parameters on H sjz . First, there

is significant variation across zip codes in the number of potential patients by insurance

type. The coefficient of variation across zip codes on the number of AMI procedures is

approximately 1.0 for all five payer groups. The across zip code correlation in the number

of AMIs is 0.59 between the Medicare and HMO categories, 0.47 between the Medicare

and Medicaid categories, and 0.35 between the HMO and Medicaid categories. The

second source of variation is the result of hospitals facing different competitive

environments. Town and Vistnes (2001) find significant differences in hospital

bargaining power in the Los Angeles area.




                                               14
Measures of Hospital Quality
           Our focus in this paper is on the relationship between hospital quality and

concentration. An obvious and nontrivial issue is: How do we measure hospital quality?

There is a rather large literature in health services research devoted to answering that

question. The literature has identified multiple measures of hospital quality that can be

grouped into two categories: process–based or outcome–based. In essence, process–based

measures of hospital quality count the amount and the quality of inputs that are used in

treating patients. Outcome–based measures are what the name implies; they measure

actual patient outcomes from treatment. The most common and oldest outcome–based

measure of hospital quality is mortality and it is the one we focus on here.11 Throughout

this paper we will use the term “quality” to refer to the negative of a hospital’s risk-

adjusted mortality rate.

           Hospitals that are of the same quality may have different mortality rates because

they are treating patients with different risk profiles. Thus, it is important that hospital

mortality rates are adjusted to reflect the risk characteristics of the patients they treat.

Again, there is a large literature on the methods to adjust mortality rates for risk (see

Iezzoni (1997) for an overview). Considerable care is exercised here to diminish the

likelihood that severity differences across hospitals are contaminating our measures of

hospital quality.

           We use two different risk-adjusted hospital mortality rates: one for pneumonia

and one for AMI. The pneumonia mortality rates come from Geweke, Gowrisankaran,

and Town (2001) (hereafter, GGT). GGT estimate a Bayesian model of the 10-day in-

hospital mortality that corrects for both observable and unobservable severity of illness of

11
     Florence Nightingale (1863) conducted the first study of the determinants of hospital mortality rates.


                                                       15
the patient. That is, if there are unobservable (to the econometrician) components of

severity that influence a patient’s choice of hospital (e.g., sick patients seek care at better

hospitals, all else equal) standard risk adjustment techniques will yield biased estimates

of the quality of care provided by the hospital. GGT correct for this bias using Bayesian

techniques that are analogous to the classical econometric method of instrumental

variables.12 The identifying assumption is that a patient’s mortality is not affected by how

far that patient’s residence is from alternative hospitals. Conceptually, the estimator

would predict hospital A to be of higher quality than hospital B if patients residing near

hospital A have lower mortality than patients residing near hospital B, after controlling

for their medical and demographic characteristics.

        The methodology generates estimates of the hospital-specific component of

mortality that, given the underlying identifying assumptions, will eliminate both the

observed and unobserved severity differentials from the risk-adjusted hospital mortality

rates. In order to form our measure of hospital quality used here, we draw a random

sample of patients and use the GGT estimates to calculate the likelihood of death for each

patient at each hospital. The hospital mortality rate is then the mean estimated mortality

rate across this sample of patients. GGT use data for the years 1989-1992. Because of the

computational complexity of the estimation procedure, they limit the number of hospitals

they include in their sample to those hospitals located in Los Angeles County (N=114).

        Our other mortality measure is the AMI mortality rates that come from Luft and

Romano (1997) (hereafter, LR). They estimate the 30-day risk-adjusted mortality rates

for AMI for most hospitals in California. LR link the hospital discharge records to death


12
  See Gowrisankaran and Town (1999) for a classical instrumental variables estimation procedure that uses
the same identification method.


                                                   16
certificates and thus are able to measure accurately whether a patient died within the 30-

day outcome window. In addition to controlling for patient demographics, LR carefully

control for comorbidities by linking up the AMI discharge records with other possible

past admissions to California hospitals. LR formulate a risk-adjusted measure that is

unlikely to contain systematic biases due to unobservable severity. We believe this for

two reasons. First, LR's study carefully controlled for potential observed severity

differences across patients. Second, AMI patients have less discretion over their choice of

hospital since time until treatment is rendered is a critical determinant of mortality for

heart attacks; thus, the need to control for unobservable severity, which is important for

pneumonia, is less acute for AMI.

       We focus our attention on the Los Angeles region. We limit ourselves to this

geographic area for three reasons. First, GGT limit their study of hospital quality for

pneumonia to Los Angeles County. Their econometric methods are rather

computationally intensive and do not allow for a wider geographic scope. Thus, our

estimates of hospital quality for pneumonia are limited to Los Angeles County. Second,

in previous work Town and Vistnes (2001) have analyzed the pricing behavior of

hospitals in this region over this time period. They found that the price a hospital charges

an HMO decreases in the ability of the HMO to drop or replace the hospital from its

network. Thus, we can link our measures of concentration and quality to the pricing

behavior of these hospitals. Finally, by limiting our geographic focus, our results likely

will not be driven by geographic variation in unobservable characteristics that may affect

mortality but are unrelated to hospital competition.




                                            17
        Our empirical strategy is straightforward. Once the measures of market

concentration have been formulated and the measures of hospital performance have been

collected, we regress the risk-adjusted mortality rate on the relevant measure of

competition for the different payer groups using OLS, controlling for hospital for-profit

status, teaching status, and size.


Data
        Our principal data comes from the State of California Office of Statewide Health

Planning and Development (OSHPD) patient discharge database, which records

information for every individual who was discharged from an acute care facility in the

state. As discussed above, the risk-adjusted mortality rates were obtained from LR and

GGT for AMI and pneumonia, respectively. Both LR and GGT use OSHPD data to

formulate their risk-adjusted mortality rates. LR estimate each hospital’s average AMI

mortality rate for 1991-1993. Similarly, GGT formulate each hospital’s relative

contribution to patient mortality for 1989-1992. Thus, there is substantial overlap in the

time frames used by both studies in formulating their measures of hospital mortality rates.

        The parameters from (1), the hospital choice problem, are also estimated using the

Version B patient discharge data from OSHPD. For this purpose, the data provide

patient-level information on zip code of residence, DRG, race, sex, age (by classes),

hospital that the patient was admitted to, source of admittance (emergency room, etc.),

and disposition (normal discharge, death, etc.). From this data we kept those patients who

were admitted to a hospital in Los Angeles, Orange, Riverside, San Bernardino, and

Santa Barbara counties and who were coded as Medicare enrollees. We removed from the

data set any patient whose source of admission was other than the emergency room or



                                            18
routine13 and any patient with missing zip code information. All of the hospitals for

which we have mortality data are located in Los Angeles County. We include patients

and hospitals from the surrounding counties in this sample to avoid biases that may occur

for those hospitals located near the county border.

        We estimate the parameters of (1) for two different types of conditions: AMI and

pneumonia. We use the recorded primary DRG as the basis for determining which

patients were treated for pneumonia and which were treated for AMI.14

        In addition to the patient level data, OSHPD is the source of our hospital-level

data on size and for-profit status. We measure hospital size by the number of staffed

beds. We construct three dummy variables based on staffed beds (151-200, 201-300,

greater than 300—the omitted category 150 or fewer beds) that we use as independent

variables. We use categorical variables in order to allow for nonlinear relationships

between hospital size and mortality.15 We also use a hospital’s teaching status as a

regressor. We define a hospital to be a teaching hospital if it is a member of the Council

of Teaching Hospitals, as listed in the American Hospital Association (AHA) Annual

Report of Hospitals database. Our data also include the longitude and latitude for the

center of each zip code, which we obtained from the TIGER database.16 This

longitude/latitude data allows us to calculate straight-line distances using the great circle




13
    This serves to eliminate patients admitted from nursing homes and other care facilities who may have
very different choice sets.
14
   The DRG codes for pneumonia are 89 and 90, while the DRG codes for AMI are 121, 122, and 123.
15
   Our results are unaffected if we include just the size of the hospital as a regressor.
16
   Center-of-zip code longitudes and latitudes can be off when zip codes are very large. By restricting our
study to hospitals in the Los Angeles/Orange County metropolitan area, where most zip codes are relatively
small, we largely avoid this problem.


                                                    19
formula between hospitals’ and patients’ home zip codes.17 Lastly, there is significant

cross–ownership of hospitals in Los Angeles County. We use OSHPD data to track

hospital ownership in our calculations of concentration for the different diagnoses.

        Table 1 presents summary statistics for the different data sets used in the analysis.

The top half of the table presents the summary statistics for the Medicare discharge data

for the AMI and pneumonia diagnoses. The typical AMI patient is younger (75 versus

76.5 years), travels slightly further to her chosen hospital (7.7 versus 7.5 km), and is more

likely to be admitted via the emergency room (63% versus 20%) than her pneumonia

counterpart. Over a third of both AMI and pneumonia patients are admitted to the closest

hospital.

        The hospital data is presented in the bottom half of Table 1. Both AMI and

pneumonia carry a significant likelihood of death, with the AMI mortality rate being

higher than the pneumonia mortality rate (14.9% versus 9.5%). The relatively high

likelihood of death for these conditions suggests that mortality is an appropriate measure

of hospital quality. There is also significant variation in the mortality rates for both

diagnoses across hospitals. The standard deviation is 3.9% and 2.3% for AMI and

pneumonia, respectively. The average hospital has 242 staffed beds. The hospitals are

roughly split between for-profit and not-for-profit hospitals (49% versus 44%) and 4% of

the hospitals are members of the Council of Teaching Hospitals.




17
  Using data from upstate New York, Phibbs and Luft (1995) show a strong correlation between travel
times and straight-line distances. We assume the same correlation holds for the metropolitan Los Angeles
region.


                                                  20
Results
Hospital Choice and Estimates of H djz
       Table 2 presents the results of estimating equation (1) for the Medicare

population, with both AMI and the pneumonia diagnoses. The coefficient estimates are

roughly as expected. The coefficient on the impact of distance on hospital choice is

negative and significantly different from zero for both diagnoses. Larger hospitals are

more attractive for both conditions—the coefficient on number of beds is significant and

positive. AMI patients appear to be more sensitive to size than pneumonia patients.

Patients are inclined to go to the closest hospitals for the treatment of both AMI and

pneumonia. This coefficient is significantly different from zero. AMI patients who are

admitted via the emergency room are more likely to go to hospitals that are closest to

their home. The coefficient on Emergency × Distance is significantly negative in both

samples. The coefficient on Emergency × Distance in the AMI sample is larger than the

one in the pneumonia sample. As time until treatment is a key determinant of AMI

survival it is not surprising that patients who experience a heart attack reduce the distance

they are willing to travel when they are aware that their condition needs immediate

treatment. The coefficient on Emergency × Close is not significantly different from zero at

traditional confidence levels for either diagnosis.

       Using the coefficient estimates in Table 2, we formulate our measures of

competition for the five payer groups for both medical conditions. Table 3 presents the

summary statistics of the measures of competition, H, by diagnosis for each payer group.

There is significant variation across hospitals in these measures. In general, the standard

deviations are larger than the means and the maximum value for each measure is over ten

times the mean value for each measure. In Table 3 we present the hospitals that


                                             21
correspond to the maximum and minimum below their respective values. The hospitals

with the maximum and minimum appear sensible. The hospitals with the minimum

values are small hospitals or are located near other large hospitals (e.g., Charter

Community Hospital; Beds = 140), while hospitals with the maximum values are large

(LA County/USC; Beds = 1,879) or are geographically isolated (Westlake Medical

Center; Beds =115) institutions. Also, the measures of market power for well-known

hospitals imply that these facilities have relatively more market power and that seems

                                                                     AMI
reasonable. For example, Cedars Sinai and UCLA Medical Center have H MED values that

are at the 95 and 85 percentiles of the distribution, respectively.

       The measures of H are highly but imperfectly correlated. OLS regressions of H

for one payer group on H for all other payer groups for the same diagnoses yield an

average R2 of 0.90. Within diagnoses, differences in H are going to be solely due to

differences in the geographic distribution of patients. This suggests that even in an urban

area such as greater Los Angeles, hospitals will face differences in patient mix and

competition for patients from different payer groups.


Hospital Competition and Hospital Quality

       Next we examine the multivariate relationship between the measures of hospital

quality and hospital concentration for AMI and pneumonia diagnoses. We control for

similar hospital-specific characteristics as in (1) to avoid any endogeneity of the

competition measures. Table 4 reports regressions that examine the relationship between

measures of competition and mortality for AMI and pneumonia separately. We transform

all continuous variables by the natural logarithm in these regressions.




                                             22
       The main findings of this paper are captured in these regressions results. Hospital

quality is correlated with the weighted measure of competition that differs across payer

groups. All else equal, increased competition for Medicare enrollees decreases hospital

quality. This is true for both diagnoses. The coefficient on H MED is negative and

significantly different from zero at traditional levels of confidence in all three

regressions. Increases in H MED across hospitals correspond to the hospitals facing an

increase in the number of Medicare enrollees nearby and/or a decrease in competition for

those enrollees. Recall that our measures of hospital quality are risk adjusted so it is

unlikely that this finding is driven by differentials in risk patient profiles that may be

correlated with differentials in H MED . The magnitudes of the coefficients imply that a

10% increase in H MED is associated with a decrease in hospital mortality of 3.5% for

AMI and 3.4% for pneumonia. That is, increasing H MED from the median level to the top

quartile decreases expected mortality by about 22% for AMI and 17% for pneumonia.

The estimated effect of competition on hospitals in markets where there is administrative

pricing is consistent with the findings of Propper, Burgess, and Green (2002) for Britain’s

National Health Service.

       McClellan (1997) finds that reimbursements for pneumonia are relatively more

generous than for AMI. Insofar as our results imply that the mortality rate for AMI is

more sensitive to changes in the competitive environment for Medicare patients than

pneumonia mortality, they are consistent with McClellan's estimates.

       The finding that vigorous competition for Medicare patients is associated with

high mortality rates suggests that Medicare margins are small. This finding is consistent

with the work of Chernew, Gowrisankaran, and Fendrick (2002). Small (or negative)


                                            23
Medicare margins are sufficient to account for our results, but there are other

possibilities. For example, this result may also be due to non profit-maximizing behavior

on the part of hospitals. If not-for-profit hospitals are maximizing revenues subject to a

break-even constraint, then even relatively generous Medicare margins may cause

competition to result in a decrease in quality.

        Increases in the degree of competition for HMO patients (a decline in H) are

correlated with increases in hospital quality. In the AMI regression the coefficient on

H HMO is positive and significant at the 1% level. In the pneumonia regression the

coefficient is positive but insignificant at traditional levels — the p-value is 0.33. Deaths

from pneumonia are a relatively rare event for patients under age 65 compared to AMI.

Pneumonia is the tenth leading cause of death for those 25 to 64 years of age, while heart

disease is the second leading cause of death for those 25 to 64 years of age (National

Center for Health Statistics).18 The magnitudes of the coefficients imply that a 10%

increase in H HMO is associated with an increase in hospital mortality of 3.4% for AMI

and 1.0% for pneumonia. That is, increasing H HMO from the median level to the top

quartile increases expected mortality by about 22% for AMI and 7.4% for pneumonia.

Given that pneumonia is a relatively infrequent occurrence for the population that is

likely to enroll in HMOs, it is not surprising that the relationship between HMO

competition and pneumonia mortality is weaker than for AMI mortality.

        For AMI patients, the coefficient estimates indicate that the effect of changes in

the competitive environment (e.g., from a merger) on hospital quality will depend upon

the relative impact of the change on the opposing forces of competition for HMO patients

18
  Source: Minino and Smith (2001). For the 65 and over population, heart disease is the leading cause of
death while pneumonia is the fifth leading cause of death.


                                                  24
and competition for Medicare patients. Thus, the impact on hospital quality will depend

on the geographic distribution of patients by payer type. For pneumonia, our results

indicate that increases in competition will reduce hospital quality. These observations

imply that the underlying forces that affect hospital quality are complex and that the

impact of changes in the competitive environment on mortality will vary by diagnoses,

the geographic distribution of patients by payer type, and Medicare payment policies.

       As an illustration of the opposing forces of Medicare and HMO competition, we

compare the implied impact of a change in competition for AMI on hospital mortality

with those of Kessler and McClellan (2000). Kessler and McClellan find that a decrease

in competition of moving from the 2nd quartile to the 1st quartile of the HHI distribution

in high HMO penetration states is expected to increase mortality by 1.60 percentage

points. We perform a similar hypothetical experiment with our data by estimating the net

impact of moving all hospitals in the 2nd quartile to the median of the 1st quartile for both

H MED and H HMO for AMI. In contrast to Kessler and McClellan, our results indicate that

an increase in measured market power from the 2nd to the 1st quartile of the distribution

will leave expected mortality essentially unchanged. In this experiment, the Medicare and

HMO effects exactly offset one another.

       The coefficients on the other payer group H’s are all insignificant at traditional

levels of confidence. The coefficients on the hospital characteristics are insignificant in

the AMI regression. In the pneumonia regression, the coefficient on 151-200 beds is

positive (relative to the excluded category of 150 or less beds), while all the included

ownership categories are negative (relative to the excluded category of public hospitals).




                                             25
For both diagnoses, there is no significant difference in the quality of not-for-profit and

for-profit hospitals, conditioning on other variables.

Discussion

       Using data from the same geographic region over the same time frame, Town and

Vistnes (2001) found that the bargaining power of an HMO with a hospital increases with

the ability of the HMO to replace or remove a hospital from its network of hospitals.

Thus, our findings in conjunction with the work of Town and Vistnes imply that from the

perspective of an HMO enrollee, increased hospital competition leads to lower hospital

prices paid by the HMO and to higher hospital quality. These results run contrary to the

popular press characterization of the effect of HMOs upon the provision of the quality of

care, in which the HMOs are viewed as severe cost cutters, sacrificing the quality of care

in order to increase profits. However, competition among hospitals for patients whose

costs are controlled by the government – as through Medicare – reduces hospital quality.

Our estimates indicate that the net effect of changes in the competitive environment on

hospital quality will depend on the distribution of patients by type of payer. In our

sample, increases in competition are expected to reduce hospital quality for both AMI

and pneumonia.

       Our results contrast with and clarify the findings of Kessler and McClellan

(2000). They find that competition unambiguously improved welfare for AMI patients

only in the post-1990 period. Our findings indicate that the story of hospital competition

is not that simple. Interpreting their conclusions using our results, the reason for the

change in the effect of competition may be the large increase in the percent of HMO

patients during the late 1980s and early 1990s.



                                             26
       Moreover, Kessler and McClellan (2000) report that increases in hospital

competition significantly improved hospital quality for Medicare patients in those states

with above median HMO enrollment, while in states in which the HMO penetration was

below the median, the effect of competition on mortality was not significant. That is, they

find an HMO penetration / hospital competition interaction spillover effect for Medicare

enrollees. Our results indicate the mechanism behind these spillovers: an increase in the

competition for HMO patients directly leads to improved hospital mortality rates.

Furthermore, the effects of competition depend upon the type of payer and the generosity

of those payments.

       Our results are also consistent with the works of Chernew, Scanlon, and Hayward

(1998) and Escarce, et al. (1999). They find that HMO patients in California are more

likely to be admitted to higher quality hospitals for coronary artery bypass graft surgery

than non-HMO patients. The results of these papers along with our findings suggest that

HMOs have preferences for higher quality hospitals, at least with respect to heart

conditions. Thus, increased competition for HMO patients places more pressure on

hospitals to improve their quality. Our results also hint that HMOs are less concerned

about the quality of care for pneumonia, as increased competition for HMO patients does

not have an estimated large or significant effect on pneumonia mortality.

       Our results suggest that the incentives for hospitals to reduce mortality rates differ

according to the method of reimbursement. This, in turn, implies that both antitrust and

Medicare policies will play a role in determining hospital quality. Increases in market

concentration, as would occur following a merger, can lead to either increases or

decreases in hospital mortality and the net effect will depend upon the geographic




                                            27
distribution of the Medicare and managed care populations about the hospitals. Also, the

impact of the merger may vary across different types of medical conditions with different

Medicare margins. This conclusion differs somewhat from Kessler and McClellan (1999)

whose results imply that hospital mergers can only reduce hospital quality.




                                           28
                                     References

Chernew, M., G. Gowrisankaran and A.M. Fendrick (2002) “Payer type and the returns
    to bypass surgery: evidence from hospital entry behavior,” Journal of Health
    Economics 21: 451-474.

Chernew, M., D. Scanlon, and R. Hayward (1998) “Insurance type and choice of hospital
    for coronary artery bypass graft surgery,” Health Services Research, 33:447-66.

Dranove, D. and M. Satterthwaite (2000) “Industrial Organization,” in Handbook of
      Health Economics, A. Culyer and J. Newhouse, eds., Amsterdam: North Holland.

Dranove, D. and W. D. White, (1998) “Medicaid-dependent hospitals and their patients:
    How have they fared?” Health Services Research, 33(2, Part 1): 163-185.

Escarce, J., L. Van Horn., M. Pauly, S. Williams, J. Shea, W. Chen, (1999) “Health
    maintenance organizations and hospital quality for coronary artery bypass surgery,”
    Medical Care Research and Review, 56 (3): 340-362.

Enthoven, A. (1993) “The history and principles of managed competition,” Health
      Affairs, 12, (supplement): 24-48.

Gaynor, M. and W. Vogt, (2000) “Antitrust and competition in health care markets,” in
      Handbook of Health Economics, A. Culyer and J. Newhouse, eds., Amsterdam:
      North Holland.

Geweke, J., G. Gowrisankaran and R. Town (2001) “Inferring hospital quality from
     patient discharge data using a Bayesian selection model,” NBER Working Paper.
     (Under third review stage at Econometrica.)

Gowrisankaran, G., and R.J. Town, 1999, “Estimating the Quality of Care in Hospitals
   Using Instrumental Variables,” Journal of Health Economics 18, 747-67.

Ho, V. and B. Hamilton (2000) “Hospital mergers and acquisitions: Does market
      consolidation harm patients?” Journal of Health Economics, 19(5):767-791.

Iezzoni, L., ed., (1997) Risk Adjustment for Measuring Healthcare Outcomes, 2nd edition.

Kessler, D.P. and M. McClellan (2000) “Is hospital competition socially wasteful?”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115(2): 577-615.

Kessler, D.P. and M. McClellan (1999) “Designing hospital antitrust policy to promote
       social welfare,” NBER working paper 6897.




                                           29
Luft H.S. and P.S. Romano (1997) Report on Heart Attack, 1991-1993, Volume 3:
       Detailed Statistical Results. Sacramento, CA: California Office of Statewide
       Health Planning and Development.

McClellan, M. (1997) “Hospital reimbursement incentives: an empirical approach,”
      Journal of Economics and Management Strategy,” Spring, 6 (1): p. 91-128.

Minino, A., and B. Smith. 2001. "Deaths: Preliminary Data for 2000.” National Vital
      Statistics     Reports,       49(12)       (October      9)      p.      26.
      http://www.cdc.gov/nchs/data/nvsr/nvsr49/nvsr49_12.pdf   (accessed   August
      2002).

Moorthy, K. S. (1988), “Product and price competition in a duopoly,” Marketing Science,
      Spring 1988, 7(2):141-168.

Motta, M. (1993) “Endogenous quality choice: prices vs. quantity competition,” Journal
       of Industrial Economics, 41(2): 113-131.

Mukamel, D., J. Zwanziger, and K. Tomaszewski, (2001) “HMO penetration,
     competition, and risk-adjusted hospital mortality,” Health Services Research,
     36(6): 1019-1035.

Nightingale, F. (1863) Notes on Hospitals, 3rd edition, London: Longman, Green,
       Longman, Roberts, and Green.

Phibbs, C. and Luft, H. (1995) “Correlation of travel time on roads versus straight line
       distance,” Medical Care Research and Review (52), 532–542.

Propper, C., S. Burgess, and K. Green, (2002) “Does competition between hospitals
      improve the quality of care? Hospital death rates and the NHS internal market,”
      mimeo.

Shaked, A., and J. Sutton (1983) "Natural oligopolies," Econometrica, 51:1469-1484.

Spence, M. (1975) “Monopoly, quality and regulation.” Bell Journal of Economics, 6(2):
      417-29.

Shortell, S. and E. Hughes (1988) “The effects of regulation, competition, and ownership
    on mortality rates among hospital inpatients,” New England Journal of Medicine,
    318:1100-1107.

Town, R. and G. Vistnes (2001) “Hospital competition in HMO networks,” Journal of
      Health Economics, 20 (5): 755-779.




                                           30
                                         Table 1
                                    Summary Statistics
                              Means and Standard Deviations
                            (standard deviations in parentheses)

                            Medicare Patient Discharge Data

                                     AMI sample                    Pneumonia Sample
                                         75.0                             76.5
     Age (in years)
                                         (6.9)                            (6.9)
  Percent admitted to
                                         37%                              36%
    closest hospital
  Distance to chosen                    7.74 km                          7.46 km
        hospital                         (11.9)                           (10.8)
Percent emergency admit                  63%                              20%

Number of observations                   4,153                            6,750

                              Hospital Summary Statistics
                                         Mean
                                                                   Min             Max
                                 (Standard Deviation)
                                        14.9%
   AMI mortality rate                                              5.2             26.5
                                        (3.91)
                                         9.5%
Pneumonia mortality rate                                           5.6             15.5
                                        (1.6%)
                                         242.0
    Staffed bed size                                               14              1,879
                                       (222.8)
Percent private, not-for-
                                        43.5%                       0               1
         profit
   Percent for-profit                   48.7%                       0               1

Percent teaching hospital                 4%                        0               1




                                            31
                                           Table 2

      Parameter Estimates from Multinomial Logit Hospital Choice Model
                                 (standard errors in parenthesis)

                   Variable                             AMI         Pneumonia
                                                     Coefficients   Coefficients
                   Distance/10                          -1.96***      -2.09***
                                                         (0.079)       (0.043)
                    Beds/100                             0.11***      0.083***
                                                        (0.0045)      (0.0036)
                Closest hospital                         0.53***       0.55***
                                                          (0.12)       (0.062)
         Emergency × (Distance/10)                      -0.79***      -0.56***
                                                         (0.092)       (0.063)
              Emergency × close                          0.0025         -0.10
                                                          (0.12)       (0.076)
                      N                                   4,153         6,750
                Log-Likelihood                           -11,785       -20,202
***
  Significant at the 1% level.




                                               32
                                         Table 3
           Summary Statistics of Concentration by Payer-Group and Condition

                                    Means
         Variable                 (Standard                Min                    Max
                                 Deviations)
                                      AMI Estimates
                                      5.91                                         64.0
           H AMI
                                                           1.83
                                                                            (Westlake Medical
             MED
                                     (6.91)          (Pacific Alliance)
                                                                                 Center)
                                      1.95                 0.38                    12.8
           H AMI                                       (Verdugo Hills       (Westlake Medical
             HMO
                                     (3.03)              Hospital)               Center)
                                      0.63                                         6.73
           H AMI
                                                           0.18
                                                                            (Westlake Medical
             IND
                                     (0.74)        (Bay Harbor Hospital)
                                                                                 Center)
                                      1.31                                         20.9
           H AMI
                                                           0.30
                                                                            (Westlake Medical
             IDM
                                     (2.16)        (Linda Vista Hospital)
                                                                                 Center)
                                      2.18                 0.56
           H AMI
                                                                                   24.7
                                                    (Charter Community
             MCD
                                     (3.14)              Hospital)
                                                                            (LA County/USC)

                                   Pneumonia Estimates
                                      8.31                                         73.2
           H PMED
                                                           2.92
                                                                            (Westlake Medical
                                     (8.86)          (Pacific Hospital)
                                                                                 Center)
                                      1.95                 0.43                    30.4
           H PHMO                                   (Burbank Community      (Westlake Medical
                                     (3.16)              Hospital)               Center)
                                      0.96                 0.31
             P
           H IND
                                                                                   11.0
                                                    (Norwalk Community
                                     (1.36)              Hospital)
                                                                            (Palmdale Hospital)

             P                        1.72                 0.37                    20.4
           H IDM
                                     (2.73)        (Linda Vista Hospital)   (Palmdale Hospital)
                                      1.92                 0.53
           H PMCD
                                                                                   16.2
                                                    (Charter Community
                                     (2.41)              Hospital)
                                                                            (Palmdale Hospital)
Note: The superscript "P" denotes pneumonia. The subscripts "MED" denotes Medicare
enrollees, "HMO" denotes HMO enrollees, "IND" denotes the self-paying or indigent population,
"IDM" denotes those covered by traditional indemnity insurance and "MCD" denotes Medicaid.
The hospitals corresponding to the minimum and maximum are listed below the reported figure.




                                              33
                                                     Table 4

              OLS Regressions of Hospital Mortality on Hospital Characteristics
                                       (robust standard errors in parentheses)

                                                                 Dependent Variable
                      Variable
                                                 Log of AMI Mortality        Log of Pneumonia Mortality
                                                             ***
                    Log of H MED                       -0.35                           -0.34**
                                                         (0.10)                        (0.14)
                    Log of H HMO                        0.27***                          0.10
                                                         (0.11)                        (0.10)
                    Log of H IND                         -0.10                          0.073
                                                        (0.092)                        (0.13)
                                                          0.10                           0.13
                    Log of H IDM
                                                         (0.11)                        (0.11)
                    Log of H MCD                         0.021                         -0.024
                                                        (0.061)                        (0.13)
                                                         0.052                        -0.46***
                    Not-for-profit
                                                         (0.10)                        (0.10)
                                                        0.0077                        -0.48***
                      For-profit
                                                         (0.11)                        (0.12)
                                                         0.070                        -0.42***
                  Teaching Hospital
                                                         (0.14)                        (0.12)
                                                          0.10                         0.23***
   Size Dummies




                      151 – 200 Beds
                                                         (0.10)                       (0.073)
                                                        -0.047                           0.13
                      201 – 300 Beds
                                                         (0.12)                       (0.074)
                     Greater than 300                   -0.020                          0.032
                          Beds                           (0.13)                       (0.090)
                                                         0.025
            Log of AMI Quantity                                                           —
                                                        (0.045)
                                                        2.88***                        3.22***
                      Constant
                                                         (0.27)                        (0.29)
                         R2                               0.19                           0.22
                         N                                107                            114
  Note: Standard errors are robust standard errors. In pooled regression, the continuous independent
  variables are transformed by the logarithm. The measures of competition are diagnoses specific.
***
    Significant at the 1% level.
**
   Significant at the 5% level.
*
 Significant at the 10% level.




                                                         34
