                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          NETWORKS OR NEIGHBORHOODS? CORRELATIONS IN THE USE OF
              PUBLICLY-FUNDED MATERNITY CARE IN CALIFORNIA


                                                Anna Aizer
                                                Janet Currie


                                           Working Paper 9209
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9209


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




Orley Ashenfelter, Guido Imbens, Erzo Luttmer, Enrico Moretti and seminar participants at UC Berkeley,
UCLA, Cal State Fullerton, ITAM, Princeton, and the Harris School provided helpful comments. Aizer
thanks the Social Science Research Council for support. Currie thanks NIH for support and the California
Dept. of Health for access to the data. None of these individuals or agencies are responsible for the contents
of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Anna Aizer and Janet Currie. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Networks or Neighborhoods? Correlations in the Use of Publicly-Funded Maternity
Care in California
Anna Aizer and Janet Currie
NBER Working Paper No. 9209
September 2002
JEL No. I18, I38

                                          ABSTRACT

       This study focuses on “network effects” in the utilization of publicly funded prenatal care
using Vital Statistics data from California for 1989 to 2000. Networks are defined using 5-digit
zipcodes and a woman’s racial or ethnic group. Like others, we find evidence that the use of public
programs is highly correlated within groups defined using race/ethnicity and neighborhoods. These
correlations persist even when we control for many unobserved characteristics by including
zipcode-year fixed effects, and when we focus on the interaction between own group behavior and
measures of the potential for contacts with other members of the group (“contact availability”).
However, the richness of our data allows us to go further and to conduct several tests of one
hypothesis about networks: That the estimated effects represent information sharing within groups.
The results cast doubt on the idea that the observed correlations can be interpreted as evidence of
information sharing, and point instead to differences in the behavior of the institutions serving
different groups of low-income women as the primary explanation for group-level differences in the
take-up of this important public program.




Anna Aizer                                           Janet Currie
Bendheim-Thoman Center for                           Dept. of Economics, UCLA
Research on Child Well-Being                         405 Hilgard Ave.
Princeton University                                 Los Angeles CA
Princeton NJ, 08544                                  90095-1477
aaizer@princeton.edu                                 currie@simba.sscnet.ucla.edu
Introduction

       Social scientists have long been interested in the interpretation of what have come to be known
as neighborhood and network effects. Moffitt ( forthcoming) provides a survey of much of this
literature. Prominent recent examples include Katz, Kling and Liebman (2001) and Ludwig, Duncan,

and Hirschfield (2001), who provide evidence from a randomized experiment that moving to a better
neighborhood can increase health and well-being and reduce ones exposure to crime; Duflo and Saez
(2001) who also conduct an experiment and show that providing information about retirement programs
to some members of a group has small effects on the behavior of other members of the group; Borjas
(1992, 1995) who shows that the outcomes of children are associated with the mean levels of "ethnic
capital" among adults in their communities, even after controlling for the human capital of their own

parents; Borjas and Hilton (1996) who show that there are strong ethnic correlations in the types of
welfare programs used by different immigrant groups; and Bertrand, Luttmer and Mullainathan
(2000), who show that a women's propensity to use welfare increases with the number of coethnics in

the area if those coethnics have a high propensity to use welfare nationally.
       However, in the absence of a well-designed experiment, it is difficult to determine whether
correlations in observed behaviors within groups represent a causal influence of one person on another

from the same group (for example, through the sharing of information) or some unmeasured
characteristic of the group or neighborhood. In this paper, we attempt to shed light on this issue using

a very rich source of data about the use of publicly funded maternity care in California.
       Over the past 20 years, federal and state governments have invested considerable resources
in efforts to get women into timely prenatal care. In California, expansions of Medicaid income

cutoffs and state-funded programs have extended eligibility for public prenatal and delivery services
to women in families with incomes up to 300 percent of the federal poverty line. However, large
differences in the utilization of prenatal care persist between racial and ethnic groups and across
geographic areas. Understanding the reasons for these differences is key if they are to be
successfully reduced. In particular, it is important to know whether they reflect neighborhood


                                                   1
characteristics such as differential access to facilities or differences in the knowledge or attitudes
about public programs that might be shared by women in different social networks. If networks are
important, then this has implications for the optimal design of outreach programs aimed at getting

women into prenatal care. More generally, our results may shed some light on the widespread
problem of non-participation by people eligible for social programs and on the nature of the
estimated network effects.
       This study focuses on racial, ethnic, and spacial variation in the utilization of publicly funded
prenatal care using Vital Statistics data from California's Birth Public Use files from 1989 to 2000.
We define “networks” using a pregnant woman’s 5-digit zipcode and other new mothers in the same

racial or ethnic group. Thus, our implicit assumption about networks is that pregnant women are
most likely to be influenced by new mothers from the same area and ethnic group in terms of their
own choices about takeup of public maternity care programs. While it is reasonable to assume that

pregnant women seek the advice of new mothers, it may be more problematic to assume that they
interact primarily with women from their own racial or ethnic group. However, as we will see
below, the index woman’s behavior is much more highly correlated with that of women from the

same racial or ethnic group than it is with the behavior of women from other groups which provides
some support for defining networks along these lines.
       The richness of our data allows us to control for possibly omitted variables to a greater

degree than many other non-experimental studies.         In particular, we can include zipcode-year
effects in many of our models in order to control for characteristics of local neighborhoods. We
explore various measures of “network effects” including those suggested by Bertrand, Luttmer, and
Mullainathan (2000). Specifically, in these regressions we interact the fraction of local coethnics
who used the public program in the last 11 months with a measure of the “density” of the local

network and treat the interaction as a measure of the importance of networks. The intuition is that
if networks represent contacts between individuals within groups, then the effect of networks should
be greater where contacts are more likely. Our results are consistent with theirs in that we find


                                                  2
strong evidence of an interactive effect.
        However, the more important contribution of our study is that we attempt to say something
about the nature of this effect. A leading hypothesis about networks is that people rely on them for

information about public programs. We test this hypothesis by comparing estimated network effects
for first and second births. Once a woman has had a publicly-funded delivery, she learns both about
the existence of the public program (if she did not know already), and that she is eligible. Hence,
estimated network effects ought to be lower for second births than for first births if this type of
information sharing is important. However, we find that the estimated network effects are similar
for first and second births, suggesting that estimated effects do not reflect this type of information

sharing.
        In a second investigation, we estimate models that include fixed effects for the hospital of
delivery interacted with the year of delivery, and find that the estimated effects of networks are

either greatly reduced or eliminated. Note that the zipcode-year effects included in our models
absorb measures of the local availability of care. The fact that the inclusion of hospital-year fixed
effects has such a dramatic effect indicates that women in different ethnic groups use different

hospitals regardless of where they live, and that this fact drives the estimated correlations in the use
of public maternity care services. This strong sorting of women across hospitals may be facilitated
by networks, but it is also likely to indicate differential behavior by hospitals.       For example,

Duggan (2000) provides compelling evidence that many California hospitals changed the extent to
which they provided publicly funded delivery services over the first half of our sample period.
Moreover, if hospitals did not differ in terms of the way that they treated different groups of women,
then there would be no information relevant to hospital choice for a network to share.
        Finally, we compare estimated network effects for foreign-born and native-born Hispanic

women. We hypothesize that the information requirements of foreign-born women are greater than
those of native-born women because of the uncertainty that surrounds their eligibility for public
prenatal care programs and the possible effects that use of such programs could have on their


                                                   3
immigration status, and perhaps because of language barriers. However, our estimates of network
effects in the use of publicly funded prenatal care are quite similar for native and foreign born
Hispanic women, and independent of whether we define the “network” as including all Hispanic

women or only native/foreign born women. This result suggests once again that information-
sharing within networks is not the primary reason for the observed correlations in use of publicly
funded programs.
        To summarize, like many others, we find evidence that behavior is highly correlated within
groups defined using race/ethnicity and neighborhoods. These correlations persist even when we
control for many unobserved characteristics via zipcode-year effects, and when we focus on the

interactive effect of own group behavior and own group “contact availability”.        However, our
investigations cast doubt on the idea that these correlations can be interpreted as evidence of
information sharing, and point instead to differences in the behavior of the institutions serving

different groups of low-income women as the primary explanation for the estimated group-level
correlations in takeup.
       The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. First, we provide some background about the

importance of prenatal care and efforts to promote prenatal care both nationally and in California.
Second, we describe our methods and the California Birth Public Use file that we use in our
analyses, and provide a description of some of the continuing disparities in the use of prenatal care

between groups and areas. We describe our results in section 3 and conclusions appear in section
4.


1. Background

a) Provision of Publicly Funded-Prenatal and Delivery Care in California

       The Medicaid program pays for the prenatal care and deliveries of low income mothers.
Medicaid is a joint federal-state matching grant program which means that the federal government
matches state payments as long as the state program remains within certain guidelines. Since April


                                                 4
1990, these guidelines have specified that Medicaid cover maternity care for women in households
with incomes less than or equal to 133% of the federal poverty line. This law had the effect of
greatly expanding eligibility for Medicaid coverage of maternity care in many states (c.f. Currie and

Gruber, 1996a,b).
       California opted to use state-only funds to extend Medicaid coverage to women up to 185%
of poverty starting in 1988, and up to 200% of poverty starting in April 1990. In addition, the
California Access for Infants and Mothers Program (AIM), begun in February 1992, pays for
maternity care for women with incomes between 200 and 300% of poverty.1 In 1997, there were

524,174 births in California. Of these, 270,325 were paid for by private insurers, 222,425 were paid

for by Medi-Cal, 19,518 were “unsponsored” births, and 3,075 were paid for by AIM. Thus, public
insurance covered a surprising 43% of all births, and only 3.7% of births were unsponsored.
       As we will show below, the fraction of women receiving publicly-funded prenatal care and

commencing care in the first trimester has consistently been smaller than the fraction of women
getting public coverage of their deliveries, especially among Hispanic women.         In an effort to
increase utilization of timely prenatal care, California has conducted significant outreach efforts to
pregnant women under its BabyCal program since 1991.



b) Non-Monetary Barriers to Care

       The fact that many people eligible for social programs do not participate in them suggests
that lack of income eligibility is not the only barrier to care. For example, Blank and Ruggles
(1996) find that only two-thirds of those eligible for AFDC and Food Stamps participate. Blank and


1. Women must also be less than 31 weeks pregnant, uninsured, and ineligible for Medi-Cal or
Medicare payments. Unlike Medicaid, AIM is not an entitlement, so that when funding for the
program runs out, eligible women cannot be served. For example, in February 1994, enrollment
was suspended for the remainder of the budget year, and eligibility was temporarily reduced to
women with incomes less than 250% of poverty. In 1998, the budget for the program was
$41,000,000 and it covered roughly 4,000 births for a cost per birth of $10,250. If it were
assumed that AIM births would otherwise have been unsponsored, then AIM would have
reduced unsponsored births by 13.6%. See Nario (1998) for more information.
                                                  5
Card (1991) find similar results for participation in the Unemployment Insurance program. Currie
and Gruber (1996a,b) find comparable rates of non-participation among women and children eligible
for Medicaid.

        Surveys of eligible non-participants in means-tested programs find that welfare stigma (c.f.
Moffitt, 1983) is often mentioned, but that it is seldom the only barrier to participation. Lack of
information about ones own eligibility and about the magnitude of the benefits available is a
common problem. For example, Daponte, Sanders, and Taylor (1999) found that informing
households about their eligibility, as well as about the size of the benefit available to them, increased
participation in the Food Stamp program.          Aizer (2001) shows that enrollments in the State

Children’s Health Insurance Program (SCHIP) are higher in states that contract out outreach efforts,
suggesting that effective outreach can increase take up. This literature suggests that it is possible
that lack of take up of public prenatal care programs in California reflects simple ignorance about

the existence of the programs despite the existence of the BabyCal campaign.
        Direct transactions costs associated with enrolling in Medicaid are another serious problem.
Currie and Grogger (2001) show that declines in welfare rates have significant effects on Medicaid

caseloads, presumably because losing welfare eligibility means that women must go through a
separate certification process to retain Medicaid benefits.         Applicants for Medicaid may be
required to produce birth certificates and/or citizenship papers, rent receipts and utility bills to prove

residency, and pay stubs as proof of income, all within a specified number of days. And applicants
are often required to return for several interviews. Up to a quarter of Medicaid applications are
denied because applicants do not fulfill these administrative requirements (GAO, 1994). Aizer
(2002) finds that community-based organizations that assist women in filling out applications have
had a large impact on the takeup of public health insurance in California, which further underlines

the importance of transactions costs.
        Even women who are covered by Medicaid may have difficulty obtaining preventive care,
since Medicaid typically pays about half of what private health insurance would pay. One study of


                                                    6
new mothers who had arrived in emergency rooms to deliver with "no physician of record" found
that 64 percent of the women cited their inability to find a doctor willing to accept them as the
largest barrier to obtaining prenatal care (Aved et al., 1993). These problems may be even more

severe for minority mothers. American cities are highly segregated by race and income (Massey and
Denton, 1993) and urban blacks often live in parts of the city that are shunned by physicians in
private practice and hence are more often served by large urban teaching hospitals (Fossett et al.,
1992).    New immigrants also tend to be concentrated in specific areas. These observations
highlight the importance of controlling adequately for the availability of local medical facilities and
resources when examining determinants of enrollment in the Medicaid program. This literature

suggests that in addition to information about the existence of programs, a network might supply
information about where to go for care and that this might be more important than simple
information about the existence of programs.

         Immigrants may face additional problems accessing publicly- funded maternity care services.
In 1991, documented and undocumented aliens accounted for 45% of deliveries financed by Medi-
Cal (Norton, Kenney, and Ellwood, 1996). California’s Proposition 187, which was passed in 1994,

disqualified undocumented pregnant women from receiving prenatal care services. However, due
to legal challenges, this law was never implemented. Moreover, health care providers flatly refused
to ask women about their immigration status, citing public health concerns. In July, 1999, Governor

Gray Davis officially ended the state’s efforts to ban public funding of prenatal care to these women.
Similarly, in 1996, the federal Personal Responsibility and Work Reconciliation Act ended federal
payments for Medicaid coverage of pregnant immigrant women who entered the country after
August 1996, but the state of California elected to continue coverage of these women with its own
funds.

         Although the 1994 and 1996 law changes limiting immigrant access to prenatal care services
were never enforced in California, many observers believe that they have discouraged immigrant
women from using these services (c.f. Korenbrot, forthcoming).           One possibility is that anti-


                                                  7
immigrant measures have heightened fears that the use of public services will lead immigrants to
be considered “public charges” and thus jeopardize their right to stay in the U.S. and/or apply for
citizenship. This issue was not clarified until 1999 when the Clinton administration specifically

stated that use of in-kind services such as Medi-Cal would not jeopardize immigration status (Yoo
and Park, 2001). These considerations suggest that a foreign-born woman seeking to use public
prenatal care services would have to learn not only how to sign up and where to get care, but also
about whether or not her use of the service was likely to cause immigration problems either for
herself or for family members.
        While it may be quite difficult for individuals to overcome these non-monetary barriers to

obtaining coverage, hospitals serving large numbers of indigent women have strong incentives to
help eligible women to enroll because they are required to provide care to women in active labor
regardless of whether the women have the means to pay their bills. Saywell (1989) finds that

uncompensated care to pregnant women was a significant financial burden for hospitals in California
in the 1980s. Many hospitals have established Medicaid enrollment offices on site. If a woman in
labor arrives without insurance, but appears to be Medicaid eligible, these offices will inform them

of their eligibility, assist them in completing applications, and tell them how to obtain necessary
documentation (GAO, 1994). Thus, births to eligible women may be covered by Medicaid even
when prenatal care is not, which accounts for the fact that usage of public prenatal care services has

lagged behind the public funding of deliveries (Ellwood and Kenney, 1995).
        On the other hand, hospitals can certainly take steps to either encourage or discourage
eligible women from presenting. Duggan (2000) discusses a change in the system of reimbursing
hospitals for indigent care which made it profitable for some hospitals to increase the share of Medi-
Cal deliveries in their caseloads. Hospitals that sought to attract this clientele advertised heavily and

even offered inducements such as free car seats.        Hospitals that want to discourage Medi-Cal
mothers can decline to establish Medicaid enrollment offices on site, fail to offer translation
services, or even engage in illegal (but often unpunished) practices such as turning away patients


                                                   8
(“dumping”) or requiring cash payments for services.2 These strategies are likely to be particularly
effective if there is another hospital nearby that is more welcoming.



c) The Importance of Prenatal Care
       It is useful to study the role of network effects in the use of public prenatal care programs
if only for the insight into determinants of program participation that it provides. However, given
all the public effort that has been devoted to getting women to enroll in prenatal care, it is worth
asking why we should care about this outcome? Many studies have shown that women who use
prenatal care earlier and more faithfully have healthier babies. But this association may reflect

characteristics of the mother that make her more likely to use prenatal care rather than an effect of
prenatal care per se. Clinical studies have attempted to demonstrate a link between prenatal care
and improved infant health. These studies generally focus on birth weight, and distinguish between

two types of infants, those who are born prematurely (but may be of normal weight given their
gestational age) and those who are of low weight given their gestational age. Premature babies (who
are often low birth weight) account for less than seven percent of total births, but consume half of

all hospital delivery charges (Marbella et al., 1998).
       The results of these studies have been mixed. Prenatal care has been shown to be effective
in reducing the risk of low birth weight, but only among relatively mature full-term infants. It has

not been shown to reduce the risk of premature birth, or the incidence of inter-uterine growth



2. A recent report by the consumer group Public Citizen finds that these illegal practices are in fact
remarkably common (Public Citizen, 2001). Of the 500 hospitals that had confirmed violations of
anti-dumping laws in 1997, 1998 and 1999, only 85 had been fined as of April 2001. A less
extreme tactic than dumping is to deny indigent patients certain services. A class action
lawsuit was recently filed against a Los Angeles County hospital which required Medi-Cal
patients in labor to pay $400 cash on-the-spot for epidurals. State officials have termed these
actions "improper" since it is illegal to charge extra fees to Medi-Cal patients. However, it
does not appear that the hospital has faced any regulatory action from state or federal agencies,
and in response to the scandal the state legislature found it necessary to enact a statute
specifically outlawing this practice (of charging for epidurals) (Bernstein, June 17, 1999). It
seems safe to assume that pregnant women who knew that they would be denied anesthesia
would avoid this hospital if at all possible.
                                                  9
retardation among infants who are born prematurely (Alexander and Korenbrot, 1995). Large-scale
survey-based studies that have attempted to control for unobserved differences between women who
do and do not seek prenatal care also typically find little or no effect of prenatal care (c.f.

Rosenzweig and Schultz, 1982, 1983, 1988; Frank et al., 1991; Corman et al., 1997).
       These results are puzzling given that there are good biological reasons for expecting prenatal
care to be effective. Perhaps routine prenatal care is often ineffective because it does not emphasize
smoking cessation, stress reduction and/or the diagnosis and treatment of mild infections (Armson
and Moutquin, 1998). One study of a national sample of mothers found that many had not received
advice about reducing or eliminating alcohol, smoking, and illegal drugs, eating the proper foods,

and taking vitamin supplements (Kogan et al., 1994). Standard prenatal care does closely monitor
maternal weight gain. Since we know that low maternal weight gain is associated with low birth
weight in full term infants, this emphasis may account for the positive effect of prenatal care on birth

weight among relatively mature infants that has been documented in the clinical literature. It is
possible that as the results of recent research regarding the efficacy of smoking cessation programs,
and the role of stress and infection in preterm delivery diffuse through the medical community,

prenatal care will become a more powerful tool for improving fetal and infant health.


2. Data and Methods

a) Data Overview
       The data for this study come from the California Birth Public Use File for 1989 to 2000.
These data are abstracted from birth certificates. Variables relevant for our analysis include the
mother’s age, race, education, marital status, natality and 5-digit zipcode; the parity of the child;
month prenatal care began; the principal source of payment for prenatal care; the principal source

of payment for delivery, which may be different; and the hospital of delivery.
        We distinguish three racial/ethnic groups: African-Americans (blacks), non-Hispanic whites
(whites), and Hispanics. We have excluded Asians and the five percent of mothers who are of


                                                  10
“other” or unknown race. Asians in California are a relatively small and very heterogeneous group.
It proved impractical to use our methods to analyze subgroups of Asians due to small sample sizes.3

       The outcomes we focus on are whether there was a public payor for delivery, and whether
there was both a public payor for prenatal care and initiation of prenatal care in the first trimester
of the pregnancy. Timeliness is an important element of prenatal care adequacy. The first visit is
used to establish baselines for such things as maternal weight and blood pressure which can then be

used to track the progress of the pregnancy.
       We limit our analysis to mothers with less than 4 years of college.          Our rationale for
excluding the college educated is that most of these women are not eligible for public coverage of
maternity care. Also, the vast majority of college educated women begin prenatal care in the first
trimester of pregnancy so there is little variation in this outcome. We look separately at first and

second births, in order to examine the way that network effects change with birth order. We found
that mothers who were giving birth for the first or second time were similar, except for the fact that
more first births were to single mothers (part of the explanation for this may be that many people

marry after the first birth but before the second). On the other hand, higher order births were to less
educated mothers on average, suggesting that a comparison of first and second births is cleaner
than a comparison of first and all higher order births would be. Means for third births are shown in

Appendix Table 1.


b) Estimation

       As Manski (1993), Moffitt (forthcoming) and others have highlighted, correlations between


3. In an earlier version of this paper, we also attempted to estimate models for Asians. This
exercise proved unsatisfactory for several reasons. First, Asians are a very heterogeneous group.
However, since they are also the smallest ethnic group, it was not practical to divide them further
at the zipcode level. Second, given the small numbers, many zipcodes had to be excluded from
our sample because there were fewer than 25 Asian births. However, in models estimated at the
MCD level, and in zipcode-level models which did not include zipcode*year fixed effects, the
key interaction term was significantly positive in models for publicly funded prenatal care in the
first trimester, though not for public deliveries, suggesting that in larger samples, we might
obtain results similar to those reported for other groups below.
                                                 11
the behavior of the index woman and other women from her “network” could reflect an endogenous
effect where the propensity of an individual to behave in a particular way is causally influenced by
the behavior of other members of the group; an exogenous effect where the individual’s behavior

is influenced by an exogenous characteristic that defines group membership; or a correlated effect
where individuals from the same group tend to behave the same way because they have similar
individual characteristics, or face similar constraints. Thus, it is important to control adequately for
exogenous characteristics and common constraints.
        One way to do this might be to control for observables thoroughly by estimating an equation
of the form:



(1) Yait = a0 + a1Xait + a3YBAROWNait-1 + a4Nat + a5YEARt + vati,



where Y is one of the two outcomes, and the subscripts i, a, and t denote the individual, area, and
time, respectively. The vector X includes maternal characteristics such as education (high school
dropout, high school graduate, some college); marital status; whether the mother is foreign born; and

age (teen, 20-29, 30-39, 40-45, 45+).          The vector N       includes measurable time-varying
characteristics of the neighborhood such as the fraction of mothers in each race/ethnic group; the
fraction of births to teen mothers; the fraction of births to single mothers; and the fraction of births
to mothers who are foreign born, YEAR is a vector of year dummies, and the variable YBAROWN

is the fraction of women in the woman’s group who used the publicly funded service in the 11
months prior to the birth month.

        Model (1) can easily be augmented by defining a variable YBAROTHER, which is the
fraction of other women in the zipcode who used the public service (either delivery or prenatal care)
in the past 11 months, and/or by including zipcode fixed effects. In this specification, the variable
YBAROTHER would help to control for time-varying characteristics of neighborhoods which
affected all women, while the zipcode fixed effects would capture any variable that was relatively


                                                  12
fixed over time, such as the location of hospitals.
          However, even in this model, YBAROWN could capture omitted group and area specific
variables, such as a new clinic that served women from a particular ethnic group rather than a

network effect. Hence, following Bertrand, Luttmer, and Mullainathan (2000) we also estimate
models of the form:


(2) Yait = a0 + a1Xait + a3YBAROWNait-1 +a4(YBAROWNait-1*CAait)+ a5YBAROTHERait-1 +

a6ZIPCODE*YEARat + vati,



where all the variables are defined as before and CA is “contact availability”, or the fraction of new
mothers in the local area who are in the index woman’s group.        The intuition is that even if the
main effect of a variable like YBAROWN is driven by omitted variables bias, network effects ought

to be more important in areas where people are more likely to have contact with someone in their
group.4
          Since the interaction term varies within zipcodes and years, we can also control for

unobserved neighborhood-specific variables in a very complete way by including zipcode-year fixed
effects. The zipcode-year effects subsume the vector N that was included in (1) above, and also
subsume the “main effect” of contact availability. However, they do not quite subsume the

YBAROWN and YBAROTHER variables because these are defined using the 11 months prior to
the index woman’s birth rather than the calendar year. Still, one expects the estimated effects of
YBAROWN and YBAROTHER to be much attenuated in this specification.
          Bertrand, Luttmer, and Mullainathan (2000) point out several possible problems with this
identification strategy. First, if YBAROWN has a non-linear effect, then it may be captured by the

interaction between CA and YBAROWN. Hence, we allow the main effect of YBAROWN to be


4. Calvo-Armengol and Jackson (2002) provide a theoretical justification for focusing on this
interaction as a measure of network effects.
                                                 13
non-linear by including two splines with break points at the bottom and top thirds of the distribution
of YBAROWN for each racial/ethnic group. A second problem is that individuals who chose to
live in areas with high contact availability may be different in unobserved respects from those who

choose to live in other areas. For example, Hispanics who live in predominantly Hispanic
neighborhoods may have different attitudes towards prenatal care than those who do not.          The
zipcode*year fixed effects included in the models help to control for these effects, but to the extent
that this selection mechanism varies over time and across groups, it constitutes an unobserved group,
area, and time-specific effect, which may bias estimates of network effects.
       Hence we estimate an alternative to (2) which controls for one potential set of omitted

variables, those that determine eligibility. To do this, we estimate models of the use of publicly
funded prenatal care which control for the fraction of women in the “own” group who received a
publicly funded delivery in the past 11 months. The idea is that since a hospital has a strong

incentive to enroll eligible uninsured women, the fraction of women in a group who obtain public
deliveries is a good proxy for the share that is eligible for public prenatal care.
       These methods allow us to control for omitted variables that might drive exogenous and

correlated effects in a more complete way than has been possible in previous studies using non-
experimental data. However, as Manski (2001) points out, even if we are able to find compelling
evidence that behavior is correlated within groups, we would like to be able to say something about

the reasons for these correlations.
       One of the more interesting hypotheses about networks is that they affect takeup by sharing
information about public programs. If the primary function of networks is to furnish information
about publicly funded maternity care programs, then network effects should be more important for
first pregnancies than for subsequent pregnancies. The reason is that after an eligible woman has

already delivered once at public expense, then she knows about the existence of the public program,
and about her own eligibility through her own personal experience. Moreover, since infants whose
deliveries are paid for by Medicaid are covered for 60 days post-partum, eligible first time mothers


                                                 14
have considerable time to learn about these programs. We therefore estimate (2) separately for first
and second births, and compare the size of the estimated network effects.
        We also estimate models with hospital*year fixed effects rather than zipcode*year fixed

effects. There are fewer hospitals than zipcodes. For example, whites deliver in 936 zipcodes and
427 different hospitals. While the choice of hospital is obviously endogenous, these models can
tell us how much of the estimated network effect is associated with the sorting of women who live
in the same place into different hospitals. The extent to which women who live in the same place
use different hospitals can be thought of as a group, area, and year-specific effect. If controlling for
these variables significantly reduces the size of the estimated “network effects”, then this suggests

that the estimated effect is in fact picking up unobserved characteristics associated with the public
health infrastructure available to each group; that is, that it is at least partly a neighborhood rather
than a network effect.

        Finally, we estimate separate models for foreign and native-born Hispanic women. We
estimate two different versions of these models, one in which the YBARs are defined using all
Hispanic women and one in which they are defined using only native/foreign born women. Given

our maintained hypothesis that foreign-born women need more information about these programs,
we expect that if information sharing drives network effects, we will find larger effects among
foreign-born women when we define the network to include only foreign-born women.

        Given that we do not know what the true geographical parameters of women’s
neighborhoods are, we also present results based on YBARs calculated using data aggregated to a
somewhat higher level, the Minor Civil Division (MCD).            MCDs are small clusters of 4 to 5
geographically contiguous 5-digit zipcodes. There are 371 MCDs in California (compared to 58
counties, and 936 zipcodes with at least one white birth) and 21 in Los Angeles County. For

example, Burbank, Glendale, Pasadena, and Santa Monica are all MCDs within Los Angeles
County.      Moving from the zipcode to the MCD level may reduce the amount of random
measurement error in the YBARs, resulting in larger coefficient estimates. On the other hand, to


                                                  15
the extent that the MCD overstates the true size of the “neighborhood”, network effects may be
smaller when estimated at the MCD level.
       Individuals in zipcodes with fewer than 50 births and/or fewer than 25 people in their

racial/ethnic group giving birth during the preceding 11 months are excluded because we cannot
estimate the YBARs precisely. This results in the loss of approximately 8% of the sample when we
do the analysis at the zipcode level. For example, the analyses using whites include 936 zipcodes,
those using Hispanics include 890 zipcodes, while those using blacks include 634. By allowing
more individuals to be included in the comparison groups, moving to the MCD level increases the
sample size by 7% for Hispanics, 16% for whites, and 24% for blacks. Appendix Table 2 shows

the sample means for this “MCD-level” sample.


c) Data Description

       Table 1 shows the means of the variables included in model (1) for first and second births,
by race and ethnicity. The table shows that the largest share of births are to Hispanic women,
followed by non-Hispanic whites. Blacks account for about 7% of births in California. It is

remarkable that almost half of first time births in California are to single mothers.5 Table 1 shows

that while over half of all first-time mothers in California use public payors for delivery, only

slightly more than a third both use a public payor for prenatal care and begin care in the first
trimester. This is despite the fact that close to 80% of all women begin prenatal care in the first
trimester, suggesting a very different pattern among women using public programs.
       There are large differences between mothers of different race and ethnic groups, both in

terms of personal characteristics that one would expect to be associated with use of public programs,
and in terms of the use of these programs. For example, while 71% of black first time mothers are



5. Up until 1997, California “inferred” marital status using other information on the birth certificate
rather than asking it directly. However, we found that this change in procedures produced little
change in the fraction of married women. For the sample as a whole, the fraction married was 36%
in 1996, and 40% in 1998, while for Hispanics, the corresponding fractions were 39%, and 43%.
                                                  16
single, only 27% of white mothers are. Also, while 63% of Hispanic mothers are foreign born, the
fractions among non-Hispanic whites and blacks are 9% and 6% respectively. Hispanic women are
most likely to use a public payor for delivery, and also most likely to use a public payor for prenatal

care.
        Table 1 also shows some of the ways in which the zipcodes women live in vary by race and
ethnicity. These neighborhood characteristics are calculated using the Vital Statistics data, and so
pertain to new mothers. For example, on average, Hispanic women live in zipcodes in which new
mothers are less educated and which have relatively high fractions of births to teenage mothers.
Hispanic women also live in zipcodes where 63% of first births are to Hispanic mothers and 22%

of births are to other white mothers. In contrast, the average white woman lives in a zipcode in
which 49% of births were to other white women, and 35% of births were to Hispanics.
        A comparison of means for the first and second births, shows that in general they are quite

similar, particularly in terms of maternal education and neighborhood characteristics. One
interesting difference is that Hispanic and white women are slightly less likely to use public prenatal
care in the first trimester for second births than for first births, while the reverse is true among black

women. Also, second births are much less likely to be to single women among Hispanics and non-
Hispanic whites, and slightly less likely to be to single women among blacks.
        Table 2 shows some of the variation in our outcome measures across zipcodes and over time,

for first and second births, combined. The zipcodes in this table were chosen from counties that
were deemed by the state to have shown the largest or the smallest increases in the “adequacy” of
prenatal care utilization over time (Taylor and Chavez, 2000).6 Although they have similar income

levels, the Long Beach zipcode was one of the areas that showed the greatest improvements, while
the Sacramento zipcode showed the smallest improvements. For example, the table indicates that
the fraction of women receiving first trimester prenatal care grew dramatically in this part of Long


6. The index of prenatal care adequacy that they use combines information about the timing of the
initiation of prenatal care, and the number of visits adjusted for gestational age.
                                                   17
Beach, especially among Hispanics, while the fraction of Hispanic women receiving first trimester
prenatal care showed no change in Sacramento.
        Table 2 suggests that some of the improvement in areas like Long Beach may have been due

to increased utilization of public programs. For example, the fraction of women receiving publicly-
funded prenatal care in the first trimester increased for whites and blacks, and grew from 20% to
50% among Hispanics. In contrast, Sacramento showed no gains in the fraction of Hispanic women
using public prenatal care programs.
        Table 2 also indicates that there were tremendous changes in the ethnic composition of some
zipcodes over this period, demonstrating the importance of controlling for this time-varying

characteristic of neighborhoods in our models. For example, in this Long Beach zipcode, the
number of white births fell from 381 to 74, while the number of Hispanic births increased from 333
to 571 over the twelve year period. Hence, improvement in prenatal care utilization in Long Beach

occurred despite shifts in population that would, ceteris paribus, cause one to expect a decline in
utilization since Hispanics are less likely to use prenatal care than whites on average.
        Table 3 explores the notion of “contact availability”. The sample was divided up into areas

with low, medium, and high shares of women using the public service (i.e. into thirds), and into low,
medium, and high shares of “own group” in the zip code. For example, a low share, low CA
Hispanic woman lives in an area that is in the bottom third of the distribution of “share Hispanic”

and in the bottom third of the distribution of Hispanic women using public services last period.
Moving along a row shows what happens as contact availability increases, holding the share using
public services last period relatively constant. As Table 3 shows, the probability that the given
outcome is chosen increases with CA among Hispanics and whites, while among blacks there is no
clear pattern.


3. Estimates

a) “Baseline” estimates


                                                18
       Panels 1 through 3 of Table 4 show the estimated effect of YBAROWN in models of the
form (1). Panel 1 suggests that YBAROWN has a very large effect on the use of public maternity
care services. Panel 2 shows that this effect is slightly mitigated by the inclusion of YBAROTHER,

which has a significant, but much smaller effect. Thus, Panel 2 shows that the index woman’s
behavior is much more highly correlated with the behavior of mothers from her own group, than
with the behavior of mothers in other groups, lending some support to our definition of groups along
racial and ethnic lines. Panel 3 shows that the estimated effect of YBAROWN is however, very
sensitive to the inclusion of zipcode fixed effects. When zipcode fixed effects are added to (1), the
estimated coefficient on YBAROWN is greatly reduced, though it remains large.

       Appendix Table 2 shows the estimated coefficients on the other maternal and neighborhood
characteristics included in the Panel 3 model. The effects of the other control variables are of the
anticipated signs. For example, among Hispanics, being a teenage mother instead of a mother 45

or older increases the probability of publicly-funded prenatal care in the first trimester by 11
percentage points, while the effect of being a highschool dropout rather than having some college
increases the probability by 18 percentage points. Thus, moving from an area with no Hispanic

mothers to one in which all the mothers were Hispanic would have an effect of similar magnitude
(but in the opposite direction) as increasing the level of education from less than high school to some
college. It is interesting to compare the estimated effects of “networks” to those of maternal

characteristics. For example, these estimates imply that moving from an area where few people used
public services to one where virtually all new mothers did, would increase the probability of using
public prenatal care services by 56 percent.
       Panels 4 and 5 of Table 4 show estimates of models of the form (2), which include
interactions between “contact availability” and YBAROWN as well as zipcode-year fixed effects.

Panel 4 includes only the main effect of YBAROWN, while Panel 5 includes a spline in
YBAROWN, as described above. However, there is no significant difference in the estimated
coefficients on the key interaction term.      Given the mean level of timely utilization of public


                                                  19
prenatal care among Hispanic women of .442, the estimated value of a4 in column 2 implies that
moving from an area where there were no births to Hispanics to an area where all births were to
Hispanics would increase the probability that a Hispanic woman used public prenatal care in the

first trimester by 22.7 percentage points. For whites, the same thought experiment yields a much
smaller effect of 8.5 percentage points, while for black women the comparable estimate is 30.4
percentage points. These estimates are clearly upper bounds on the effects that one would anticipate
in practice, since women are unlikely to move from areas with no new mothers in their group to
areas in which all of the new mothers are in their group. For example, a Hispanic woman moving
from Long Beach 90805 to Sacramento 95822 would be moving from an area in which about 60%

of the new mothers were Hispanic to one in which about 40% of new mothers were. Thus, one
would have to divide the estimates above by a factor of five.7

       The coefficients on the spline on YBAROWN in Panel 5 suggest that it does indeed have a
non-linear effect on the propensity to use public programs. Note that YBAROWN is not subsumed

by the zipcode*year fixed effects, because it is defined over a different time period than the calendar
year (the 11 months prior to the birth). For Hispanics, the effect of increasing YBAROWN is
positive when the spline is evaluated at the sample mean, while for whites and blacks it is negative.

The most reasonable explanation for these different patterns may be that YBAROWN does indeed
capture omitted characteristics of neighborhoods, which is the reason that we are focusing on the
interaction between YBAROWN and CA.


b) Alternative Specifications


7. An alternative way to interpret these estimates is to ask how the network would multiply an
exogenous shock to program participation. Following the calculations on pages 1039 and 1040
of Bertrand, Luttmer, and Mullainathan, the effect of an exogenous one percentage point change
in program participation, is [1/(1-a4*CABAR)]-1, where CABAR is the mean contact
availability for the group. Accordingly, network effects would increase the effect of the
exogenous change by 48, 29, and 15 percent for Hispanics, whites, and blacks, respectively.
These figures are in the same range as the 27 percent which Bertrand, Luttmer, and Mullainathan
compute as a weighted average of the network effects over all language groups.
                                                 20
        Table 5 presents estimates from a number of variants of equation (2). For convenience, the
coefficients on the interaction terms from Panel 5 of Table 4 are repeated in Panel 1. As discussed
above, it is possible that the coefficient on the interaction will be biased if the variables associated

with women choosing a particular area are also associated with their probability of using public
prenatal care programs. This was the rationale for including zipcode*year fixed effects in equation
(2). Panel 2 shows what happens when we replace these effects with simple year dummies. While
the size of the estimated interactive effect is somewhat reduced, it remains statistically significant
for both Hispanics and whites.       However, it becomes insignificant in the models for blacks,
suggesting that it is particularly important to control for omitted neighborhood-year effects in these

models.
        In order to test for the importance of an omitted group, area, and year specific effect, we
next estimate models of the use of public prenatal care which are similar to (2) except that they also

include the fraction of women in the “own” group who received a publicly funded delivery in the
past 11 months. As discussed above, this variable is a good proxy for determinants of eligibility that
may vary at the group, area and year level. The inclusion of this variable has very little effect on

the estimated interaction effect, however, suggesting that once zipcode*year effects are included in
the model, unobserved zipcode*year*group effects associated with eligibility for public deliveries
are not driving the results for use of public prenatal care in the first trimester.

        Since it is difficult to justify a particular geographic definition of a “neighborhood”, we have
also estimated models at the MCD level, rather than at the zipcode level. Since MCDs are larger
than zipcodes, we loose fewer observations due to the lack of a comparison group of births, and so
the usable sample size is larger as shown in panel 4 of Table 5. These regressions control for
MCD*year effects rather than for zipcode*year effects. A comparison with panel 1 shows that the

estimates are quite similar for Hispanics, somewhat smaller for whites, and that they become
statistically insignificant for blacks. Given the similarity of the results for Hispanic women, we
will estimate the models for native-born and foreign-born Hispanic women at the MCD level, in


                                                  21
order to have larger cell sizes.
       To summarize, we estimate several models of “network effects” including models which are
similar to those of Bertrand, Luttmer, and Mullainathan in the sense that they focus on the

interaction between “contact availability” and own group welfare use as a measure of network
effects. The richness of our data allows us to move to a smaller level of aggregation and to control
in a more complete way for potentially omitted characteristics of areas and years by adding
zipcode*year effects.     Our results are robust to including a proxy for group-area-year level
determinants of eligibility for public delivery (e.g. average income in the group, area, and year).
However, as Bertrand, Luttmer, and Mullainathan make clear, it is not possible to determine from

models of this kind whether the measured effects represent information exchange, stigma, or some
other characteristic of groups, areas and years. We turn to this question in the next section.



c) Interpreting the Estimated Network Effects
       As discussed above, there are many women who have publicly funded deliveries in
California who did not begin the use of publicly funded prenatal care in the first trimester. This may

be because these women lack information about the programs, or because they do not know how to
apply. Networks could act by passing on this type of information. However, mothers who have
already had one delivery are likely to know a lot more about these programs than women who have

not. Specifically, if they are eligible, they will find out about the program and how to get on it.
Thus, if the main role of networks is to pass on this type of information, we should expect that
networks will have much smaller effects for second births than they do for first births.
       Panel 1 of Table 6 shows estimates similar to those in Panel 5 of Table 4 except that they are
estimated using second births rather than first births. The coefficients on the interaction terms in

the models for second births actually tend to be somewhat larger than the corresponding coefficients
from models of first births, though the differences are not statistically significant. Thus, there is no
evidence that estimated network effects are greater for first than for second births, as one might have


                                                  22
expected if the estimated network effects reflected shared information about the existence of these
public programs.
        One additional piece of information we have on the birth certificates is the hospital where

the woman delivered. Panel 2 of Table 6 shows models which include hospital*year effects rather
than zipcode*year effects. These estimates examine the estimated network effects conditional on
the choice of hospital. Recall that our baseline models with zipcode*year fixed effects control for
the availability of hospitals.     For example, if a woman lives near a hospital that is very
accommodating to Medicaid mothers, then this is accounted for.            In contrast, the models with
hospital fixed effects control for the hospital that was actually chosen by the mother, given her own

characteristics and those of her neighborhood.
        The comparison of the baseline model with Panel 2 shows that controlling for the choice of
the hospital of delivery reduces the size of estimated size of the network effect greatly. For whites,

and for public deliveries among Hispanics, the estimated network effects become statistically
insignificant. For publicly funded prenatal care among Hispanics, the estimated effect drops to a
fifth of its previous value. For blacks, the effects remain statistically significant, but are reduced by

more than half. Note that we do not know where women went to obtain prenatal care. In most
cases, they would obtain this care outside of a hospital setting though it might be from a provider
who was affiliated with a particular hospital. Thus, these results suggest that if we could control for

the location where prenatal care services were received, we might reduce the size of the estimated
network effects even further.
        This striking result suggests that network effects in the use of public maternity services are
largely “explained” by the choice of hospital where the woman delivers.         This choice, in turn, is
likely to reflect characteristics of the hospital which are changing over time, such as the quality of

services offered to Medi-Cal mothers, whether translation services are provided, whether the
hospital is affiliated with clinics attractive to low income women, and so on. The choice of hospital
may also be affected by information sharing among women in a network, but without differences


                                                  23
in hospital services to begin with, there would be no relevant information to share.       It is also
difficult to explain this result via “stigma”. If the stigma a woman feels changes with the number
of people in her group who use public services, then one would expect this to be largely independent

of the hospital chosen.
       Table 7 explores the results for Hispanics further by dividing women into those who are
foreign-born and those who are native born. While most Hispanic women in California are of
Mexican origin, there may nevertheless be large differences between the native born and more recent
arrivals, and one might expect these women to belong to different social networks. Thus, in the first
panel of Table 7, the “own group” is defined as all Hispanic women, while in the second panel of

Table 7, the own group is defined as only native born or only foreign born Hispanic women,
depending on the group the woman herself belongs to. These models are estimated are at the MCD
level, in order to conserve sample size. As Table 5 showed, moving from the zipcode to the MCD

level has little impact on the estimates for Hispanics.
       The estimates for the use of publicly funded prenatal care are remarkably similar in the two
panels. Thus, perhaps surprisingly, it does not appear to matter which definition of the “own group”

is used, and there is little evidence that foreign-born women transmit information of special
relevance to other foreign-born women through their networks. This result is consistent with the
observation that hospitals seldom ask about a woman’s immigration status, so that it is likely that

hospitals treat foreign-born and native-born Hispanic women very similarly.


4. Discussion and Conclusions

       We argue that it is interesting to look at network effects in the use of publicly funded
prenatal care for two reasons. The first is the specific policy goal of improving the use of prenatal

care among eligible women. Strong endogenous network effects would imply that outreach efforts
which were concentrated in areas densely populated by target groups would have a greater impact
than the same effort spread over a larger area. The second reason for examining network effects in


                                                24
this very specific context, is that it they may tell us something about the nature of these effects, and
about factors that influence the takeup of social programs, more generally.
          Like many others, we find evidence that behavior is highly correlated within groups defined

using race/ethnicity and neighborhoods. These correlations persist even when we control for many
unobserved characteristics via zipcode-year effects, and when we focus on the interactive effect of
own group behavior and own group “contact availability”, as suggested by Bertrand, Luttmer, and
Mullainathan (2000) . In our view, the more important contribution of the paper is that the richness
of our data allows us to go further, and to attempt to test the hypothesis that the estimated effects
represent information sharing within groups.

          We formulate three tests: First, we argue that if information sharing drives network effects,
it should be more important for first births than for second births, given the fact that eligible
pregnant women are likely to learn about public maternity care programs when they deliver the first

time. We find, however, that the estimated effects are of similar magnitude for first and second
births.
          Second, we show that the estimated network effects are greatly reduced, often to statistical

insignificance, when we control for the hospital of delivery. This suggests that variations across
groups and areas in the use of public maternity care services may be driven more by the institutional
infrastructure available to women of different groups, than by within-group interactions between the

women. For example, the presence of Spanish-language enrollment assistance at a particular
hospital or clinic might be a critical factor influencing takeup of the public program among Hispanic
women in the surrounding area. Moreover, this result suggests that it is unlikely that the estimated
network effects are driven by “stigma”. If the stigma associated with using public programs falls
as the number of group members using the program rises, then it is hard to see why this result

should disappear when we control for hospital of delivery.
          Third, we examine native-born and foreign-born Hispanic women separately.                Our
maintained hypothesis is that because of confusion surrounding the legality and consequences of


                                                  25
using the services, foreign-born women require more information than native-born women in order
to feel comfortable accessing public maternity care. Thus, one might expect networks to be more
important for foreign-born than for native-born Hispanic women. However, we find little evidence

that this is the case, suggesting once again that the estimated network effects are unlikely to be
driven by information sharing. Instead, the similarity in the estimates for native-born and foreign-
born women is consistent with the observation that providers of medical care seldom ask about
immigration status in California.
       Our results suggest that it is extremely difficult to identify endogenous network effects (i.e.
causal effects of one person’s behavior on other members of his or her group) in publicly available

survey data because of the infeasibility of adequately controlling for all of the omitted group, area,
and time-specific variables that affect behavior. More positively, our results indicate that we can
gain further understanding of group-level correlations in the propensity to take up public programs

by examining the way that relevant institutions, such as hospitals, treat members of different groups;
or alternatively, how members of different groups respond to similar treatment. We currently have
little systematic data about the way that most public programs are administered “on the ground”.

While this study focuses on a particular program in a specific location, the results suggest that such
administrative information could help us to understand group and location-level differences in the
propensity to participate in public programs more generally.




                                                 26
                                           References

Aizer, Anna. "Covering Kids: Improving the Health Insurance Coverage of Poor Children", xerox,
Dept. of Economics UCLA, August 2001.
Aizer, Anna. 2002. “Got Health? Advertising, Medicaid, and Child Health?”, UCLA xerox, January
2002.
Alexander, Greg. R. and Carol C. Korenbrot. “The Role of Prenatal Care in Preventing Low Birth
weight”, The Future of Children v5 #1, Spring 1995.
Armson, Tony and Jean-Marie Moutquin. “Preterm Birth-Secondary and Tertiary Prevention” in
Prevention of Low Birth Weight in Canada” 2nd Edition (Toronto: Perinatal Education Program of
Eastern Ontario) 1998.
Aved, Barbara M. et al., "Barriers to Prenatal Care for Low-Income Women," The Western Journal
of Medicine, 158 #5 (May 1993) 493-498.

Bernstein, S., “Women denied epidurals file class-action lawsuits”, Los Angeles Times, Thursday
June 17, 1999.

Bertrand, Marianne, Erzo Luttmer, and Sendhil Mullainathan. “Network Effects and Welfare
Cultures”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, v CXV, August 2000, 1019-1056.
Blank, Rebecca and David Card. "Recent Trends in Insured and Uninsured Unemployment: Is
There an Explanation?," Quarterly Journal of Economics 106, November 1991, 1157-1190.
Blank, Rebecca and Patricia Ruggles. "When Do Women Use AFDC & Food Stamps? The
Dynamics of Eligibility vs. Participation," Journal of Human Resources, 31 #1, Winter, 1996, 57-89.
Borjas, George. “Ethnic Capital and Intergenerational Mobility”, Quarterly Journal of Economics
CVII, 1992, 123-150.
Borjas, George. “Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human-Capital Externalities”, American Economic
Review, LXXXV, 1995, 365-390.
Borjas, George and Lynette Hilton. “Immigrant Participation in Means-Tested Entitlement
Programs”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, v111 #2, May 1996, 575-604.
Calvo-Armengol, Antoni and Matthew Jackson. "Social Networks and Resulting Patterns and
Dynamics of Employment and Wages", California Institute of Technology xerox, March 2002.

Currie, Janet and Jeffrey Grogger. “Medicaid Expansions and Welfare Contractions: Offsetting
Effects on Prenatal Care and Infant Health”, Journal of Health Economics, v21 #2, March, 2002,
313-335.
Currie, Janet and Jonathan Gruber , "Health insurance eligibility and Child Health: Lessons from
Recent Expansions of the Medicaid program", Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 431-466,
1996a.
Currie, Janet, and Jonathan Gruber. "Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in
the Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women," Journal of Political Economy, December 1996b.
                                               27
Daponte, Beth, Seth Sanders, and Lowell Taylor. “Why Do Low Income Households Not Use Food
Stamps: Evidence From an Experiment”, Journal of Human Resources, 34 #3, Summer 1999, 612-
628.
Duflo, Esther and Emmanuel Saez. “The Role of Information and Social Interaction in Retirement
Plan Decisions: Evidence from a Randomized Experiment”, xerox, Dept. of Economics, Harvard
University, 2001.
Duggan, Mark. “Hospital Ownership and Public Medical Spending”, Quarterly Journal of
Economics, v 115 #4, November 2000, 1343-1373.
Ellwood, Marilyn and Genevieve Kenney. "Medicaid and Pregnant Women: Who is Being Enrolled
and When?", Health Care Financing Review, 17 #2, 1995, 7-28.
Fossett, James W., et al. "Medicaid and Access to Child Health Care in Chicago", Journal of Health
Politics, Policy, and Law, XVII, 1992, 273-298.
Frank, Richard, Donna Storbino, David Salkever, Catherine Jackson. "Updated Estimates of the
Impact of Prenatal Care on Birth weight Outcomes by Race," NBER Working Paper #3624,
Cambridge, February 1991.
Kalmuss, Debra and Katherine Fennelly, "Barriers to Prenatal Care Among Low-Income Women
in New York City" Family Planning Perspectives, 22 #5, Sept./Oct., 1990, 215-231.

Katz, Lawrence, Jeffrey Kling, and Jeffrey Leibman. "Moving to Opportunity in Boston: Early
Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment", Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI, #2, May
2001, 607-645.
Kogan, Michael D. et al. "Relation of the Content of Prenatal Care to the Risk of Low Birth weight",
Journal of the American Medical Association, 221 #17, May 4, 1994, 1340-1345.
Korenbrot, Carol C. “Use of Medicaid for Prenatal Care by Immigrants in CA”, Journal of
Immigrant Health , forthcoming.
Ludwig, Jens, Greg J. Duncan, and Paul Hirschfield. “Urban Poverty and Juvenile Crime: Evidence
from a Randomized Housing Mobility Experiment”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI #2,
May 2001 655-680.
Manski, Charles. “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem”, The
Review of Economic Studies, 60 #3, July 1993, 531-542.
Manski, Charles. “Economic Analysis of Social Interactions”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
v14 #3, Summer 2000, 115-136.
Marbella, Anne, Veerappa Chetty and Peter Layde, “Neonatal Hospital Lengths of Stay,
Readmissions and Charges”, Pediatrics, 101 #1, January 1998, 32-36.

Massey, Douglas S. and Nancy Denton, American Apartheid, (Cambridge MA: Harvard University
Press, 1993).
Moffitt, Robert. "An Economic Model of Welfare Stigma", American Economic Review, 73 #5,
December 1983, 1023-1035.
                                                28
Moffitt, Robert. “Policy Interventions, Low-Level Equilibria and Social Interactions” in Steven
Durlauf and Peyton Young (eds.) Social Dynamics (Cambridge MA: MIT Press) forthcoming.
Nario, Nora. Aim Fact Book (Sacramento CA: Managed Risk Medical Insurance Board) 1998.
Norton, Stephen, Genevieve Kenney and Marilyn Rymer Ellwood. “Medicaid Coverage of
Maternity Care for Aliens in California”, Family Planning Perspectives, v28 #3, May/June 1996,
108-112.
Public Citizen. “Public Citizen’s Research Group Report on Questionable Hospitals”
(Washington D.C.: Public Citizen) July, 2001.
Rosenzweig, Mark and T. Paul Schultz. "The Behavior of Mothers as Inputs to Child Health: The
Determinants of Birth Weight, Gestation, and Rate of Fetal Growth," in Economic Aspects of
Health, Victor Fuchs (ed.), University of Chicago Press: Chicago, 1982.
Rosenzweig, Mark and T. Paul Schultz. "Estimating a Household Production Function:
Heterogeneity, the Demand for Health Inputs, and Their Effects on Birth Weight," Journal of
Political Economy, 91, October 1983, 723-746.
Rosenzweig, Mark and T. Paul Schultz. "The Stability of Household Production Technology, A
Replication," The Journal of Human Resources, 23, Fall 1988, 535-549.

Saywell, et al. "Hospital and Patient Characteristics of Uncompensated Hospital Care: Policy
Implications," Journal of Health Politics, Policy, and Law, 14, 1989, 287-307.
Taylor, Don and Gilberto Chavez. Atlas of Prenatal Care Utilization, California-1998 (Sacramento:
California Dept. of Health Services Maternal and Child Health Branch), October 2000.

U.S. Dept. of Health and Human Services. Healthy People 2010: Understanding and Improving
Health, 2nd Edition (Washington D.C.: GPO) November 2000.
U.S. General Accounting Office, Health Care Reform: Potential Difficulties in Determining
Eligibility for Low Income People, (Washington D.C.: Government Printing Office, July, 1994)
document number GAO/HEHS-94

Yoo, Grace J. and Lisa Park. 2001. “The Impact of Public Charge on Immigrant Women’s Access
to Medi-Cal” (San Francisco: The California Program on Access to Care at the California Policy
Research Center) April 2001.




                                              29
                                     Table 1 - Sample Means for First and Second Births, By Race


                                                          First Births                               Second Births
Maternal Characteristics                    Hispanic       White          Black          Hispanic       White         Black
Public delivery                              0.656         0.256          0.553            0.612        0.231         0.553


Public prenatal 1st trimester                0.442         0.188          0.399            0.409        0.169         0.406


Prenatal 1st trimester                       0.745         0.880          0.780            0.751        0.888         0.793


Maternal age                                 22.327       26.492          22.278          25.459       29.007        25.655
                                             (0.005)      (0.007)         (0.016)         (0.006)      (0.007)       (0.018)
Maternal education                           10.519       13.691          12.445          10.286       13.698        12.736
                                             (0.003)      (0.003)         (0.006)         (0.004)      (0.003)       (0.006)
Single                                       0.502         0.267          0.711            0.381        0.163         0.609


Foreign born                                 0.629         0.093          0.052            0.687        0.094         0.056


Neighborhood Characteristics
Share of own group with public delivery      0.650         0.317          0.619            0.652        0.318         0.621
                                            (0.0002)      (0.0002)       (0.0004)         (0.0002)     (0.0002)      (0.0005)
Share of own group with public prenatal      0.414         0.222          0.428            0.419        0.222         0.429
1st trimester                               (0.0001)      (0.0002)       (0.0003)         (0.0002)     (0.0002)      (0.0004)
Share of other group with public delivery    0.4500        0.522          0.610           0.4530       0.5200        0.6110
                                            (0.0002)      (0.0002)       (0.0005)         (0.0002)     (0.0002)      (0.001)
Share of other group with public prenatal    0.3100        0.332          0.390           0.3130       0.3310        0.3900
1st trimester                               (0.0001)      (0.0002)       (0.0004)         (0.0002)     (0.0002)      (0.0004)
Share Asian                                  0.047         0.056          0.059            0.047        0.053         0.059
                                            (0.0001)      (0.0001)       (0.0002)         (0.0001)     (0.0001)      (0.0002)
Share black                                  0.070         0.056          0.264            0.071        0.054         0.258
                                            (0.0001)      (0.0001)        (0.001)         (0.0001)     (0.0001)      (0.001)
Share Hispanic                               0.628         0.350          0.456            0.634        0.350         0.458
                                            (0.0002)      (0.0002)        (0.001)         (0.0003)     (0.0003)      (0.001)
Share white                                  0.219         0.492          0.176            0.214        0.497         0.181
                                            (0.0002)      (0.0002)        (0.001)         (0.0002)     (0.0003)      (0.001)
Share of teen mothers                        0.149         0.118          0.162            0.149        0.119         0.162
                                            (0.00004)     (0.0001)       (0.0001)         0.0000       (0.0001)      (0.0001)
Share of single mothers                      0.409         0.307          0.479            0.411        0.306         0.477
                                            (0.0001)      (0.0001)       (0.0003)         (0.0001)     (0.0001)      (0.0004)
Share of foreign born mothers                0.532         0.334          0.442            0.534        0.326         0.440
                                            (0.0002)      (0.0002)       (0.0005)         (0.0002)     (0.0002)      (0.001)
Average maternal education                   10.435       11.549          10.741          10.425       11.559        10.735
                                             (0.001)      (0.001)         (0.003)         (0.001)      (0.001)       (0.003)
Average maternal age                         25.991       26.756          25.755          25.990       26.742        25.738
                                             (0.001)      (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.001)      (0.002)       (0.002)
Observations                                880305        761813          124553          713201       598786         96054
                                  Table 2: Changes in the Use of Public Maternity Care, 1989-2000



                                           State of California               Long Beach               Sacramento
zipcode                                                                          90805                     95822
Median HH income, 1989                                                           29607                     30106
                                           1989          2000             1989           2000       1989           2000
Hispanic
Number of Births                          128600       151719             333            571        104            105
% public delivery                          55%           63%              50%            64%        63%            60%
% public prenatal in first trimester       20%           48%              19%            49%        40%            41%
% prenatal in first trimester              64%           80%              65%            82%        74%            75%


White
Number of Births                          141265        74429             381            74         113            52
% public delivery                          29%           30%              33%            49%        42%            35%
% public prenatal in first trimester       18%           23%              20%            39%        30%            21%
% prenatal in first trimester              81%           87%              78%            86%        86%            77%


Black
Number of Births                          28084         18067             265            230        125            57
% public delivery                          57%           54%              47%            43%        63%            56%
% public prenatal in first trimester       34%           41%              33%            36%        40%            37%
% prenatal in first trimester              70%           81%              72%            84%        75%            77%


Note: Numbers are based on first and second births, excluding college educated women.
                                             Table 3: Impact of Contact Availability on Outcomes


                                               Public Delivery                                     Public Prenatal, First Trimester
Hispanic                         Low CA         Moderate CA          High CA                  Low CA        Moderate CA          High CA
Low YBAR                          0.467             0.536             0.568                    0.287           0.328              0.333

Moderate YBAR                      0.643            0.669             0.695                     0.409              0.444         0.476

High Ybar                          0.760            0.797             0.810                     0.527              0.572         0.592




White                            Low CA         Moderate CA          High CA                  Low CA          Moderate CA      High CA
Low YBAR                          0.122            0.111              0.101                    0.091             0.082          0.072

Moderate YBAR                      0.223            0.232             0.249                     0.164              0.165         0.172

High YBAR                          0.41             0.435             0.469                     0.299              0.317         0.352




Black                            Low CA         Moderate CA          High CA                  Low CA          Moderate CA      High CA
Low YBAR                          0.402            0.407               0.43                    0.29              0.295          0.296

Moderate YBAR                      0.55             0.569             0.552                     0.393              0.395         0.398

High YBAR                          0.715            0.698              0.67                     0.515              0.509         0.496

Note: The sample was divided into thirds for low, medium, and high contact availability, and low, medium, and high
levels of YBAR, where YBAR is either public delivery (in the first 3 columns) or public prenatal care that commenced
in the first trimester (in the last 3 columns). Means of YBAR were then computed for each cell, using the sample
of first and second births.
                                          Table 4: Estimates of "Network Effects"

                                               Hispanic                       White                   Black
                                           Public    Public             Public    Public      Public       Public
                                          Delivery Prenatal            Delivery Prenatal      Delivery    Prenatal
1. No zipcode fixed effects
Share own group with outcome                 0.641        0.752          0.72        0.757     0.693       0.688
                                            [0.009]      [0.009]        [0.013]     [0.014]   [0.018]     [0.020]
R-squared                                    0.24         0.11           0.31         0.19      0.18        0.09

2. No zipcode fixed effects, controls for "others"
Share own group with outcome             0.612      0.724                0.652       0.707     0.597       0.562
                                        [0.010]    [0.011]              [0.013]     [0.014]   [0.019]     [0.022]
Share other group with outcome           0.072      0.069                0.141       0.087     0.289       0.263
                                        [0.009]    [0.011]              [0.010]     [0.011]   [0.023]     [0.022]
R-squared                                0.24       0.11                  0.31        0.19      0.18        0.09

3. Zipcode fixed effects, controls for "others"
Share of own group w/outcome              0.357           0.56           0.309       0.299     0.234       0.148
                                         [0.015]         [0.012]        [0.020]     [0.017]   [0.024]     [0.024]
Share of other group w/outcome            0.111           0.143          0.123       0.117     0.222       0.253
                                         [0.011]         [0.014]        [0.011]     [0.009]   [0.034]     [0.024]
R-squared                                 0.24            0.11           0.32         0.2       0.19        0.1

4. Zipcode-year fixed effects, controls for "others", interaction
Share own *percent own                  0.266        0.455               0.375       0.402     0.615       0.798
                                       [0.051]      [0.057]             [0.048]     [0.052]   [0.152]     [0.164]
Share own                               0.096        0.027               -0.15       -0.18    -0.128      -0.246
                                       [0.027]      [0.032]             [0.024]     [0.026]   [0.042]     [0.045]
Share other                             0.159        0.229               0.184       0.174     0.189       0.316
                                       [0.014]      [0.017]             [0.010]     [0.010]   [0.036]     [0.041]
R-squared                                0.25         0.12                0.32        0.21      0.2         0.12

5. Zipcode-year fixed effects, controls for "others", spline in interaction
Share own group w/outcome*                   0.253         0.513           0.428     0.453     0.59        0.761
 Share own group                            [0.054]       [0.058]         [0.048]   [0.053]   [0.154]     [0.167]
Share own w/outcome                          0.092        0.081         -0.361      -0.422    -0.177      -0.322
                                            [0.027]      [0.035]        [0.038]     [0.043]   [0.057]     [0.069]
Share own w/outcome- middle third            0.077       -0.085          0.158        0.21     0.121       0.161
                                            [0.032]      [0.040]        [0.039]     [0.046]   [0.089]     [0.110]
Share own w/outcome - top third             -0.153       -0.137          0.132       0.091    -0.076      -0.081
                                            [0.046]      [0.049]        [0.030]     [0.034]   [0.098]     [0.104]
Share other group w/outcome                  0.154        0.225          0.186       0.174     0.187       0.317
                                            [0.014]      [0.017]        [0.010]     [0.010]   [0.037]     [0.041]
R-squared                                    0.25         0.12           0.32        0.21       0.2        0.12

Observations                               880305        861634         761813      754615    124553      122198

Robust standard errors in parentheses. Models 1 to 3 include year effects, and neighborhood characteristics:
the share of teen mothers, share of foreign-born mothers, mean maternal education, mean maternal age,
and the share of single mothers. All regressions include the following maternal characteristics: whether or
not the mother is foreign born, single, a teen, 20-29, 30-39, 40-45, a high school dropout, or a high school
graduate.
Table 5: Alternative Specifications

                                        Hisp.       Hisp.          White        White      Black       Black
                                         Pub     Pub Pren.          Pub      Pub Pren.        Pub      Pub Pren.
1. Base Regression                    Delivery    First Tri      Delivery     First Tri    Delivery     First Tri
Share own group w/outcome*              0.253       0.513          0.428        0.453        0.59         0.761
share own group                        [0.054]     [0.058]        [0.048]      [0.053]      [0.154]      [0.167]
Observations                          880305      861634         761813       754615       124553       122198
R-squared                               0.25        0.12            0.32         0.21         0.2          0.12

2. Without zipcode fixed effects
Share own group w/outcome*             0.269        0.302         0.131        0.175         0.024      -0.039
share own group                       [0.032]      [0.031]       [0.057]      [0.070]       [0.100]     [0.106]
Observations                          880305       861634        761813       754615        124553      122198
R-squared                              0.24         0.11           0.31         0.19          0.18       0.09

3. Control for Public Deliveries
Share own group w/outcome*                          0.574                      0.445                     0.746
share own group                                    [0.058]                    [0.053]                   [0.167]
Observations                                       861634                     754615                    122198
R-squared                                           0.12                       0.21                       0.12

4. MCD-level Analysis
Share own group w/outcome              0.191        0.459         0.228        0.172         0.252       0.147
*share own group                      [0.057]      [0.054]       [0.060]      [0.064]       [0.383]     [0.435]
Observations                          942980       922945        863703       855761        152564      149778
R-squared                              0.24         0.11           0.3          0.18          0.19        0.1

Note: Except for the difference noted in the panel heading, these regressions are all similar to those shown in
Panel 5 of Table 4.
Table 6: Tests of the "Information Hypothesis"

                                      Hisp.        Hisp.          White        White       Black     Black
                                      Pub        Pub Pren.        Pub        Pub Pren.       Pub    Pub Pren.
                                     Delivery     First Tri      Delivery     First Tri    Delivery First Tri

1. Model estimated using 2nd births
Share own group w/outcome            0.225          0.606         0.455        0.629         0.882       1.065
*share own group                    [0.062]        [0.065]       [0.051]      [0.056]       [0.176]     [0.191]
Observations                       713201          698162        598786       592498        96054       93977
R-squared                            0.27           0.13          0.37          0.23          0.26        0.14

2. Model estimated using 1st births, including Hospital*year FE
Share own group w/outcome*           -0.082      0.108         0.062           0.05          0.176      0.305
share own group                     [0.051]     [0.032]       [0.051]         [0.065]       [0.088]    [0.111]
Observations                        879253      860785        758745          751538        124222     121932
R-squared                              0.5        0.24          0.49           0.34           0.57       0.33

Notes: Other than the differences noted in the panel headings, these regressions are similar to the "base
regressions" shown in Panel 5 of Table 4.
                          Table 7: Hispanic Mothers Stratified by Native vs. Foreign Born, MCD level


Panel 1: Share Own=Hispanic Mothers                         Native born                         Foreign born
                                                  Public    Public Pren.            Public      Public Pren.
                                                 Delivery     First Tri            Delivery       First Tri
Share of own group w/outcome*share Hispanic        0.315        0.407                0.022          0.348
                                                  [0.104]      [0.091]              [0.074]        [0.071]
Observations                                     350790       344989               592216          577982
R-squared                                           0.23         0.12                 0.19           0.09


Panel 2: Share Own=Native or Foreign born Hispanic Mothers
Share own group with outcome*share own        -0.04      0.346                      0.235           0.376
                                             [0.106]    [0.117]                    [0.050]         [0.036]
Observations                                345814      340084                     590505          576323
R-squared                                      0.23       0.12                       0.19            0.09

Note: Regression models are similar to those in Panel 4 of Table 4 in that they include MCD*year effects
instead of zipcode*year effects.
                         Appendix Table 1: Means for Third Births by Race


                                                        Hispanic      White      Black
Maternal Characteristics
Public delivery                                           0.619       0.271      0.598

Public prenatal 1st trimester                             0.403       0.189      0.422

Prenatal 1st trimester                                    0.730       0.853      0.761

Maternal age                                             28.072       30.494    27.635
                                                         (0.005)      (0.006)   (0.016)
Maternal education                                        9.622       13.402    12.576
                                                         (0.004)      (0.003)   (0.005)
Single                                                    0.353        0.174     0.607

Foreign born                                              0.726       0.094      0.053

Neighborhood Characteristics
Share of own group with public delivery                    0.655       0.317      0.623
                                                         (0.0001)    (0.0002)   (0.0004)
Share of own group with public prenatal                    0.417       0.221      0.431
1st trimester                                            (0.0001)    (0.0002)   (0.0003)
Share of other group with public delivery                  0.456       0.521      0.624
                                                         (0.0002)    (0.0002)   (0.0005)
Share of other group with public prenatal                  0.315       0.330      0.398
1st trimester                                            (0.0001)    (0.0002)   (0.0004)
Share Asian                                                0.047       0.053      0.057
                                                         (0.0001)    (0.0001)   (0.0002)
Share black                                                0.072       0.055      0.281
                                                         (0.0001)    (0.0001)    (0.001)
Share Hispanic                                             0.640       0.344      0.461
                                                         (0.0002)    (0.0002)    (0.001)
Share white                                                0.208       0.502      0.159
                                                         (0.0002)    (0.0002)    (0.001)
Share of teen mothers                                      0.151       0.119      0.165
                                                        (0.00004)    (0.0001)   (0.0001)
Share of single mothers                                    0.414       0.305      0.492
                                                         (0.0001)    (0.0001)   (0.0003)
Share of foreign born mothers                              0.539       0.325      0.446
                                                         (0.0002)    (0.0002)    (0.001)
Average maternal education                                10.383      11.566     10.682
                                                          (0.001)     (0.001)    (0.003)
Average maternal age                                      25.941      26.730     25.690
                                                          (0.001)     (0.002)    (0.002)
Observations                                              859850      708289     106912
               Appendix Table 2: Sample Means for First Births, MCD Sample

Maternal Characteristics                    Hispanic        White             Black
Public delivery                              0.655          0.247             0.528

Public prenatal 1st trimester                0.442          0.181             0.383

Prenatal 1st trimester                       0.746          0.884             0.789

Maternal age                                 22.380        26.798            22.677
                                            (0.0005)       (0.007)           (0.015)
Maternal education                           10.547        13.797            12.593
                                             (0.003)       (0.003)           (0.006)
Single                                        0.501         0.262             0.682

Foreign born                                 0.626          0.096             0.062

Neighborhood Characteristics
Share of own group with public delivery        0.659         0.324             0.613
                                             (0.0001)      (0.0001)          (0.0003)
Share of own group with public prenatal        0.419         0.226             0.425
1st trimester                                (0.0001)      (0.0001)          (0.0002)
Share of other group with public delivery      0.414         0.586             0.560
                                             (0.0001)      (0.0002)          (0.0003)
Share of other group with public prenatal      0.288         0.369             0.366
1st trimester                                (0.0001)      (0.0001)          (0.0003)
Share Asian                                    0.050         0.058             0.068
                                             (0.0001)      (0.0001)          (0.0002)
Share black                                    0.075         0.070             0.157
                                             (0.0001)      (0.0001)          (0.0003)
Share Hispanic                                 0.594         0.415             0.491
                                             (0.0002)      (0.0002)           (0.001)
Share white                                    0.248         0.415             0.240
                                             (0.0002)      (0.0002)          (0.0004)
Share of teen mothers                          0.144         0.131             0.147
                                            (0.00003)     (0.00004)          (0.0001)
Share of single mothers                        0.400         0.342             0.425
                                             (0.0001)      (0.0001)          (0.0002)
Share of foreign born mothers                  0.509         0.385             0.471
                                             (0.0002)      (0.0002)          (0.0004)
Average maternal education                    10.575        11.173            10.753
                                             (0.0001)       (0.001)           (0.002)
Average maternal age                          26.147        26.491            26.103
                                              (0.001)       (0.001)           (0.002)
Observations                                  943006        863890            152575
Appendix Table 3: Zipcode Level Base Regressions for First Births by Race
(Panel 3, Table 4)
                                   Hispanic Hispanic        White       White       Black     Black
                                    Public Public Pren.    Public Public Pren.     Public Public Pren.
                                   Delivery  First Tri    Delivery    First Tri   Delivery  First Tri
  Share of own group w/outcome       0.357     0.56         0.309       0.299       0.234     0.148
                                    [0.015]   [0.012]      [0.020]     [0.017]     [0.024]   [0.024]
 Share of other group w/outcome      0.111     0.143        0.123       0.117       0.222     0.253
                                    [0.011]   [0.014]      [0.011]     [0.009]     [0.034]   [0.024]
            Share black             -0.059    -0.014       -0.077      -0.015       0.121     0.241
                                    [0.051]   [0.059]      [0.040]     [0.039]     [0.091]   [0.093]
            Share white             -0.049     0.086       -0.043      -0.034       0.13      0.17
                                    [0.042]   [0.045]      [0.029]     [0.029]     [0.085]   [0.086]
          Share Hispanic             0.016     0.109       -0.066      -0.018       0.06      0.218
                                    [0.041]   [0.041]      [0.028]     [0.029]     [0.077]   [0.083]
           Share Asian              -0.049    -0.011        -0.04       -0.03       0.014     0.178
                                    [0.051]   [0.055]      [0.035]     [0.035]     [0.096]   [0.099]
      Maternal Characteristics
           Foreign born              0.177     0.097        0.053       0.034      0.043      0.011
                                    [0.002]   [0.002]      [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.006]    [0.006]
               Single                0.164     0.078        0.231       0.144       0.17      0.11
                                    [0.001]   [0.001]      [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.004]    [0.004]
           Teen mother               0.242     0.119        0.198        0.14     -0.029     -0.128
                                    [0.056]   [0.059]      [0.014]     [0.014]    [0.143]    [0.145]
        Maternal age 20-29           0.18      0.107        0.122       0.095     -0.024     -0.094
                                    [0.056]   [0.059]      [0.014]     [0.014]    [0.143]    [0.145]
        Maternal age 30-39           0.028    -0.004        0.016       0.008      -0.18     -0.228
                                    [0.056]   [0.059]      [0.014]     [0.014]    [0.143]    [0.145]
        Maternal age 40-45          -0.008    -0.027       -0.007      -0.012     -0.185     -0.257
                                    [0.057]   [0.059]      [0.014]     [0.014]    [0.145]    [0.146]
            HS drop out              0.271     0.176         0.26       0.154      0.252      0.132
                                    [0.002]   [0.002]      [0.002]     [0.002]    [0.005]    [0.005]
           HS graduate               0.141      0.11        0.126       0.091      0.185      0.135
                                    [0.002]   [0.002]      [0.001]     [0.001]    [0.003]    [0.004]
Other neighborhood characteristics
        Share teen mothers          -0.058    -0.054         0.03      -0.021      0.083     -0.018
                                    [0.041]   [0.047]      [0.033]     [0.032]    [0.110]    [0.113]
    Share foreign-born mothers      -0.097    -0.078       -0.068       -0.08     -0.146     -0.066
                                    [0.023]   [0.024]      [0.018]     [0.017]    [0.054]    [0.059]
     Mean maternal education         0.004     0.006        0.004         0       -0.015      0.002
                                    [0.003]   [0.003]      [0.003]     [0.003]    [0.007]    [0.007]
        Mean maternal age           -0.005    -0.004        0.002      -0.004      0.001     -0.001
                                    [0.002]   [0.002]      [0.002]     [0.001]    [0.006]    [0.006]
       Share single mothers         -0.198    -0.131       -0.202      -0.127     -0.082     -0.078
                                    [0.015]   [0.018]      [0.017]     [0.016]    [0.041]    [0.042]
           Observations             880305   861634        761813     754615      124553     122198
            R-squared                0.24      0.11          0.32        0.2        0.19       0.1
Robust standard errors in brackets
   Includes zipcode fixed effects
