                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           THE EFFECTS OF A BABY BOOM ON STOCK PRICES AND CAPITAL
              ACCUMULATION IN THE PRESENCE OF SOCIAL SECURITY


                                            Andrew B. Abel


                                          Working Paper 9210
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9210


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




I thank Bill Dupor, Joao Gomes, Urban Jermann, Nick Souleles, Chris Telmer, and Amir Yaron for helpful
discussions, the editor and three anonymous referees for helpful comments, and Arianna Degan for excellent
research assistance. I also thank seminar participants at Columbia University, the Federal Reserve Banks of
Minneapolis, New York, and Richmond, Iowa State University, Stanford University, University of California
at Berkeley, University of Southern California, NBER Summer Institute, and the Penn Macro Lunch Group.
The views expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Andrew B. Abel. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
The Effects of a Baby Boom on Stock Prices and Capital Accumulation in the
Presence of Social Security
Andrew B. Abel
NBER Working Paper No. 9210
September 2002
JEL No. E22

                                          ABSTRACT

       Is the stock market boom a result of the baby boom? This paper develops an overlapping
generations model in which a baby boom is modeled as a high realization of a random birth rate, and
the price of capital is determined endogenously by a convex cost of adjustment. A baby boom
increases national saving and investment and thus causes an increase in the price of capital. The
price of capital is mean-reverting so the initial increase in the price of capital is followed by a
decrease. Social Security can potentially affect national saving and investment, though in the long
run, it does not affect the price of capital.



Andrew B. Abel
Department of Finance
Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania
3620 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6367
and NBER
abel@wharton.upenn.edu
    As the baby boom generation progresses through middle age, with its
oldest members anticipating retirement about a decade in the future, public
attention has increasingly focused on the provision of income during retire-
ment. Retirement income is built on three pillars: Social Security, private
pensions, and other private saving. Although the Social Security system in
the United States currently runs a surplus of more than $100 billion per year,
the enormous flow of benefits that will be paid to retired baby boomers will
cause large deficits in a few decades. As a consequence, the solvency of the
Social Security system is in peril. However, the prospects for private pen-
sions appear optimistic due in part to the dramatic increase in stock prices
during the 1980s and 1990s. At the upper end of the income distribution,
the rise in stock prices has created “401(k) millionaires,” and many workers
of more modest means have also benefited from the boom in stock prices.
Other private saving has also benefited from the run-up in the stock market.
    As the stock market continued to rise sharply through the late 1990s,
many observers expressed concern that the market was overvalued and that
the high value of stock prices reflected a bubble. At least some of the concern
about a bubble appeared justified by the tumble in stock prices, especially in
the prices of technology stocks, that began in March 2000. However, even
after falling to a level in July 2002 that was slightly more than 40% below its
peak, the stock market remained more than 8 times its level at the beginning
of 1980.1 In this paper, I examine the long-term sustained increase in the
value of the stock market over the period since 1980. Instead of trying to
determine whether there was (or still is) a bubble in the stock market, I will
pursue a more modest and focused goal in this paper. Specifically, I will use
the discipline of a general equilibrium model with overlapping generations
of rational consumers to examine the logical consistency of the argument
that the flow of private saving by middle-aged baby boomers helped fuel the
booming stock market. Potentially oﬀsetting the argument that purchases
of stocks by middle-aged baby boomers is driving up stock prices is a similar
argument that these investors will eventually sell large amounts of stock
during retirement, thereby causing a decline in stock prices. And if these
investors are forward-looking in the first place, would they so eagerly buy
   1
    Stock prices are measured here by the S&P 500 index. This index rose by a factor of
1.54 during the 1960s, 1.17 during the 1970s, 3.27 during the 1980s, and 4.16 during the
1990s. Comparing 20-year periods, this index rose by a factor of 1.80 over the 1960s and
1970s, and by a factor of 13.61 over the 1980s and 1990s. On July 30, 2002, the S&P 500
index was 8.36 times as high as its value on December 31, 1979.


                                           1
stocks that are destined to fall in price eventually?
    A natural framework for analyzing the eﬀects on stock prices and capital
accumulation of a baby boom is an overlapping generations model with pro-
duction and capital accumulation as in Diamond (1965). However, I need
to modify the classic Diamond model in two ways. First, population grows
at a constant rate in the Diamond model, so I must modify the model to
allow for variation in the population growth rate. I will model the birth rate
as an i.i.d. random variable. The second modification reflects the goal of
analyzing the behavior of the price of capital. In the Diamond model, as in
most neoclassical growth models, the price of capital in terms of consump-
tion is immutably equal to one because a unit of output can be used either
for one unit of consumption or to create one unit of capital. To make the
price of capital endogenous, I assume that there is a convex adjustment cost
technology for converting consumption goods into capital goods.
    Modifying the Diamond model to incorporate adjustment costs and ran-
dom population growth leads to a model that can be used to examine the
eﬀect of a baby boom on stock prices and capital accumulation.2 I also in-
clude a Social Security system in the model and I allow (but do not require)
the Social Security system to accumulate capital in a trust fund. One reason
for including a Social Security system is that in an overlapping generations
model with consumers who live for two periods, and have no bequest motive,
private saving is motivated only by the desire to consume during retirement.
To the extent that Social Security provides a substantial portion of retirement
consumption for many consumers, I want to take account of Social Security
when analyzing the saving behavior of individuals. An additional reason for
including Social Security is that it provides a set of fiscal policy tools that
can potentially aﬀect consumption, capital accumulation, and stock prices.
Indeed, Social Security policy can be used to allow the economy to attain
the Golden Rule in the long run.
    I describe the production and adjustment cost technologies in Section 1.
In Section 2, I introduce the Social Security system. The specification of
the Social Security system is flexible enough to include a pure pay-as-you-go
system or a system with a trust fund. I model the behavior of individual
consumers in Section 3. In Section 4, I derive the equilibrium values of
   2
    Bohn (1999) presents a version of the Diamond model with uncertain birth rates, but
the price of capital is immutably fixed at unity, so that model cannot be used to analyze
the eﬀects of a baby boom on stock prices.



                                           2
the capital-labor ratio and the price of capital. I show that a baby boom
increases the price of capital, and that the price of capital reverts toward its
mean in the following period.
    An important variable characterizing capital accumulation is the investment-
output ratio. In the model presented here, the investment-output ratio is
constant in the long run, even though shocks to technology and the birth
rate cause stochastic variation in the capital-labor ratio and the price of cap-
ital in the long run. Two interesting baseline cases in which to study the
investment-output ratio are a laissez-faire economy, which I analyze in Sec-
tion 5, and an economy that has attained the Golden Rule, which I analyze
in Section 6. Also in Section 6, I analyze the dynamic eﬃciency or ineﬃ-
ciency of an economy with costs of adjusting the capital stock, and I analyze
policies to attain the Golden Rule. Sections 7 and 8 analyze the long-run
behavior of the investment-output ratio for diﬀerent classes of Social Secu-
rity policies. Section 7 examines defined-benefit policies with a constant
replacement rate and a trust fund that is proportional to the aggregate cap-
ital stock. Section 8 examines defined-contribution Social Security systems.
I present concluding remarks in Section 9.


1    Production Technologies
Consider an overlapping generations closed economy in which consumers live
for two periods. Each consumer supplies one unit of labor when young and
does not work when old. This economy has two production technologies.
The first production technology uses capital and labor to produce a consump-
tion good. The consumption good can be consumed in the period in which
it is produced, or it can be used as an input to the second technology, the
capital adjustment technology, which uses the consumption good and capital
to produce capital for use in the following period.
    The consumption good technology is

                              Yt = At Ktα Nt1−α                           (1)

where 0 < α < 1, Yt is the gross production of consumption goods before
diverting some of these goods to the capital adjustment technology, Kt is
the aggregate capital stock at the beginning of period t, Nt is the aggregate
input of labor in period t, and At > 0 is total factor productivity (T F P ).


                                      3
Total factor productivity follows a geometric random walk

                                 ln At = ln At−1 + εA,t                                  (2)

where the growth rate of T F P , εA,t , is i.i.d.
    The output of the consumption goods technology is used for two purposes:
consumption and capital formation. Let Ct be the aggregate consumption
of all consumers (young and old) during period t, and let It be the aggregate
amount of consumption goods diverted from consumption and used as an
input to the capital adjustment technology. Therefore,

                                      Yt = Ct + It .                                     (3)

    The capital adjustment technology uses consumption goods and the cur-
rent capital stock to produce capital available for use in the following pe-
riod. This technology is given by Kt+1 = G (Kt , It ) where G (Kt , It ) is non-
decreasing and linearly homogenous in Kt and It . Convex adjustment costs
                                     2
are represented by the restriction ∂∂IG2 < 0. The most natural specification
                                       t
for G (Kt , It ) is as

                         G (Kt , It ) = g (Kt , It ) + (1 − δ) Kt                        (4)

where g (Kt , It ) represents gross investment and is non-decreasing and lin-
                                      2
early homogeneous in Kt and It , ∂∂I g2 < 0, and 0 ≤ δ ≤ 1 is the depreciation
                                       t
rate. Net investment, Kt+1 −Kt , equals gross investment minus depreciation,
δKt .
    Instead of equation (4), I will adopt the following log-linear specification3
of G (Kt , It )
                          Kt+1 = G (Kt , It ) ≡ aItφ Kt1−φ                    (5)
where 0 ≤ φ ≤ 1 and a > 0.4 I chose the log-linear specification in equation
(5) because, as discussed in Section 4, this specification helps to simplify
   3
     Basu (1987) uses the adjustment cost function in equation (5) with a = 1 and exam-
ines equilibrium asset prices. Because Basu’s model has a representative infinitely-lived
consumer, it cannot be used to examine the impact of a baby boom on stock prices.
   4
     If φ = 1 and a = 1, equation (5) is simply Kt+1 = It , which is the capital accumulation
equation in the neoclassical growth model with complete depreciation of capital in each
period. If φ = 0 and a = 1, the capital accumulation equation in (5) is Kt+1 = Kt , so
that the capital stock is constant, as in the Lucas (1978) fruit-tree model of asset pricing.



                                             4
the behavior of the equilibrium price and quantity of capital. The ana-
lytic tractability resulting from the loglinear specification in equation (5) is
achieved at the cost of violating the linear relationship among gross invest-
ment, net investment, and depreciation in equation (4), except in the extreme
case in which capital fully depreciates within one period so that δ = 1. When
δ < 1, the specification in equation (5) is, at best, an approximation of the
more appealing specification in equation (4).
    The price of capital is determined by the capital adjustment technology.
Define qt to be the price, in terms of consumption goods, of acquiring one
unit of capital at the end of period t to be carried into period t + 1. This
price is the amount that It must be increased to increase Kt+1 by one unit,
          ³      ´−1
which is dKdIt+1
              t
                     . Thus, equation (5) implies
                                       µ        ¶1−φ
                                   1       It
                             qt =                      .                    (6)
                                  aφ       Kt

If 0 < φ < 1, the price of capital is an increasing function of the investment-
capital ratio, KItt . In the neoclassical growth model a = 1 and φ = 1, so
equation (6) indicates that the price of capital is constant and equal to one.
    The value, measured in terms of current consumption goods, of the ag-
gregate capital stock carried into period t + 1 is qt Kt+1 . Multiplying both
sides of equation (6) by Kt+1 and using the capital adjustment technology in
equation (5) yields
                                            1
                                 qt Kt+1 = It .                             (7)
                                            φ
    The services of capital and labor are rented in competitive factor markets
so that each factor earns its marginal product. Thus, the wage rate per unit
of labor is
                                             Yt
                               wt = (1 − α) .                              (8)
                                             Nt
    Capital earns a rental in both technologies. The rental earned by capital
in the production of consumption goods is
                                            Yt
                                  νC
                                   t = α       .                            (9)
                                            Kt

The rental earned by capital in the capital adjustment technology, ν K
                                                                     t , equals
the marginal product of capital in this technology (measured in terms of

                                       5
capital in the following period) multiplied by the relative price of capital, qt .
It follows from equations (5) and (6) that

                                            1 − φ It
                                    νK
                                     t =             .                                 (10)
                                              φ Kt

The total rental to capital during period t is the sum of the rentals ν C
                                                                        t and
  K
ν t . Since a unit of capital used in period t was purchased at a price of qt−1
at the end of period t − 1, the rate of return to capital is

                                           νC
                                            t + νt
                                                  K
                                    Rt =            .                                  (11)
                                             qt−1
   An alternative expression for the rate of return on capital can be obtained
by substituting equations (9) and (10) for ν C           K
                                                t and ν t , respectively, into
equation (11) to obtain
                                   αYt + 1−φ  I
                                            φ t
                             Rt =               .                         (12)
                                      qt−1 Kt
    Gross domestic product, GDP , equals the market value of final consump-
tion goods, Ct , plus the market value of capital to be carried into the following
period, which is qt Kt+1 = φ1 It , as shown in equation (7). Therefore,

                                    1          1−φ
                         GDPt = Ct + It = Yt +     It                                  (13)
                                    φ           φ

where the second equality in equation (13) follows from equation (3).5
    The consumption goods technology and the capital adjustment technol-
ogy are interpreted as components of a two-sector model in Figure 1, which
displays Kt+1 on the horizontal axis and Ct on the vertical axis, for the case
in which 0 < φ < 1.6 The two-sector production possibilities frontier is
represented by the downward-sloping concave curve in Figure 1. The equi-
librium combination of Ct and Kt+1 is shown by point E on the production
   5
     In a standard neoclassical growth model with φ = 1, equation (13) shows that GDPt =
Ct +It = Yt . In the absence of convex adjustment costs, It represents both the input to the
capital adjustment technology and the value of the output of this technology. However, in
the presence of convex adjustment costs (0 < φ < 1), GDP exceeds Ct + It = Yt because
It measures the input to the capital adjustment technology, not the value of the output of
this technology, and the capital adjustment technology contributes value added.
   6
     See Appendix A for a formal interpretation as a two-sector model.


                                             6
           GDPt
                                                 1−φ
                                                       It
                                                  φ
              Yt
                                           It
                                                             E     Slope = − qt
                   Consumption goods, Ct




                                                                                  Production possibilities frontier

                                            Ct




                                                            Kt+1                              Capital goods, Kt+1




       Figure 1: Production Possibilities Frontier Relating Ct and Kt+1

possibilities frontier. The (absolute value of the) slope of the production
possibilities frontier at point E is the price of capital in terms of consump-
tion, which is qt . The value of GDPt , measured in terms of consumption
goods, is shown by the vertical intercept of the straight line through point E
with slope −qt . GDPt exceeds Yt by 1−φ  φ t
                                            I , which is the value added by the
                                7
capital adjustment techology.
   7
    The capital adjustment technology converts It units of the consumption good into
capital worth qt Kt+1 , so the value added by this technology is qt Kt+1 − It = 1−φ φ It .
Equivalently, the value added by the capital adjustment technology equals ν K
                                                                            t Kt , which,
according to equation (10) equals 1−φ
                                    φ It .




                                                             7
2       The Social Security System
I will specify a Social Security system in which the funding of retirement
benefits can be on a pay-as-you-go basis, a fully-funded basis, or more gen-
erally, some combination of the two. Retirement benefits are determined as
a hybrid of a defined-contribution system and a defined-benefit system.
    Each young consumer in period t pays a Social Security tax of τ t wt . When
these consumers are old in period t + 1, they each receive a Social Security
benefit of Rt+1 θt wt .8 A defined-contribution Social Security system, in which
consumers’ Social Security taxes are invested on their behalf in capital, can
be represented by θt = τ t . In a defined-benefit system, the parameter θt can
be interpreted as the replacement rate. From the viewpoint of period t, the
present value of the Social Security benefit to be received in period t + 1 is
θt wt . Therefore, Social Security replaces a fraction θt of the wage income
wt , in present value. The assumption that the present value of the Social
Security benefit is known when the consumer is young greatly simplifies the
consumer’s intertemporal consumption decision in Section 3.
    The Social Security system can own a trust fund that invests in capital.
Let KtS be the amount of capital held by the Social Security system at the
beginning of period t. Let 0 ≤ σ t ≤ 1 be the fraction of the aggregate capital
stock that is held in the trust fund of the Social Security system so that

                                       KtS = σ t Kt .                                (14)

    Using the fact that aggregate wage income earned by young consumers
in period t is (1 − α) Yt , the sources and uses of funds for the Social Security
system are given by

        τ t (1 − α) Yt + Rt qt−1 σ t Kt = Rt θt−1 (1 − α) Yt−1 + qt σ t+1 Kt+1 .     (15)

The left-hand-side of equation (15) shows the sources of funds for the Social
Security system in period t, which consist of Social Security taxes plus the
value of the trust fund, including capital income, at the beginning of period
t. The right hand side of equation (15) shows the uses of funds by the Social
Security system in period t, which consist of retirement benefits paid to old
consumers and the purchase of capital to hold in the trust fund.
    8
    I assume that 1−τ t +θt > 0 so that the present value of lifetime income of a consumer
born at the beginning of period t, (1 − τ t + θt ) wt , is positive.



                                             8
3       Consumers
At the beginning of period t, a continuum of consumers with measure Nt is
born. The measure of young consumers, Nt , follows a geometric random
walk
                           ln Nt = ln Nt−1 + εN,t                   (16)
where the birth rate εN,t is an i.i.d. random variable that is independent of
εA,t at all leads and lags. A high realization of εN,t represents a baby boom.
    Young consumers in period t inelastically supply one unit of labor and
earn the competitive wage rate wt in equation (8). A young consumer in
period t uses after-tax wage income (1 − τ t ) wt to consume cyt and to purchase
                 P
capital. Let kt+1   be the amount of capital that a young consumer buys at
a price qt per unit at the end of period t to carry into period t + 1. (The
superscript P denotes privately held capital to distinguish it from capital
held by the Social Security system.) The purchases of consumption and
capital by a young consumer satisfy
                                P
                            qt kt+1 = (1 − τ t ) wt − cyt .                   (17)

    I assume that consumers do not have bequest motives,9 and thus they
consume all available resources when they are old. Let cot+1 be the consump-
tion of an old consumer in period t + 1. This consumption is financed with
capital held by the consumer as well as the Social Security benefit so that
                                     £ P             ¤
                         cot+1 = Rt+1 qt kt+1 + θt wt .                  (18)

    I assume that consumers have logarithmic utility, so the utility function
of a consumer born at the beginning of period t is
                                      ©     ª
                 Ut ≡ ln cyt + β ln Et cot+1 , 0 < β < 1.                (19)

I chose this utility function so that, along with the assumption that Social
Security benefits equal Rt+1 θt wt , the optimal consumption when young is a
constant fraction of the present value of lifetime resources, which consist of
after-tax wage income, (1 − τ t ) wt , plus the present value of the future Social
    9
    For an analysis of the eﬀect of a bequest motive on the dynamic behavior of the
equilibrium price of capital in the absence of Social Security, see Abel (2001).




                                          9
Security benefit, θt wt . Specifically, the optimal consumption of a young
consumer in period t is10
                                                         wt
                                cyt = (1 − τ t + θt )       .                              (20)
                                                        1+β

    The aggregate consumption of the young cohort, Cty ≡ Nt cyt , is calculated
from equation (20) using the fact from equation (8) that Nt wt = (1 − α) Yt
to obtain
                            1
                    Cty =       (1 − τ t + θt ) (1 − α) Yt .               (21)
                          1+β

4      Equilibrium
In this section I derive the equilibrium values of the price and quantity of
capital. The solution of the equilibrium exploits four simplifying assump-
tions made in previous sections: (1) the production function for consumption
goods is Cobb-Douglas; (2) the capital adjustment technology is log-linear;
(3) consumers have logarithmic preferences; and (4) the Social Security ben-
efit received by old consumers in period t + 1 is Rt+1 θt wt , so that a young
consumer in period t knows the present value of these benefits. Assump-
tions (3) and (4) simplify the individual consumption/saving problem, and
more importantly, imply that private saving is independent of the real rate
of return on saving. Without this independence, the link between private
saving and the rate of return would run in both directions: private saving
aﬀects capital accumulation which aﬀects the marginal product of capital
and the rate of return; and the rate of return would aﬀect the optimal saving
of individual consumers. By severing the link in which the rate of return
aﬀects capital accumulation, it is very simple to compute the equilibrium in
the economy. When assumptions (3) and (4) are combined with the log-
linearity assumptions in equations (1) and (2), in the long run, the logarithm
of the price of capital and the logarithm of the ratio of capital to augmented
labor (defined in this section) evolve as AR(1) processes. The cost of this
simplicity is that the model cannot capture the response of private saving to
changes in interest rates, and hence would not be suited to study the eﬀects
  10
    Substituting       equation    (17)    into     equation       (18)      yields  cot+1     =
                            y                                                  o
Rt+1 [(1 − τ t + θt ) wt − ct ].    Substituting this expression for ct+1 into equation
(19) yields Ut = ln cyt + β ln Et {Rt+1 } + β ln [(1 − τ t + θt ) wt − cyt ]. Diﬀerentiating this
expression with respect to cyt and setting the derivative equal to zero yields equation (20).


                                               10
of policies aimed at stimulating saving by increasing the (after-tax) rate of
return to saving.
    To derive equilibrium behavior, I begin with the observation that the
aggregate consumption of the young equals the aggregate after-tax wage
income of the young minus their expenditure on capital, so

                         Cty = (1 − τ t ) (1 − α) Yt − qt Kt+1
                                                           P
                                                                                  (22)
        P          P
where Kt+1  ≡ Nt kt+1   is the total amount of capital purchased directly by
young consumers at the end of period t. Now set the right hand side of
equation (22) equal to the right hand side of equation (21) and rearrange to
yield
                          P     1−α
                     qt Kt+1 =        [(1 − τ t ) β − θt ] Yt .         (23)
                                1+β
   Equation (23) shows the aggregate capital stock held directly by young
consumers. To calculate the national capital stock, recall from equation (14)
                                                              S
that the Social Security system holds capital in the amount Kt+1 = σ t+1 Kt+1 ,
                 P
which implies Kt+1 = (1 − σ t+1 ) Kt+1 . Therefore, equation (23) implies

                                   1      1−α
                    qt Kt+1 =                   [(1 − τ t ) β − θt ] Yt .         (24)
                                1 − σ t+1 1 + β

Now use the fact from equation (7) that qt Kt+1 = φ1 It and the definition of
the investment-output ratio ψ t ,
                                                  It
                                         ψt ≡        ,                            (25)
                                                  Yt
to rewrite equation (24) as

                                 φ      1−α
                       ψt =                   [(1 − τ t ) β − θt ] .              (26)
                              1 − σ t+1 1 + β
   The sources and uses of funds for the Social Security system in equation
(15) can be rewritten, using the definition of ψ t in equation (25) along with
equations (7) and (12), as

             α − ψt                      1          θt−1
  τ t + σt          + (σ t − σ t+1 )           ψt =       (αφ + (1 − φ) ψ t ) .   (27)
             1−α                     φ (1 − α)      ψ t−1

                                             11
     Equations (26) and (27) are two equations in four variables that are de-
termined in period t: the endogenous investment-output ratio ψ t , and the
three Social Security parameters τ t , θt , and σ t+1 . Two of the three Social
Security parameters are chosen exogenously, and equations (26) and (27) can
then be solved for ψ t and the remaining Social Security parameter.
     In addition to the two endogenous variables determined by equations (26)
and (27), the capital stock is an endogenous variable that evolves over time.
It is convenient to focus on e
                             kt , the ratio of the capital stock to the augmented
amount of labor, which is defined as11

                                       e         Kt
                                       kt ≡        1     .                                   (28)
                                              At1−α Nt

The logarithm of e
                 kt evolves according to12
                                                        1
  ln e
     kt+1 = φ ln ψ t + [1 − (1 − α) φ] ln e
                                          kt −             εA,t+1 − εN,t+1 + ln a. (29)
                                                       1−α
    The dynamic behavior of the economy is described by three equations:
equations (26) and (27), which describe the dynamic behavior of ψ t and of the
Social Security system, and equation (29) which governs the evolution of e
                                                                         kt+1 .
This 3-equation system exhibits a strong form of separability. Specifically,
equations (26) and (27) form an independent deterministic system that does
not depend on e kt+1 or on any of the shocks in equation (29).
    The behavior of the independent deterministic system in equations (26)
and (27) depends on the specification of Social Security policy, and I will
discuss diﬀerent classes of Social Security policies in Sections 7 and 8. In
  11
    To interpret the denominator in equation (28) as the augmented amount of labor,
note that the consumption goods technology in equation (1) can be rewritten as Yt =
    µ 1      ¶1−α            1
  α    1−α
Kt At Nt          , where At1−α Nt is the ”augmented” amount of labor.
  12                                                          It          Yt
       The definition of ψ t in equation (25) implies that    Kt    = ψt K   . Therefore, the con-
                                                                           t
                                                                            ³ ´α−1
                                                             It
sumption goods technology in equation (1) implies            Kt    = ψ t At K  t
                                                                              Nt    . Substitut-
                         It
ing this expression for K    into the capital adjustment technology in equation (5) yields
                    ³ ´(α−1)φ
                           t
                                                                              1
Kt+1 = aKt ψ φt Aφt K  t
                      Nt         . Divide both sides of this equation by At+11−α
                                                                                 Nt+1 , use
the definition of e
                  kt+1 in equation (28), and then take logarithms of both sides to obtain
equation (29), where εA,t+1 is (the logarithm of) the growth rate of T F P in equation (2)
and εN,t+1 is (the logarithm of) the birth rate defined in equation (16).

                                              12
both of these classes of policies, there is a constant value of ψt that satisfies
the independent deterministic system in equations (26) and (27) and has the
property that once this value is attained, ψ t remains constant even though
stochastic shocks in equation (29) generate stochastic movements in e    kt+1 . I
will use the term “long run” to apply to situations in which ψ t is constant,
and in Sections 7 and 8, I will examine the stability of these stationary values
of ψ t .
    Equation (29) implies the following proposition.

Proposition 1 In the long run with constant ψ t , ln e
                                                     kt is a stationary AR (1)
process if φ > 0, and is a random walk if φ = 0.

  Proposition 1 implies that ln ekt is mean-reverting if φ > 0, but it is not
mean-reverting in the Lucas (1978) fruit-tree model, which has φ = 0. This
mean reversion with φ > 0 induces mean reversion in the price of capital, qt .
The logarithm of the price of capital evolves according to13
                                                        ψt
       ln qt = [1 − (1 − α) φ] ln qt−1 + (1 − φ) ln          − (1 − α) φ ln φ (30)
                                                       ψ t−1
                   − (1 − α) ln a + (1 − φ) [εA,t + (1 − α) εN,t ]

If φ = 1, the price of capital is constant and equal to a1 . For the more inter-
esting case in which φ < 1, equation (30) implies the following proposition
and corollaries.

Proposition 2 If φ < 1, the price of capital, qt , is an increasing function
of the TFP shock, εA,t , and of the shock to the birth rate, εN,t .

Corollary 1 If 0 < φ < 1, the price of capital, ln qt , is mean-reverting in
response to TFP shocks εA,t and birth rate shocks εN,t .
  13
     Use the definition of ψ t in equation (25), the definition of e
                                                                   kt in equation (28), and the
consumption goods technology in equation (1) to obtain
                                        It
                                           = ψt e
                                                ktα−1 .                                    (*)
                                        Kt
Substitute equation (*) into equation (6) and take logarithms of both sides to obtain

                   ln qt = − ln aφ + (1 − φ) ln ψ t − (1 − φ) (1 − α) ln e
                                                                         kt .             (**)

Substitute equation (29) into equation (**), and simplify, to obtain equation (30).

                                              13
Corollary 2 If φ = 0, then the price of capital, qt , follows a geometric
random walk.

    Proposition 2 and its corollaries state that the price of capital rises in
response to a baby boom and rises in response to a positive shock to total
factor productivity. The corollaries state that whether the price of capital
reverts toward its mean in the period following the shock depends on whether
capital can be accumulated. Specifically, if capital can be accumulated
(φ > 0), then the price of capital is mean-reverting. However, if the capital
stock is fixed over time (φ = 0), as in the fruit-tree model, the price of capital
is not mean-reverting.
    Aggregate saving is the economic channel through which a baby boom or
a productivity shock aﬀects the price of capital. A baby boom in period t
(i.e., a high value of εN,t )—or a productivity boom in the consumption goods
technology (i.e., a high value of εA,t )—causes a high value of aggregate wage
income relative to the capital stock, Kt . The high wage income accrues
to young consumers, who are the private savers in the economy, and thus
leads to a high level of saving relative to Kt . Since aggregate investment
equals aggregate saving in a closed economy,14 aggregate investment is high
relative to Kt . The high value of aggregate investment relative to the capital
stock drives up the price of capital along the upward-sloping supply curve of
capital in equation (6), provided that φ < 1. As a result of the high value
of investment in period t, the capital stock in the following period, Kt+1 ,
is high, provided that φ > 0. The high value of Kt+1 reduces the price of
capital at any level of investment in period t + 1, thus putting downward
pressure on the price of capital and generating mean reversion.
    Equation (30) and the fact that ψ t is constant in the long run when the
Social Security parameters are constant imply the following proposition.15

Proposition 3 In the long run, the price of capital, qt , is independent of
  14
     More precisely, It = φqt Kt+1 = 1−σφt+1 qt Kt+1
                                                  P
                                                     , where the first equality follows from
                                                                         P
equation (7), the second equality follows from equation (14), and qt Kt+1    is the aggregate
saving of young consumers in period t.
  15
     If Social Security were to have an eﬀect on the price of capital in the long run, the
                                                           It
channel would be through the investment-capital ratio K      t
                                                               (See equation (6)). However,
in the long run, the investment-output ratio ψ t is constant, so equation (*) in footnote 13
implies that K It
                 t
                   = ψe
                      ktα−1 . Although Social Security can potentially aﬀect the long-run
                                                                              et with respect
value of ψ (see Section 7), I will show in footnote 17 that the elasticity of k
to ψ is   1
             . Therefore, the product ψ keα−1
                                               = It
                                                     is unaﬀected by changes in ψ.
        1−α                              t        Kt


                                             14
the investment-output ratio ψ and the constant values of the Social Security
parameters τ t , θt , and σ t .

    Recall from equation (7) that the market value of the capital stock,
qt Kt+1 , is φ1 It , and observe that equation (13) states that GDPt = Yt + 1−φ
                                                                             φ t
                                                                                I.
The ratio of the market value of the capital stock to GDP is given by the
following proposition.
                       qt Kt+1      ψt
Proposition 4           GDPt
                               = φ+(1−φ)ψ   .
                                          t


     The ratio qGDP
                  t Kt+1
                       t
                         is independent of the stochastic shocks in the model and
                       e
is independent of kt . Indeed, in the long run ψ t remains constant, and thus
qt Kt+1
 GDPt
         is constant despite the presence of stochastic shocks in the long run.
The huge increase in the value of stocks in the 1990s would seem to indicate
that qGDP
        t Kt+1
             t
               increased sharply during this period. However, conventionally
measured GDP may understate GDP when there is a stock market boom
and high capital accumulation, so the ratio qGDP t Kt+1
                                                      t
                                                        may, in fact, have increased
far less than would appear from conventional data.16


5        Laissez Faire
Henceforth, we will assume that φ > 0, so that economy can accumulate
capital and the capital stock is determined endogenously. In this section, we
examine capital accumulation under laissez-faire. Under laissez faire, there
is no Social Security system. Formally, τ t = θt = σ t = 0 for all t. Equation
(26) immediately implies the following proposition.

Proposition 5 Under laissez faire (τ t = θt = σ t = 0 for all t), ψ t = ψ LF ≡
   β
φ 1+β (1 − α) for all t.

    Under laissez faire, national saving equals private saving, which equals the
saving of the young generation. The aggregate income of young consumers
                                                                              β
is a constant share 1 − α of output Yt . They save a constant fraction 1+β
                                                          β
of their income, so the saving of young consumers is 1+β     (1 − α) Yt . Equiv-
alently, the value of capital purchased by young consumers, qt Kt+1 , equals
  β                                                                β
1+β
    (1 − α) Yt . Since It = φqt Kt+1 (equation (7)), It = φ 1+β       (1 − α) Yt ,
which implies Proposition 5.
  16
       See Hall (2001) for a discussion of this point.

                                                15
6         The Golden Rule and Dynamic Eﬃciency
In the long run with constant values of the Social Security parameters, the
value of ψ t is constant. The Golden Rule value of ψ, denoted ψ GR , is the
                                                           ct ≡ C1 t , the
constant value of ψ t that maximizes the long-run value of e
                                                                                   At1−α Nt
amount of consumption per augmented unit of labor. To derive an expression
for e
    ct , use the definition of ψ t from equation (25) and the consumption goods
technology in equation (1) to rewrite equation (3) as

                                        Ct = (1 − ψ t ) At Ktα Nt1−α .                        (31)
                                                              1
                                                                                              Ct
Divide both sides of equation (31) by At1−α Nt , use the definitions e
                                                                     ct ≡                     1
                                                                                        At1−α Nt
and e
    kt ≡          Kt
                  1       , and use the fact that ψ t is constant in the long run to obtain
                1−α
               At    Nt


                                                  ct = (1 − ψ) e
                                                  e            ktα .                          (32)

   To determine the value of ψ that maximizes consumption per augmented
unit of labor in the long run, diﬀerentiate equation (32) with respect to ψ to
obtain                        Ã                    !
                        ∂e
                         ct       1 − ψ ∂ ln e
                                             kt
                            = α                 − 1 ktα .                 (33)
                        ∂ψ          ψ ∂ ln ψ
                                            ∂e
                                             ct
       Setting the derivative               ∂ψ
                                                    in equation (33) equal to zero and using17
∂ ln e
     kt        1
∂ ln ψ
          =   1−α
                    yields the following proposition.

Proposition 6 The Golden Rule, which maximizes consumption per aug-
mented unit of labor in the long run, is attained by ψ = ψGR ≡ α.

    This proposition can be interpreted using the results on dynamic eﬃciency
under uncertainty in Abel, Mankiw, Summers, and Zeckhauser (1989), here-
after AMSZ. Proposition 2 in AMSZ states that if, in every period, the rate
of return on risky capital exceeds the growth rate of the value of the capital
                                                                       ³              ´
   Rewrite the expression for ln e
  17
                                    kt in equation (29) as ln e     1
                                                              kt = 1−α  ln ψ + φ1 ln a +
P∞                    h                     i
                    j     1
 j=0 [1 − (1 − α) φ]   − 1−α εA,t−j − εN,t−j . Inspection of this equation reveals that
                            ∂ ln e
                                 kt          1
the desired elasticity,     ∂ ln ψ ,   is   1−α .



                                                         16
stock, the economy is dynamically eﬃcient. If, in every period, the rate of
return on capital is less than the growth rate of the value of the capital stock,
the economy has a dynamically ineﬃcient overaccumulation of capital.
    In AMSZ the price of capital is fixed at unity, but here the price of capital
varies endogenously. With a variable price of capital, the gross growth rate
of the value of the capital stock is Gt ≡ qqt−1
                                            t Kt+1
                                                Kt
                                                   . Define
                                                Rt
                                       ρt ≡                                         (34)
                                                Gt
as the ratio of the rate of return on capital to the growth rate of the value of
the capital stock. Extending the results of AMSZ to the case with a variable
price of capital, an economy is dynamically eﬃcient if ρt > 1 in every period,
but it is dynamically ineﬃcient if ρt < 1 in every period. If ρt = 1 in every
period, the economy attains the Golden Rule.18
    To obtain a simple expression for ρt in the long run in this model, use the
expression for Rt in equation (12), the expression for qt Kt+1 in equation (7),
and the fact that the investment-output ratio ψ t is constant in the long run
to rewrite equation (34) as
                                                φ
                              ρt = ρ ≡ 1 +        (α − ψ) .                         (35)
                                                ψ
Equation (35) shows that if φ > 0, an economy is dynamically eﬃcient if
ψ < α. It has a dynamically ineﬃcient overaccumulation of capital if ψ > α,
and it attains the Golden Rule if ψ = α.
    AMSZ present an alternative criterion for dynamic eﬃciency in their
Proposition 1. Specifically, if, in every period, the contribution of capi-
tal to output is larger than the flow of resources used to create capital, the
economy is dynamically eﬃcient. In this model, the contribution of capital
to the gross production of consumption goods is αYt and the flow of resources
diverted from consumption to the creation of capital is It . Thus, the con-
tribution of capital exceeds its use of resources by αYt − It = (α − ψ) Yt in
period t. Consistent with the results discussed above, this comparison of
the contribution of capital to its use of resources indicates that the economy
is dynamically eﬃcient if ψ < α, is dynamically ineﬃcient if ψ > α, and
attains the Golden Rule if ψ = α.19
  18
    Abel (2002) shows in a deterministic framework that in the presence of convex adjust-
ment costs, the Golden Rule is characterized by Rt = Gt (which implies ρt = 1).
 19
    The AMSZ conditions for dynamic eﬃciency and dynamic ineﬃciency are suﬃcient

                                           17
6.1     Golden Rule Social Security Policies
Since ψ t = ψ t−1 = α in an economy that has attained the Golden Rule,
equation (27) implies that τ t = θt−1 in the Golden Rule steady state of an
economy with constant values of the Social Security parameters τ t , θt , and
σ t .20 Therefore, equation (26) implies the following proposition.

Proposition 7 When the Golden Rule steady state is attained in the long
run with constant values of the Social Security parameters (τ t = τ , θt = θ,
and σ t = σ), τ = θ = θGR ≡ φ1 1−α
                                1
                                   [ψ LF − (1 − σ) α].

Corollary 3 In a pure pay-as-you-go system (σ = 0), when the Golden Rule
steady state is attained in the long run with constant values of the Social
Security parameters, τ = θ = φ1 1−α
                                 1
                                    [ψ LF − α].

    Corollary 3 implies that if ψ LF < α, so the laissez-faire economy is dy-
namically eﬃcient, the Golden Rule is attained by negative values of τ and
θ. Negative values of τ and θ imply that young consumers receive a sub-
sidy and old consumers pay a tax. Since subsidizing the income of young
consumers and increasing the taxes paid by old consumers both increase the
saving of young consumers, this tax/subsidy scheme will increase national
saving and investment toward the Golden Rule. On the other hand, if the
laissez-faire economy is dynamically ineﬃcient (ψ LF > α), national saving
and investment must be reduced to attain the Golden Rule. In this case,
positive values of τ and θ are required to attain the Golden Rule.


7      Social Security with Constant θt and σ t
In this section I consider the class of Social Security policies in which the
replacement rate θt and the trust fund ratio σ t , 0 ≤ σ t < 1, are constant.
but not necessary. In particular, these conditions do not apply when ρt is sometimes
greater than one and sometimes less than one. Conveniently, in this model, ρt is constant
in the long run, so the AMSZ conditions are decisive. For situations in which ρt is not
always greater than or always less than one, dynamic eﬃciency or ineﬃciency could be
assessed by extending the results of Zilcha (1991) to the case with convex adjustment costs
and stochastic population growth.
  20
     Two of the three Social Security parameters (τ t , θt , and σ t ) are chosen exogenously.
Equation (26) implies that if any two of these three parameters are constant, and if ψ t is
constant, then the third Social Security parameter is constant.


                                             18
This class includes σ t ≡ 0, which represents a pay-as-you-go system. A
constant replacement rate θt represents a defined-benefit system in which
(the present value of) Social Security benefits are a constant fraction of wage
income when young.
   Setting θt = θ and σ t = σ for all t, equations (26) and (27) can be
rewritten as
                               φ 1−α
                      ψt =           [(1 − τ t ) β − θ] .                 (36)
                              1−σ1+β
and
                            α − ψt     θ
                   τt + σ          =       (αφ + (1 − φ) ψ t ) .          (37)
                            1−α      ψ t−1
    Equations (36) and (37) govern the evolution of ψ t and τ t . This system
of two equations in ψ t and τ t can be expressed as a single diﬀerence equation
in ψ t by substituting equation (37) into equation (36) and rearranging to
obtain
             ¡     ¢ ((1 − α) (β − θ) + σαβ) ψ t−1 − αβφθ (1 − α)
      ψ t = h ψ t−1 ≡ ³                 ´                            .    (38)
                        (1−σ)(1+β)
                            φ
                                   + σβ   ψ t−1 + βθ (1 − φ) (1 − α)

   To find the steady-state values of ψ t , set ψt = ψ t−1 = ψ in equation (38)
and rewrite this equation as

                                  H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0                         (39)
where

                         ·                   ¸
                        (1 − σ) (1 + β)         1
         H (ψ, θ, σ) ≡                  + σβ        ψ2                    (40)
                              φ                1−α
                         ·                            ¸
                                  αβ
                       − β+σ          − θ − (1 − φ) βθ ψ + βθφα.
                                1−α

For given values of the Social Security policy parameters θ and σ, the func-
tion H (ψ, θ, σ) is quadratic in ψ and thus has at most two real roots. If
H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0 has real roots, these roots are stationary values of the diﬀer-
ence equation in equation (38).


                                         19
                                         ψ
               A
                                             1     λH (0, σ )




                               λH(θ,σ)
                                                                    B

                               λL(θ,σ)


                                                                                    θ
           θ min (σ )                        O                  θ max (σ ) θ (σ )
                                             λ*L




                        Figure 2: Roots of H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0.

    Lemma 8 in Appendix B fully describes the roots of H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0, and
Figure 2 shows the two real roots λL (θ, σ) ≤ λH (θ, σ) as functions of the
replacement rate θ for a given value of the trust fund ratio σ. The horizontal
axis measures θ and the vertical axis shows the values of λi (θ, σ), i = L, H.
These roots represent the steady-state values of the investment-output ratio
ψ. For values of θ < θmax (σ), there are two real roots. The economically
interesting roots lie between 0 and 1, and these roots are represented by the
thick portion of the curve, which is arc OBA. For θ = 0, one root equals zero
                                                               (1−α)β+σαβ
and the other root is positive and equal to λH (0, σ) = φ (1−σ)(1+β)+σβφ     < 1.
Under laissez faire, θ = 0 and σ = 0, so the positive root becomes λH (0, 0) =
   β
φ 1+β (1 − α) ≡ ψ LF , which is consistent with Proposition 5.
    For negative values of θ, the equation H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0 has one positive root.
Provided that the negative value of θ is greater than θmin (σ) ≡ − φ1 1−α
                                                                        1−σ
                                                                            , this
root is less than one and thus is economically interesting.


                                             20
    For positive values of θ less than θmax (σ), the quadratic equation H (ψ, θ, σ) =
0 has two positive roots less than one.
    A stationary point, ψ t = ψ t−1 = λ of the diﬀerence equation in equa-
tion (38) is locally stable if the derivative h0 (λ) satisfies −1 < h0 (λ) < 1.
Lemma 9 in Appendix B, which describes the stability of a class of diﬀerence
equations containing the diﬀerence equation in equation (38), implies the
following proposition.21
Proposition 8 Suppose that θmin (σ) < θ < θmax (σ). Then H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0
has two distinct real roots λL (θ, σ) < λH (θ, σ). The larger root, λH (θ, σ),
is positive and ψ = λH (θ, σ) is a stable steady state of equation (38). If
λL (θ, σ) > 0 (equivalently, if θ > 0), then ψ = λL (θ, σ) is an unstable steady
state of equation (38).
Corollary 4 The laissez faire steady state, ψ = λH (0, 0) = ψ LF ≡ φ (1−α)β
                                                                       1+β
                                                                            ,
is stable.
   Proposition 8 implies that the economically interesting steady states that
are stable lie along the arc AB in Figure 2. This arc slopes downward and
thus implies the following proposition.
Proposition 9 Suppose that θmin (σ) < θ < θmax (σ). In the class of Social
Security policies with constant values of θt and σ t , the unique stable steady-
state value of ψ is a decreasing function of θ.
   The primary eﬀect reflected in Proposition 9 is that an increase in the
replacement rate θ increases retirement income and thus induces young con-
sumers to consume more and save less. The fall in national saving reduces
the investment-output ratio ψ.
   Corollary 6 in Appendix B implies the following proposition.
Proposition 10 Suppose that θmin (σ) < θ < θmax (σ). In the class of
Social Security policies with constant values of θt and σ t , the unique stable
steady-state value of ψ is an increasing function of σ.
   An increase in σ increases the saving of the Social Security system,
thereby increasing national saving and thus increasing ψ.
  21
    To apply Lemma 9 to equation (38), set a = (1 − α) (β − θ)+σαβ; b = −αβφθ (1 − α);
     (1−σ)(1+β)
d=       φ      + σβ; and e = βθ (1 − φ) (1 − α). Note that d > 0, be ≤ 0, and a + e
          £                                        ¤                β (1+σ 1−α
                                                                            α
                                                                               )
= (1 − α) (1 + β (1 − φ)) θ (σ) − (1 − β (1 − φ)) θ , where θ (σ) ≡ 1+β(1−φ)     . Since θ ≤
θmax (σ) and Lemma 6 states that θmax (σ) < θ (σ), a + e > 0.

                                            21
8      Defined-Contribution Social Security
In this section I consider a defined-contribution Social Security system in
which benefits paid to retirees equal the amount they would receive if their
taxes were invested on their behalf in capital. However, the Social Security
system I analyze need not be fully funded.
   In a defined-contribution Social Security system, a young consumer with
a wage income of wt in period t pays a tax of τ t wt in period t and receives a
benefit of Rt+1 τ t wt in period t + 1, so θt = τ t . I will assume that
                                                            β
                                      0 ≤ τ t = θt <                              (41)
                                                           1+β
so that the consumption of young consumers is less than their disposable
income.22
    I will confine attention to policies with constant values of τ t and θt . Set-
ting θt = τ t = τ in equations (26) and (27) yields
                                       φ      1−α
                             ψt =                   [(1 − τ ) β − τ ]             (42)
                                    1 − σ t+1 1 + β
and

             α − ψt                      1            τ
    τ + σt          + (σ t − σ t+1 )           ψt =       (αφ + (1 − φ) ψ t ) .   (43)
             1−α                     φ (1 − α)      ψ t−1

   Equations (42) and (43) govern the dynamic behavior of the investment-
output ratio ψ t and the trust fund ratio σ t . This two-equation system can
be written as a diﬀerence equation in ψ t by solving equation (42) for σ t+1 ,
substituting the result and an analogous result for σ t into equation (43), and
rearranging to obtain
                                    (α + β) ψ t−1 − αβφ (1 − α)
                          ψt =                                      .             (44)
                                  (1 + β) ψ t−1 + (1 − φ) β (1 − α)
   The steady-state values of ψ t are found by setting ψ t = ψ t−1 = ψ in
equation (44) and rewriting this equation to obtain the following quadratic
  22
    In a defined-contribution system, a young consumer has disposable income of
(1 − τ t ) wt and consumes cyt = 1+β
                                  1
                                     wt . Consumption will be smaller than disposable
             1                                            β
income if   1+β   < 1 − τ t , or equivalently if τ t <   1+β .


                                                  22
equation in ψ
                         [(1 + β) ψ − (1 − α) βφ] (ψ − α) = 0.                             (45)
                                                                                           β
The quadratic equation in (45) has two roots: α and ψ LF ≡ (1 − α)                        1+β
                                                                                              φ.
These roots, along with Lemma 9 in Appendix B, imply the following propo-
sition.23

Proposition 11 If τ t = θt is constant for all t, the steady-state value of the
                                                                            β
investment-output ratio is either the laissez faire value, ψ LF ≡ (1 − α) 1+β φ,
or the Golden Rule value, α, regardless of the constant value of θt = τ t . The
steady state with the higher value of ψ is stable, and the steady state with the
lower value of ψ is unstable.

   To determine the state-state value of the trust fund ratio, assume that ψ t
and σ t+1 are constant and rewrite equation (42) using the definition of ψ LF
in Proposition 5 to obtain
                                µ             ¶
                                      1+β       ψ LF
                        1−σ = 1−            τ        .                   (46)
                                        β        ψ

Equation (46) implies that in the steady state with ψ = ψ LF , the trust fund
ratio is
                                     1+β
                                σ=        τ.                              (47)
                                       β
With the trust fund ratio in equation (47), the value of the Social Security
                                          S
trust fund at the end of period t, qt Kt+1   , equals the value of the Social
Security taxes collected from young consumers in period t, τ t (1 − α) Yt .24
Thus, taxes collected from young consumers are fully invested on their behalf
by the Social Security system at the market rate of return. When these
consumers are old, they receive Social Security benefits equal to the amount
they would have had available from investing their Social Security taxes at the
market rate of return. Therefore, the lifetime profile of optimal consumption
is unchanged by the Social Security system, and the steady state is the laissez
  23
      To apply Lemma 9 to equation (44), set a = α + β; b = −αβφ (1 − α); d = 1 + β; and
e = (1 − φ) β (1 − α), so d > 0, be < 0, and a + e > 0.
                                                        β
   24     S
      qt Kt+1 = σqt Kt+1 = σ φ1 It = σ φ1 ψ LF Yt = σ 1+β  (1 − α) Yt = τ (1 − α) Yt , where the
first equality follows from the definition of the trust fund ratio σ, the second equality follows
from equation (7), the third equality follows from ψ = YItt and the fact that ψ = ψ LF , the
fourth equality from the definition of ψ LF , and the fifth equality follows from equation
(47).

                                               23
faire steady state. This invariance to the presence or size of a fully-funded
defined-contribution Social Security system is an example of the Ricardian
Equivalence Proposition.
    In the Golden Rule steady state, the trust fund ratio given by (46) is just
the right size to make the national capital-labor ratio equal to the Golden
Rule value.25


9      Concluding Remarks
I have shown that a baby boom will increase the price of capital. Specifically,
when baby boomers are in the labor force earning wage income, national
saving and investment are high. In the presence of convex adjustment costs,
or equivalently in a two-sector economy that produces consumption goods
and capital goods, a high rate of investment can be achieved only by driving
up the supply price of capital. Thus, a baby boom increases the price of
capital. However, the price of capital displays mean reversion (provided that
φ > 0), so that this increase in the price of capital is followed by a fall in the
price of capital in the following period.
    I included Social Security in the paper because it is an important part
of retirement income, and saving for retirement is a major component of the
model. I have shown how Social Security can be used to change national
saving and investment in the long run, and even to achieve the Golden Rule.
Although Social Security can aﬀect the investment-output ratio in the long
run, it does not aﬀect the price of capital in the long run. However, in the
model in this paper, the Social Security trust fund is held entirely in capital.
Further research would be needed to analyze any long-run impact of the
Social Security system on stock prices if the trustees of the trust fund can
decide how to allocate the assets between risky capital and riskless bonds.




  25
     In a Golden Rule steady state, qt Kt+1 = φ1 It = α  φ Yt . With a defined-contribution
social security system, the value of the capital held directly by young consumers at
the end of period t equals disposable income, (1 − τ ) (1 − α) Yt , minus their consump-
                  1                           P                             1
tion, which is 1+β   (1 − α) Yt .  Thus, qt Kt+1  = (1 − τ ) (1 − α) Yt − 1+β   (1 − α) Yt =
³           ´                                            P      ³        ´
                                                   q   K                   ψ LF
  1 − τ 1+β
         β
               β
              1+β (1 − α) Yt .  Therefore, 1 − σ = qtt Kt+1
                                                        t+1
                                                             = 1 − τ 1+β
                                                                       β     α , which sat-
isfies equation (46) with ψ = α.

                                            24
A     Interpretation as a Two-Sector Model
This appendix interprets the production and capital adjustment technologies
in equations (1) and (5) as a two-sector model in which labor, Nt , and capital,
Kt , are combined in period t to produce aggregate consumption, Ct , in period
t and a capital stock, Kt+1 , in period t + 1. Since It is the gross production
of consumption goods not consumed in period t,

                            It = At Ktα Nt1−α − Ct .                      (A.1)

Substitute equation (A.1) into equation (5) and rearrange to obtain the fol-
lowing representation of the two-sector technology
                                                 1        1
                                             1         1− φ
                     Ct = At Ktα Nt1−α − a− φ Kt+1
                                                φ
                                                   Kt         .           (A.2)

Given Nt and Kt , equation (A.2) shows that Ct is a decreasing, concave
function of Kt+1 , so that the production possibilities frontier between Ct and
Kt+1 slopes downward and is concave to the origin (see Figure 1 in Section
1). The right hand side of equation (A.2) is a linearly homogeneous function
of Nt , Kt , and Kt+1 . Thus, a doubling of the factor inputs Nt and Kt in
period t makes possible the doubling of the outputs Ct and Kt+1 .
    Diﬀerentiating equation (A.2) with respect to Kt+1 and using equation
(5) yields
                                          µ ¶1−φ
                             ∂Ct       1    It
                                  =−                 .                    (A.3)
                           ∂Kt+1      φa Kt
Comparing equations (6) and (A.3) verifies that price of capital qt equals
   ∂Ct
− ∂K t+1
         .
    The rental earned by capital in period t, expressed in units of consump-
tion, can be calculated by diﬀerentiating equation (A.2) with respect to Kt
and using equations (1) and (5) to obtain

                           ∂Ct    Yt   1 − φ It
                               =α    +          .                         (A.4)
                           ∂Kt    Kt     φ Kt

    Inspection of equations (9), (10), and (A.4) verifies that marginal product
of capital, measured in terms of consumption goods, equals ν C        K
                                                                 t + νt .




                                      25
B      Equilibrium Values of ψ and the Social Se-
       curity Parameters
This Appendix proves lemmas and corollaries that are useful in characterizing
the equilibrium values of ψ and the Social Security parameters.

                                                              β (1+σ 1−α
                                                                      α
                                                                         )
Lemma 1 Suppose that 0 < φ ≤ 1. Define θ (σ) ≡                  1+β−βφ
                                                                             > 0, λ∗L ≡
     βφα                               (1−α)β+σαβ           26
− 1+(1−φ)β < 0, and 0 < ψ 0 (σ) ≡ φ (1−σ)(1+β)+σβφ < 1.         H (ψ, θ, σ), defined
in equation (40), has the following properties:
    (1) sign (H (0, θ, σ)) = sign (θ)
                                   ¡ .         ¢
    (2) sign (Hψ (0, θ, σ)) = sign θ − θ (σ) .
    (3) sign (Hθ (ψ, θ, σ)) = sign (ψ − λ∗L ) .
    (4) sign (Hσ (ψ, θ, σ)) = −sign (ψ (ψ − λ∗L ))
    (5) H (ψ 0 (σ) , 0, σ) = 0.

    Proof. (1)¡ H (0, θ, ¢σ) = βθφα and βφα > 0. (2) Hψ (0, θ, σ) =
[1 + (1 − φ) β] θ − θ (σ) and 1+(1 − φ) β ≥ 0. (3) Hθ (ψ, θ, σ) = [1 + (1 − φ) β] (ψ − λ∗L )
and 1 + (1 − φ) β > 0. (4) Hσ (ψ, θ, σ) = − 1−α    1 1
                                                       [1 + (1 − φ) β] ψ (ψ − λ∗L )
                                           h³        φ        ´         ¡           ¢i
and 1+(1 − φ) β ≥ 0. (5) H (ψ, 0, σ) = (1−σ)(1+β) φ
                                                        +  σβ    1
                                                                1−α
                                                                    ψ −   β + σ  αβ
                                                                                1−α
                                                                                       ψ.
Substituting ψ 0 for ψ yields H (ψ 0 , 0, σ) = 0.

Lemma 2 Define ψ m (θ, σ) ≡ arg minψ H (ψ, θ, σ). Then sign (ψ m (θ, σ)) =
     ¡         ¢
−sign θ − θ (σ) and ∂ψm∂θ(θ,σ) < 0. If θ < θ (σ), then ∂ψm∂σ(θ,σ) > 0.
                                      h                 i
                                          (1−σ)(1+β)       1
    Proof. Since Hψψ (ψ, θ, σ) = 2            φ
                                                    + σβ 1−α  > 0, sign (ψ m (θ, σ)) =
                                  ¡         ¢
−sign (Hψ (0, θ, σ)) = −sign θ − θ (σ) where the final equality follows from
statement (2) of Lemma 1.
    Note that ψ m (θ, σ) satisfies Hψ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ) = 0. Diﬀerentiating this
expression with respect to θ yields Hψψ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ) ∂ψm∂θ(θ,σ) +Hψθ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ) =
                     Hψθ (ψ m (θ,σ),θ,σ)
0, so ∂ψm∂θ(θ,σ) = − Hψψ (ψ (θ,σ),θ,σ)
                                         . Hψθ (ψ, θ, σ) = 1 + (1 − φ) β > 0 and
                           m

Hψψ (ψ, θ, σ) > 0, so ∂ψm∂θ(θ,σ) < 0.
  Diﬀerentiating Hψ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ) = 0 with respect to σ yields
  26
     To prove that ψ 0 (σ)             <      1,   observe that ψ 0 (σ) − 1          =
                       −1
[(1 − σ) (1 + β) + σβφ] [φ (1 − α) β + φαβσ − (1 − σ) (1 + β) − σβφ]                 =
[(1 − σ) (1 + β) + σβφ]−1 (1 − σ) [(1 − α) φβ − (1 + β)] < 0.


                                           26
Hψψ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ) ∂ψm∂σ(θ,σ) +Hψσ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ) = 0, which implies ∂ψm∂σ(θ,σ) =
  Hψσ (ψ m (θ,σ),θ,σ)
− Hψψ (ψ (θ,σ),θ,σ)
                      . Observe that if θ < θ (σ), then Hψσ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ) =
        m
   1 1+(1−φ)β
− 1−α    φ
              (2ψ m (θ, σ) − λ∗L ) < 0 because θ < θ (σ) implies ψ m (θ, σ) > 0.
             ∂ψ m (θ,σ)
Therefore,      ∂σ
                          > 0.

Lemma 3 Define h (θ, σ) ≡ minψ H (ψ, θ, σ) = H (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ). If θ <
θ (σ), then h (θ, σ) is strictly increasing in θ and strictly decreasing in σ.

    Proof. Assume that θ < θ (σ). Note that ∂h(θ,σ)     ∂θ
                                                             = Hψ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ) ∂ψm∂θ(θ,σ) +
Hθ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ). Since ψm (θ, σ) minimizes H (ψ, θ, σ) with respect to
ψ, Hψ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ) = 0. Lemma 2 implies that ψ m (θ, σ) > 0 > λ∗L so
statement (3) of Lemma 1 implies that Hθ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ) > 0. Therefore,
∂h(θ,σ)
  ∂θ
        > 0.
    Note that ∂h(θ,σ)
                  ∂σ
                       = Hψ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ) ∂ψm∂σ(θ,σ) +Hσ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ). Again,
since ψ m (θ, σ) minimizes H (ψ, θ, σ) with respect to ψ, Hψ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ) =
0. Lemma 2 implies that ψ m (θ, σ) > 0 > λ∗L so statement (4) of Lemma 1
implies that Hσ (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ) < 0. Therefore, ∂h(θ,σ) ∂σ
                                                                < 0.

Lemma 4 If H (0, θ, σ) > 0 and Hψ (0, θ, σ) ≥ 0, then H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0 has
no positive real roots.
                              h               i
   Proof. Hψψ (ψ, θ, σ) = 2 (1−σ)(1+β)
                                  φ
                                        +  σβ    1
                                                1−α
                                                    > 0 implies that Hψ (ψ, θ, σ) >
Hψ (0, θ, σ) ≥ 0 for all ψ > 0. Therefore, H (ψ, θ, σ) > H (0, θ, σ) > 0 for all
ψ > 0.

Corollary 5 If θ ≥ θ (σ) , then H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0 has no positive real roots.

   Proof. If θ ≥ θ (σ), then statements (1) and (2) of Lemma 1 imply
H (0, θ, σ) ≥ 0 and Hψ (0, θ, σ) > 0. Therefore, Lemma 4 implies that
H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0 has no positive real roots.

Lemma 5 H (λ∗L , θ, σ) > 0 and is independent of θ and σ, where λ∗L ≡
    βφα
− 1+(1−φ)β < 0.
                          h                i         £          ¤ ∗
   Proof. H (λ∗L , θ, σ) = (1−σ)(1+β)
                               φ
                                      + σβ    1
                                             1−α L
                                                             αβ
                                                λ∗2 − β + σ 1−α  λL =            1+β 1
                                                                                       λ∗2 −
                                                                                  φ 1−α L
  ∗                                                      ∗
βλL is independent of θ and σ, and is positive because λL < 0.


                                           27
                                            ¡       ¢
Lemma 6 If φ > 0, ∃ a unique θmax (σ) ∈ 0, θ (σ) such that H (ψ, θmax (σ) , σ) =
                                                      β (1+σ 1−α
                                                              α
                                                                 )
0 has a (positive) repeated real root, where θ (σ) ≡ 1+β−βφ        > 0. θmax (σ)
is strictly increasing in σ.

    Proof. Define h (θ, σ) ≡ minψ H    ¡ (ψ, θ,αβ
                                                σ) ¢= H (ψ m (θ, σ) , θ, σ). Since
H (0, 0, σ) = 0 and Hψ (0, 0, σ) = − β + σ 1−α       < 0, h (0, σ) < 0. Lemma 2
                  ¡         ¢                      ¡        ¢       ¡            ¢
implies that ψ m θ (σ) , σ = 0. Therefore, h θ (σ) , σ = H 0, θ (σ) , σ =
βθφα
  ¡    > 0.¢ Since h (θ, σ) is a continuous function ¡ ¢ of θ, h (0, σ) < 0 <
h θ (σ) , σ implies that there exists a θmax (σ) ∈ 0, θ such that h (θmax (σ) , σ) =
0. Lemma 3 implies that   ¡ h (θ,¢σ) is strictly increasing in θ for θ < θ (σ) , so
the value of θmax (σ) ∈ 0, θ (σ) for which h (θmax (σ) , σ) = 0 is unique. Dif-
ferentiate h (θmax (σ) , σ) = 0 with respect to σ to obtain ∂h(θmax
                                                                  ∂θ
                                                                     (σ),σ) 0
                                                                           θmax (σ)+
                                                      ∂h(θ max (σ),σ)
∂h(θmax (σ),σ)
     ∂σ
                 = 0. Therefore, θ0max (σ) = − ∂h(θmax
                                                    ∂σ
                                                       (σ),σ) . Since θ max (σ) < θ (σ),
                                                            ∂θ
                        ∂h(θmax (σ),σ)             ∂h(θmax (σ),σ)
Lemma 3 implies              ∂θ
                                         > 0 and        ∂σ
                                                                    < 0, so that θ0max (σ) > 0.


Corollary 6 If θ ≤ θmax (σ), then H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0 has two real roots λL (θ, σ) ≤
λH (θ, σ) with the following properties: λH (θ, σ) > 0, λL (θ, σ) >³λ∗L . If ´θ <
θmax (σ), the roots are distinct, ∂λL∂θ(θ,σ) > 0, ∂λH∂θ(θ,σ) < 0, sign ∂λL∂σ
                                                                           (θ,σ)
                                                                                 =
                              ∂λH (θ,σ)
−sign (λL (θ, σ)), and          ∂σ
                                          > 0.

     Proof. Lemma 3 states that h (θ, σ) is strictly increasing in θ for θ <
θ (σ). Since h (θmax (σ) , σ) = 0, h (θ, σ) < 0 for θ < θmax (σ). Therefore,
H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0 has a repeated real root if θ = θmax (σ) and has two distinct
real roots if θ < θmax (σ).
     To prove that λH (θ, σ) > 0, use statement (2) ofh Lemma 1 to infer   i that
                                                          (1−σ)(1+β)          1
Hψ (0, θ, σ) < 0. Therefore, since Hψψ (ψ, θ, σ) = 2          φ
                                                                     + σβ 1−α    >
                                                                 ∗
0, 0 < ψ m (θ, σ) ≤ λH (θ, σ) . To prove that λL (θ, σ) > λL , suppose that
λL (θ, σ) ≤ λ∗L . Since λ∗L < 0 < λH (θ, σ) , λ∗L ∈ [λL (θ, σ) , λH (θ, σ)].
Hψψ (ψ, θ, σ) > 0 implies that H (ψ, θ, σ) ≤ 0 for all ψ ∈ [λL (θ, σ) , λH (θ, σ)].
Therefore, H (λ∗L , θ, σ) ≤ 0, which contradicts Lemma 5. Hence, λL (θ, σ) >
λ∗L . To determine the eﬀect of θ on each of the roots, observe that Hψψ (ψ, θ, σ) >
0 implies that if there are two distinct real roots, then Hψ (λL (θ, σ) , θ, σ) < 0
and Hψ (λH (θ, σ) , θ, σ) > 0.       Statement (3) in Lemma 1 implies that
Hθ (λL (θ, σ) , θ, σ) > 0 and Hθ (λH (θ, σ) , θ, σ) > 0. Applying the implicit

                                                 28
function theorem to H (λi (θ, σ) , θ, σ) = 0 for i = L, H implies ∂λL∂θ(θ,σ) =
   Hθ (λL (θ,σ),θ,σ)
−H  ψ (λL (θ,σ),θ,σ)
                      > 0 and ∂λH∂θ(θ,σ) = − H
                                             Hθ (λH (θ,σ),θ,σ)
                                               ψ (λH (θ,σ),θ,σ)
                                                                < 0. Since λL (θ, σ) > λ∗L ,
statement (4) in Lemma 1 implies that sign (Hσ (λL (θ, σ) , θ, σ)) = −sign³(λL (θ, σ))                ´
                                                                                            ∂λL (θ,σ)
and Hσ (λH (θ, σ) , θ, σ) < 0. The implicit function theorem implies sign                     ∂σ
                                                                                                        =
         ³                     ´
            Hσ (λL (θ,σ),θ,σ)
−sign H       ψ (λL (θ,σ),θ,σ)
                                 = −sign (λL (θ, σ)) and ∂λH∂σ(θ,σ) = − H Hσ (λH (θ,σ),θ,σ)
                                                                           ψ (λH (θ,σ),θ,σ)
                                                                                             >
0.
Corollary 7 If θ > θmax (σ), then H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0 has no real roots.
    Proof. The proof of Lemma 6 states that h (θmax (σ) , σ) = 0 and Lemma
3 states that h (θ, σ) is strictly increasing in θ for θ < θ (σ). Therefore,
h (θ, σ) > 0 for θmax (σ) < θ < θ (σ) and H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0 has no real roots
for θmax (σ) < θ < θ (σ). Corollary 5 states that H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0 has no real
roots for θ > θ (σ).
Lemma 7 Define θmin (σ) ≡ − φ1 1−α
                               1−σ
                                   < 0.                 Then λH (θmin (σ) , σ) = 1 and
 ∗
λL < λL (θmin (σ) , σ) < 0.
                                                   ³              ´
                                                        1 1−σ
    Proof. It is straightforward to show that H 1, − φ 1−α , σ = 0. State-
ment (1) of Lemma 1 implies that H (0, θmin (σ) , σ) < 0 which implies that
λL (θmin (σ) , σ) < 0. Corollary 6 implies that λ∗L < λL (θmin (σ) , σ) .
    The following lemma summarizes the values of the roots for various values
of θ.
                                                         β (1+σ 1−α
                                                                 α
                                                                    )
Lemma 8 Suppose that 0 < φ ≤ 1. Define θ (σ) ≡ 1+β−βφ                 > 0, λ∗L ≡
      βφα                                                         (1−α)β+σαβ
− 1+(1−φ)β   < 0, θmin (σ) ≡ − φ1 1−α
                                  1−σ
                                      < 0, and 0 < ψ 0 (σ) ≡ φ (1−σ)(1+β)+σβφ  <
                              ¡        ¢
1. ∃ a unique θmax (σ) ∈ 0, θ (σ) such that H (ψ, θmax (σ) , σ) = 0 has a
(positive) repeated real root, and θmax (σ) is strictly increasing in σ. The
roots λL (θ, σ) ≤ λH (θ, σ) of H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0 depend on θ as follows:
     (1) If θ > θmax (σ) > 0, then H (ψ, θ, σ) = 0 has no positive real roots.
     (2) If θ = θmax (σ) > 0, then 0 < λL (θ, σ) = λH (θ, σ) < λH (0, σ) =
ψ 0 (σ) < 1.
     (3) If 0 < θ < θmax (σ), then 0 < λL (θ, σ) < λH (θ, σ) < λH (0, σ) =
ψ 0 (σ) < 1.
     (4) If θ = 0, then λL (θ, σ) = 0 and 0 < λH (θ, σ) = ψ 0 (σ) < 1.
     (5) If θmin (σ) < θ < 0, then λ∗L < λL (θ, σ) < 0 < ψ 0 (σ) < λH (θ, σ) < 1.
     (6) If θ = θmin (σ), then λ∗L < λL (θ, σ) < 0 and λH (θ, σ) = 1.
     (7) If θ < θmin (σ), then λ∗L < λL (θ, σ) < 0 and λH (θ, σ) > 1.

                                              29
                                             axt−1 +b
Lemma 9 Suppose that xt = f (xt−1 ) ≡ dx       t−1 +e
                                                      where d > 0, a + e > 0 and
be ≤ 0. The positive steady-state values of x (for which xt = xt−1 = x), if
they exist, are given by the positive real roots of Q (x) ≡ dx2 +ex−ax−b = 0.
Suppose that Q (x) = 0 has two distinct real roots λL < λH . If λH > 0, it is
locally stable. If λL > 0, it is locally unstable.

    Proof. The roots λL and λH satisfy Q (λi ) = dλ2i +eλi −aλi −b = 0 for i =
L, H. Q00 = 2d > 0 implies that Q0 (λL ) < 0 < Q0 (λH ). Confine attention
to positive roots λi > 0. First prove, by contradiction that dλi + e > 0.
Assume that dλi + e ≤ 0, which implies that e < 0 because d > 0 and λi > 0.
Since e < 0, a + e > 0 implies a > 0, and be ≤ 0 implies b ≥ 0. Therefore,
aλi + b > 0. But Q (λi ) = 0 implies (dλi + e) λi = aλi + b > 0, which
contradicts dλi + e ≤ 0 for λi > 0. Therefore, dλi + e > 0. Therefore,
      aλi +b
λi = dλ i +e
             = f (λi ), so xt = xt−1 = λi satisfies the equation of motion for
                                           aλi +b             aλi +b
xt . Observe that f 0 (λi ) = dλai +e − d (dλ +e)2
                                                   . Use λi = dλi +e
                                                                     to rewrite the
                                             i
                                                                             a−dλi
second term on the right hand side and simplify to obtain f 0 (λi ) =        dλi +e
                                                                                    ,
                                                       Q0 (λi )
which implies that f 0 (λi ) − 1 = − 2dλdλi +e−a
                                            i +e
                                                  = − dλi +e . If λH > 0, then
dλH + e > 0, which, along with Q (λH ) > 0, implies f 0 (λH ) − 1 < 0. Also,
                                     0

note that f 0 (λi ) + 1 = dλa+e
                             i +e
                                  > 0. Therefore, −1 < f 0 (λH ) < 1, so λH is
locally stable. If λL > 0, then dλL + e > 0, which, along with Q0 (λL ) < 0,
implies f 0 (λL ) − 1 > 0. Therefore, f 0 (λL ) > 1, so λL is locally unstable.




                                        30
References
[1] Abel, Andrew B., “On the Invariance of the Rate of Return to Con-
    vex Adjustment Costs,” Review of Economic Dynamics, 5, 3 (July 2002),
    586-601.

[2] Abel, Andrew B., “Will Bequests Attenuate the Predicted
    Meltdown in Stock Prices When Baby Boomers Retire?”
    Review of Economics and Statistics, 83, 4 (November 2001), 589-595.

[3] Abel, Andrew B., Mankiw, N. Gregory, Summers, Lawrence H., and
    Zeckhauser, Richard J., “Assessing Dynamic Eﬃciency: Theory and
    Evidence,” Review of Economic Studies, 56 (1989), 1-20.

[4] Basu, Parantap, “An Adjustment Cost Model of Asset Pricing,”
    International Economic Review, 28, 3 (October 1987), 609-621

[5] Bohn, Henning, “Social Security and Demographic Uncertainty: The
    Risk Sharing Properties of Alternative Policies,” National Bureau of Eco-
    nomic Research Working Paper No. 7030, March 1999.

[6] Diamond, Peter A., “National Debt in a Neoclassical Growth Model,”
    American Economic Review, 55, 5 (December 1965), 1126-1150.

[7] Hall, Robert E., “The Stock Market and Capital Accumulation,”
    American Economic Review, 91, 5 (December 2001), 1185-1202.

[8] Lucas, Robert E., Jr., “Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy,”
    Econometrica, 46 (1978) 1429-1445.

[9] Zilcha, Itzhak, “Characterizing Eﬃciency in Stochastic Overlapping Gen-
    erations Models,” Journal of Economic Theory, 55, 1 (October 1991), 1-
    16.




                                     31
