NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ORPHANS IN AFRICA
Anne Case
Christina Paxson
Joseph Ableidinger
Working Paper 9213
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9213
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
September 2002

We thank Angus Deaton and seminar participants at Princeton University for helpful comments,
and Thu Vu for excellent research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Anne Case, Christina Paxson, and Joseph Ableidinger. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

Orphans in Africa
Anne Case, Christina Paxson, and Joseph Ableidinger
NBER Working Paper No. 9213
September 2002
JEL No. I1, D1
ABSTRACT
We examine the impact of orphanage on the living arrangements and school enrollment of
children in Sub-Saharan Africa, using data from 19 Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS)
conducted in 10 countries between 1992 and 2000. We find that orphans in Africa on average live
in poorer households than non-orphans, and are significantly less likely than non-orphans to be
enrolled in school. However, orphans’ lower school enrollment is not explained by their poverty:
orphans are equally less likely to be enrolled in school relative both to non-orphans as a group and
to the non-orphans with whom they live. Consistent with the predictions of Hamilton’s Rule, we find
that outcomes for orphans depend largely on the degree of relatedness of the orphan to the household
head. Children living in households headed by non-parental relatives fare systematically worse than
those living with parental heads, and those living in households headed by nonrelatives fare worse
still. Much of the gap between the schooling of orphans and non-orphans is explained by the greater
tendency of orphans to live with more distant relatives or unrelated caregivers.

Anne Case
345 Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton NJ 08544
(609) 258-2177
and NBER
accase@princeton.edu

Christina Paxson
316 Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton NJ 08544
(609) 258-6474
and NBER
cpaxson@princeton.edu

Joseph Ableidinger
Center for Health and Wellbeing
Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton NJ 08544

1. Introduction
More than 15 percent of adults in Sub-Saharan Africa are infected with HIV, and prevalence rates
are as high as 25 percent in many Southern African countries (UNAIDS/WHO 2000). Death of
prime aged adults has led to pronounced concentrations of orphans in Uganda, Malawi,
Mozambique, Zambia and Zimbabwe, where nearly 15 percent of all children under the age of 15
have lost one or both parents. In this paper, we examine the impact of orphanage on the living
arrangements and school enrollment of children in Sub-Saharan Africa, using data from 19
Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS) conducted in 10 countries between 1992 and 2000.
Some researchers argue that orphans are not at any particular disadvantage over equally
poor non-orphans (Foster and Shakespeare 1995). In many countries in sub-Saharan Africa,
kinship fostering of orphans and non-orphans is common, and is often seen as a way of
reallocating resources based on need, ability, and prospective benefit (Isiugo-Abanihe 1985).
Kamali et al (1996) argue that orphans in South-West Uganda are “generally well looked after”
within the community and by extended family (page 509). Lundberg and Over (2000) point to the
role played by the network of family and friends, suggesting that wealth within such networks is
used as a form of insurance in times of crisis. Lloyd and Blanc (1996) argue that schooling
investments in all children depend primarily on the collective pool of kin-resources and individual
children’s academic promise, and less on their biological parents’ financial positions or vital
status. In this view, adult death adversely affects resources available to all children in a
kinship—non-orphans as well as orphans— but there are no additional effects on investments in
orphans. This is one of the points made in a new publication on AIDS and education from the
World Bank (2002), which calls the relationship between orphanage and school enrollment

“unclear” and notes that in low enrollment countries both orphans and non-orphans face schooling
constraints (page 18).
An alternative view is that children who are cared for by adults other than their parents are
disadvantaged, even holding resources fixed. Research by Bishai et al (2001) argues that
biological relatedness is an important predictor of the quality of care offered to children by
different providers. Foster parents may not have the same altruistic ties to the children, and may
be less likely to realize financial gains from investments made in orphans, leading to weaker
incentives to invest in such children. African children who continue to live with a surviving parent
may be absorbed into households in which other adults control the available resources, or may
gain a step-parent who does not have the same incentives as the biological parent they lost. The
death of a mother may leave children especially vulnerable, even among those who continue to
live with their father and who experience no reduction in income. Household expenditure on
child-related goods—in particular, on healthy foods—is lower when a child’s biological mother is
absent (Case et al 2000). Moreover, mothers are generally the gate-keepers for their children’s
health investments (Case and Paxson 2001).
Understanding the risks that orphans face is important for policy. If extended families do
provide adequate insurance, then government policies need not target orphans specifically.
Households could be singled out for help on the basis of other indicators (income poverty, for
example).1 On the other hand if, holding all else equal, orphans are at risk for lower investments,
then governments may be well advised to target orphans specifically when designing policies to

1

Urassa et al (1997) and Lundberg and Over (2000) argue against targeting based on orphanage. Urassa et al state
that in rural Tanzania many non-orphans live in poorer households than do orphans. Lundberg and Over argue
that “indiscriminate provision of assistance [to orphans] is both fiscally irresponsible and socially inefficient” (page
13).

2

improve such outcomes as school enrollment. A related issue is whether the effects of orphanage
differ across boys and girls. There is a presumption in much of the literature that female orphans
are at a disadvantage. A recent report from the World Bank states that “girls are more likely than
boys to be retained at home for domestic work when household income drops due to AIDS
deaths or to care for sick relatives” (p. 21).2 Another report states that “one of the more
unfortunate responses to a prime-age-adult death in poorer households is that of removing the
children (especially girls) from schools (UNAIDS, 2002, pp. 48-49.) To the extent that female
orphans are at a disadvantage, it could be because adult deaths reduce household resources, and
girls in poorer households are generally less likely to attend school than boys. Or, it could be that
foster parents discriminate against girl orphans relative to boys. Understanding whether and why
girls are disadvantaged is an important policy concern.
In the sections that follow, we present evidence that orphans in Africa on average live in
poorer households than non-orphans, and are significantly less likely than non-orphans to be
enrolled in school. However, orphans’ lower school enrollment is not explained by their poverty:
orphans are equally less likely to be enrolled in school relative both to non-orphans as a group and
to the non-orphans with whom they live. Furthermore, we find no evidence that female orphans
are systematically disadvantaged. Consistent with the predictions of Hamilton’s Rule, we find that
outcomes for orphans depend largely on the degree of relatedness of the orphan to the household
head. Children living in households headed by non-parental relatives fare systematically worse
than those living with parental heads, and those living in households headed by non-relatives fare

2

However, this report is internally inconsistent in its stance on the effects of orphanage on the school enrollment of
girls versus boys, and states elsewhere that “in most cases, the gender gap among double orphans is similar to the
gender gap among children living with their parents” (p. 18).

3

worse still. Much of the gap between the schooling of orphans and non-orphans is explained by
the greater tendency of orphans to live with more distant relatives or unrelated caregivers.

2. Rates of orphanage and living arrangements
Data and definitions
We use information for children, aged 14 and under, collected in 19 Demographic and Health
Surveys (DHS). The surveys collected data on household living arrangements, housing quality and
durable goods ownership, years of completed education and current enrollment status for all
children in the household, and the vital status of their parents. The sample in each country-year is
typically a stratified random sample of all non-institutional households, which allows us to assess
the prevalence of orphanage in non-institution based populations.3 Because the survey misses
children who live in orphanages or on the street, the rates of orphanage we compute are likely to
be too low. There are no reliable national estimates of the numbers of children who live in
institutions or are homeless.
The surveys ask a responsible adult to list each household member, and to indicate the
vital status of each child’s parents (living, deceased or unknown). There is no information on the
cause of parental death, so AIDS orphans cannot be separated from others. If a parent is noted to
be living, the interviewer finds out whether the parent lives in the household. If so, his or her
household identification number is noted, so the child’s record can be linked to that of the parent.
We divide children into four mutually exclusive categories for our analysis. “Non-orphans”
are children with two living parents. “Maternal orphans” are children whose mothers are

3

In some country-years, sections of countries were excluded due to civil unrest or excessive violence. The DHS
website provides details: http://www.measuredhs.com/

4

deceased and whose fathers are known to be living. Similarly, “paternal orphans” are those whose
fathers are deceased and whose mothers are known to be living. Defining “double orphans” is
complicated by the fact that some children have parents whose vital status is unknown to the
respondent: 1.16% of children have mothers in this category and 1.94% have fathers in this
category. We define “double orphans” as children for whom either both parents are deceased, or
one parent is deceased and the other parent has unknown vital status, or both parents have
unknown vital status. We experimented with alternative definitions of double orphans, for
example counting children as double orphans only if both parents are known to be deceased, with
little effect on our results. We prefer the broader definition of double orphans because, if both
parents have unknown vital status, or if one parent is deceased and the other has unknown vital
status, it is unlikely that these parents (even if alive) exert any influence on their children’s care.
We have chosen these mutually exclusive categories to allow easier identification of the impact of
the death of one parent, and to separate this from the impact of the loss of both parents.4

Rates of orphanage
The countries we use are mapped in Figure 1. Altogether, these 10 countries account for
approximately 27% of the children living in Sub-Saharan Africa, and 50% of the AIDS orphans.5
Seven of the 10 countries—Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Malwai, Mozambique, Zambia and
Zimbabwe—are in the “AIDS belt” that extends from Eastern into Southern Africa. All of these

4

Children with one living parent and another parent whose vital status is unknown are not classified as orphans or
non-orphans: 0.86% of children fall into this category.

5

The fraction of AIDS orphans living in the 10 countries is based on data from the UNAIDS (2000), which
provides a measure of “cumulative orphans” for each country. “Cumulative orphans” are defined as the estimated
number of children who lost their mother or both parents to AIDS by age 15, from the epidemic’s onset through to
the end of 1999.

5

countries have orphan rates in excess of 9 percent, with Uganda (2000), Zambia (1996) and
Zimbabwe (1999) in excess of 12
percent. In the countries we analyze where the fraction of orphans is lowest—the West African
countries of Niger and Ghana—the adult AIDS rates are relatively low.6
Figure 2 shows orphan rates, by the age of the child, in each of the survey years we
examine. A common characteristics across all countries is that orphan rates increase with age, so
that school-age children are at higher risk of orphanage than younger children. In Mozambique
(1997), Uganda (2000), Zambia (1996), and Zimbabwe (1999), a quarter or more of 14-year-olds
had lost one or both parents. Interpretation of the graphs requires care, since they necessarily
confound age and cohort effects. In countries in which AIDS rates are climbing, orphan rates
among older children may be higher in 10 years than the rates shown on the graphs.
Countries differ in how orphan rates have changed over time. For example, although
estimates of orphanage in Uganda are quite high in both 1995 and 2000, the estimated rates have
remained stable. Uganda may have reached a saturation point in the spread of the disease.
However, these results are also consistent with reports on the success of Ugandan prevention
programs and the diminution of HIV prevalence rates there.7 Ghana, Niger and Tanzania have
also maintained steady orphan rates, while in Kenya, Malawi and, especially, Zambia and
Zimbabwe, the fraction of children of each age who are orphans grew over the 1990's.

6

Nigeria has a high rate of AIDS and orphanage, and conducted a DHS in 1999 that contains information on the
vital status of children’s parents. We do not use this survey because the quality of these data appears to be low.
Relative to surveys from other countries, there are substantially more children in the Nigerian DHS with both
parents of “unknown” vital status. The data collection for this survey was not supervised by Macro International,
which conducted the other surveys, and we are concerned that the same protocols may not have been used by the
data collectors as in other countries.

7

See www.unaids.org/fact_sheets/files/Africa_Eng.html for discussion.

6

Table 1 shows statistics on the fractions of children who are maternal, paternal, and
double orphans. A (non-population weighted) average over the country-years analyzed here
indicates that 2.4 percent of children aged 14 or younger are maternal orphans and more than
twice that percentage (5.7) are paternal orphans.8 Roughly 2 percent of children surveyed have
lost both parents (either deceased or vital status unknown), and 10 percent of children have lost
one or both parents. The fractions of children who are maternal, paternal, or double orphans at
each age, for the most recent year of data available, can be seen in Figure 3. In some countries, in
particular, Kenya, Namibia, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe, the fractions of children
who have lost a father are markedly larger than those who have lost a mother. In other countries,
including the two West African countries in which HIV/AIDS rates are thought to be lower
(Ghana and Niger), the differential loss of fathers is small.

Living arrangements
Children who lose a parent through death often experience additional changes in the set of adults
who provide them with care. Many maternal and paternal orphans are “virtual” double orphans,
who lost the care of both parents when one died. Traditions of patrilineage may dictate that
paternal orphans remain with paternal relatives rather than with their mothers; remarriage and
migration among widows and widowers may also result in separation of children from their
surviving parents (see Foster 1996, Ntozi and Nakayiwa 1999, and Monk 2000).

8

Throughout the paper we will treat the results for each country-year as one observation, and for this reason we do
not population-weight our cross-country summary statistics. However, our results are robust to population
weighting. (The statistics reported for each country-year taken individually have been population weighted, to
make them nationally representative.)

7

Table 2 provides evidence on the importance of “virtual” double orphans. Columns 1 and
2 show the fraction of non-orphans and maternal orphans who live with their fathers, and columns
3 and 4 show the fraction of non-orphans and paternal orphans who live with their mothers. In all
of the country-years examined, paternal orphans (who by definition have mothers who are alive)
are less likely to live with their mothers than are non-orphans. In many countries these differences
are large and have become more pronounced in later years. In Tanzania, for example, 73.5
percent of children whose fathers were dead lived with their mothers in 1992, a statistic that drops
to 63.4 percent by 1999. At the same time, the fraction of non-orphans living with their mothers
remained constant, at 84 percent. The relative differences in living arrangements between orphans
and non-orphans are even larger for children who have lost a mother (columns 3 and 4). For
example, in Zambia, in 1996, only 40 percent of maternal orphans lived with their fathers,
compared with 74 percent of non-orphans. These differences have become larger with time. In
Malawi, 52 percent of maternal orphans lived with their fathers in 1992; only 27 percent of
maternal orphans lived with their fathers by 2000. In Tanzania, the fraction of maternal orphans
who lived with their fathers declines from 56 percent in 1992 to 37 percent in 1999.
In most of the country-years we analyze, orphans live in household with smaller numbers
of members (see Appendix Table 1).9 However, the gap in household size is always less than one
member, indicating either that adult deaths strike larger households or that, when an adult dies,
households gain new adult members or are absorbed into other households. The fraction of
members who are children is also not systematically larger for orphan households, which is
consistent with adult deaths striking households with fewer children per adult, or with a

9

We restrict attention in Appendix Table 1 to children aged 6-14, since the following analyses of school enrollment
are based on this sample.

8

reshuffling of household members after a death occurs. In all countries, orphans are more likely to
live in households with a higher fraction of elderly members, and with less well educated heads. In
addition, orphans are more likely to live in households headed by women. These patterns are
consistent with evidence highlighting the role of grandparents, and often grandmothers, in the care
of orphans (Hunter 1990, Ntozi 1997).
In the next section, we present a model of household resource allocation that allows us to
analyze the effects of household living arrangements and income on the school enrollment of
orphans and non-orphans.

3. Household resource allocation
A model of equal intra-household allocation
To begin, we define a household h as consisting of Nh adults and nh children. Children within
households need not be siblings—and in fact 30% of the households in our sample contain
children who do not all share the same relationship to the household head.10 We work with a
simple model in which there are no household economies of scale in consumption and a child is
assumed to require resources of β (where β<1) to achieve the same living standard as an adult
with resources of 1. Resources are allocated to equalize welfare across all household members.
Let yh denote total income per adult, equal to the sum of all adult’s earnings plus net transfers
from other households in their extended family, divided by the number of household adults.
Expenditure on each adult ( C A ) and child ( C C ) equals:

10

Children who share the same relationship to the household head are not necessarily full siblings—for example,
two children who are grandchildren of the head could be cousins. For this reason, 30% is a lower bound on the
fraction of households that contain groups of children who are not full siblings.

9

CA

yh
1  β nh/Nh

,

CC

β yh
1  β nh/Nh

.

(1)

Expenditures on children include both current consumption as well as investments made in
children’s health and education, and in the empirical work that follows we will focus only on
education.11
How does the death of an adult affect the living standards of household members? Assume
I

that each household begins with Nh initial adult members, a fraction
Nh

sh

of whom survive, so that

I

 sh N h . Each initial adult has bh children, f h of whom are fostered to other households to

live, so that the number of children living in a household is ( b h  f h ) N I . The ratio of children to
adults in the household equals ( b h  f h ) / s h . Substituting into (1), the living standard of each child
in the household can be expressed as:
C

Ch 

β yh
1 β(b h  f h ) / s h

.

In what follows, it will be useful to work with the logarithm of expenditure per child. Taking
logarithms and applying a first-order Taylor expansion to ln( 1 β

b f
) , and suppressing the
s

household subscript, the logarithm of expenditure per child can be expressed as:
lnC C  lnβ  lny β

( b  f)
.
s

(2)

We summarize the routes through which changes in the survival probability affect the living
standards of children as follows:
εC ,s  εy,s 

β( b f )
[ 1  εb  f, s ] ,
s

11

These expenditure functions can be derived from an additively separable utility function of the form:
A
C
Uh  v ( Ch )  nh β v (Ch / β) .

10

(3)

where εC,s is the elasticity of child expenditure with respect to adult survival, εy ,s is the elasticity of
average adult income with respect to adult survival, and εb  f,s is the elasticity of the birth rate net
of foster-care out-placements with respect to adult survival. The term εy ,s will be positive if adult
deaths are concentrated among adults whose earnings are higher than the household average, and
if the households that experience deaths do not receive transfers to fully compensate for changes
in earnings per adult. The term εb  f,s will be positive if birth rates net of fosterage are higher in
households with higher adult survival. A sufficient condition for lower survival to depress living
standards is that the elasticity of earnings with respect to adult survival is positive, and the
elasticity of the birth rate net of foster care out-placements with respect to the survival rate is less
than 1.12
This conclusion applies only to the living standards of individuals who remain in the
household, and does not address the effects of sending children–presumably orphans—to live
elsewhere. All else equal, households to which orphans are sent will experience an increase in the
ratio of children to adults. Unless there is an offsetting increase in transfers to or reductions in
birthrates in the foster household, the living standards of the members of the child’s new
household will decline. The model is silent as to how an adult death affects the living standards of
children who change households. Orphans could be placed in households that are wealthier or
poorer than their households of origin.
Several important points come out of this model. First, adult deaths will not necessarily
result in declines in investments in children. The effect of a death on living standards depends on

12

Although we have not modeled this possibility, the death of an adult may result in new adult members moving
into the household, reducing the ratio of children to adults and changing income per adult. We have also not
modeled the effects of medical care and funeral costs that result from the illness and death, which all else equal
would reduce household resources and living standards.

11

whether the deceased adult was a high earner within his or her household, whether transfers
increase in response to the death, whether the household responds by placing children in foster
care, and whether households into which orphans are placed are richer or poorer than the
household of origin. The extent to which investments in children are insured against the death of
their parents (or other adults living in their households) is of great interest. However, models of
insurance cannot be tested without longitudinal data on children and their extended families.
Second, even if households provide equal treatment to all children, it is not the case that
orphans and non-orphans in the population will experience the same investment levels. Unless
child fostering is so extensive that it results in the random placement of children across
households, we expect orphans will be over-represented in households in which an adult death has
occurred. To the extent that adult deaths produce declines in household living standards, orphans
will be more likely than non-orphans to experience such declines. However, the living standards of
orphans relative to non-orphans will be affected by the correlation between household income and
the adult survival probability across households within the population. Evidence from Africa
indicates that, at least early in the AIDS crisis, infection rates may have been higher among richer
and better educated individuals (see Ainsworth and Semali, 1998). If so, it would not be
surprising to find that orphans were on average wealthier than non-orphans. If AIDS is becoming
more of a poor person’s disease—which could happen if prevention measures are more quickly
adopted by the wealthy—we would expect to see the living standards of orphans relative to nonorphans decline over time.

Testable implications of the equal intra-household allocation model

12

The model above has the following testable implications. First, given household resources y and
the dependency rate n/N , investments in orphans and non-orphans will be identical. If household
resources are measured with error—as will be the case using DHS data, where we have limited
information on items other than household durables—we could find a spurious correlation
between orphanage and school enrollment that is attributable to mismeasurement of household
income. If orphans live in poorer households, and income is measured with error, some of the
effects of poverty will be picked up by the orphan indicator. We can test whether this is the reason
for differential enrollment of orphans and non-orphans by comparing the investments made in
orphans relative to those made in non-orphans living in the same household, using household fixed
effect models. If household resources determine children’s school enrollment and if resources are
shared equally within households, we would expect children in the same households to receive
equal educational investments.
A second test of whether outcomes for orphans are due to poverty is based on a
comparison of the patterns of school investments and durables for orphans and non-orphans. If
both school investments and household durables are positively related to household resources, as
measured by y/( 1 βn/N ) , then the relationship we observe between orphanage and durables
should be mirrored by the pattern we observe between orphanage and school investments.
Specifically, for different groups of orphans—paternal, maternal, and double orphans—we
examine whether groups that have on average lower levels of household durables are also less
likely to be enrolled in school.

Orphans, Caregivers and Hamilton’s Rule

13

The model above assumed that orphans and non-orphans living in the same households receive
identical treatment, and that any disadvantage orphans face is due to the poverty of the
households in which they are raised. However, there are many reasons why the amount invested in
a child may depend on the nature of the relationship between the child and the decision-making
adults in the child’s household. Adults may be willing to invest more in their own children, both
because their affinity to their own children is greater, and because they are more likely to receive
transfers from their children later in life. The idea that parents invest more than non-parents is
consistent also with arguments from evolutionary biology. Hamilton (1964 a,b) hypothesizes that
altruistic behavior between any two individuals will depend upon the degree of genetic relatedness
between them, so that one’s own children would be favored over grandchildren, nieces, or
nephews, who in turn would be favored over more distant relatives and non-relatives.13
These ideas can be incorporated into the model presented above, by making the weights
on children’s welfare in the household utility function depend on the relationship between the
child and the adults who make expenditure decisions. Suppose there are J possible types of
relationships between the adult and a child, and let βj denote the weight given to a child with a
relationship j. Assume that greater values of j represent more distant relationships, so that β1 is the
weight for a biological child and values of βj decrease with j. We assume β1 is the true cost of a
child, in the sense that a child on whom β1 is spent will have the same welfare as an adult with
expenditure of 1. A household has nj children of each type, and chooses expenditure on each type
of child to maximize:
J

C

U  v( C A)  j nj βj v (Cj / β1 ) .
j1

13

See Daly and Wilson (1987) for a review.

14

For purposes of illustration, assume that subutility functions are isoelastic, so that vN(C)  C 1/α .
With household resources of y, expenditure on a biological child in the household will be:

y β1

C

C1 

J

1  j n j (β1/βj)1/α
j1

and expenditure on a child of type j>1 will be a fraction of that of a biological child:

Cj  ( β1 / βj )1/α C1
C

C

Orphans are disadvantaged relative to biological children of the decision-making adult, and the
degree of disadvantage increases as the “distance” in the relationship with the decision-making
adult grows. We present tests of this hypothesis in Section 5.

4. Orphans, household wealth and school enrollment
Household wealth
The DHS surveys do not contain information on income or financial wealth, but they do collect
information on the number of household durables, which serves as a proxy for household wealth.
The measure of durables we use is constructed from information on ownership of up to seven
durable goods, including items such as refrigerators, radios and bicycles.14

14

The list of durables varies slightly across surveys. In most cases, information is obtained on 6 durables, including
a radio, television, refrigerator, bicycle, motorcycle, and a car. (The 1993 Kenyan survey did not ask about
motorcycles or cars, the 1992 Malawi survey did not ask about TV’s or refrigerators, and the 2000 Malawi survey
did not ask about refrigerators. The 2000 Ugandan list of durables includes telephones.) The index of durables is
simply the sum of the number of kinds of durables the household owns. Pooling all children aged 6-14, 30% live in
households with none of these durable goods. Among those with at least one durable, the average number of
durables was 1.7. An alternative approach is taken by Filmer and Pritchett (1999), who use the first principal
component of an index created from the DHS household durables and characteristics of housing. We prefer to use

15

For each country-year, we regress the durable goods index on an indicator that the child is
an orphan. In addition to the orphan indicator, the regressions include a complete set of age
indicators for the child (since the child’s age may be related to both household wealth and the
probability that the child is orphaned), and an indicator variable for the child’s gender. The
coefficient on the orphan indicator, denoted as δ, measures the difference between orphans and
non-orphans in household durables, adjusting only for the age and gender of the child. Because in
subsequent sections we will focus on school-aged children, we estimate these regressions using
samples of children aged 6-14. Estimates of δ, together with confidence intervals (at the 90%
level), are graphed in the top left-hand panel of Figure 4. The results are summarized in the top
panel of Table 3, which shows the average value of δ and its associated standard error, over all
country-years.
The estimates indicate that orphans live in poorer households than non-orphans, measured
using durable good ownership. In all country-years, the coefficient on the orphan indicator is
significantly less than zero. Some types of orphans live in households that are less well off than
others, which can be seen in the other three panels of Figure 4, which separate orphans by type.
The top right hand panel shows regressions on samples of children who are either non-orphans or
maternal orphans, with paternal and double orphans excluded. For each country-year in the top
right panel, the coefficient on our orphan indicator δ reveals whether, on average, children with
living fathers and deceased mothers live in households with significantly fewer durables than do
children with two living parents. The lower left-hand panel repeats this exercise for paternal
orphans, and the lower right panel, for double orphans. It is clear from these panels that paternal

the count of household durables, because the units are clearly defined, which makes comparison of results across
countries possible.

16

orphanage drives the lower living standards of orphans’ households. For maternal and double
orphans, there is no systematic difference in the (age and gender adjusted) number of household
durables for orphans and non-orphans. However, children whose fathers have died live in
households with significantly fewer durables, in every country-year (with the exception of Niger in
1998, where the result is only marginally significant).
Although orphans are poorer, there is no evidence that the living standards of households
in which orphans live have systematically deteriorated (or improved) over time as the AIDS crisis
has spread. For example, the number of durables in the households of paternal orphans in Ghana
fell (although not significantly), whereas the number of durables rose for paternal orphans in Niger
and Zambia (again, not significantly). For most countries, even those that have experienced rapid
increases in orphan rates, there is no significant difference in coefficients on the orphan indicators
between subsequent surveys. Among double orphans, who by definition have been absorbed into
households that do not contain their parents, we find no systematic change in the durable good
ownership of the households that absorb such orphans between rounds of the survey.
That orphans, and in particular paternal orphans, live in poorer households can largely be
explained by the characteristics of households in which orphans live. Figure 5 graphs estimates of
δ from regressions that add controls for household characteristics, including the number of
household members, the fraction of household members who are children aged 14 or younger, the
fraction who are aged 55 or older, and the age, education (in years) and sex of the household
head, together with indicators for rural/urban status. With household controls, the estimates of δ
for orphans of any type are significant in only 8 of 19 country-years. In addition, the household
controls explain more than two-thirds of the lower level of durables for paternal orphans; the
average estimate for paternal orphans drops from –0.284 to –0.093. After controlling for

17

household characteristics, double orphans appear if anything to live in better off households than
non-orphans. In 12 of the 19 surveys, the estimate for double orphans is positive, and in 4 it is
positive and significantly different from zero. This is consistent with a response within the
extended family network in which households that are wealthier, controlling for household
characteristics, take in orphans who have lost both parents.
In summary, we find that orphans on average live in poorer households than non-orphans.
These differences, which are largest for paternal orphans, are largely explained by observable
characteristics of the households in which orphans live. Whether orphans’ schooling suffers, and
whether that is due to orphans’ living arrangements, their relative poverty, or both, will be the
focus of the next sections.

Within-household comparisons
We use current school enrollment as our measure of investments in schooling. In Africa, enrolling
children in school is costly. In addition to the foregone income of the child, schooling entails
expenditures on school uniforms, supplies, and (often) school fees. We analyze school enrollment
rather than educational attainment, because the former reflects current investments in a child,
whereas attainment reflects the history of enrollment over the child’s life. It is possible that
children who are orphans moved through school more slowly in the years prior to becoming
orphaned—for example, while a parent was dying. Because it is common for African children to
enter and leave school periodically, and to repeat grades, we are not concerned that children will
be less likely to be currently enrolled because of their enrollment history.
Because our sample consists of school-aged children who are at least 6 years old, it is
unlikely that our results are driven by illness in the children who have lost parents. Mother-to-

18

child transmission of HIV leaves children vulnerable to infection and death, which could lead to
correlation between orphanage and lower investments in a child, but one that is due to the child’s
own health. However, deaths of children infected at birth are highly concentrated in ages 0 to 5.
Such children would rarely live to be among those we examine here. (See
www.unaids.org/publications/documents/mtct/qaweb99.html .)
For each country and year, we estimate regressions of an indicator for whether a child is
enrolled in school on an orphan indicator, a complete set of age indicators for the child, an
indicator for the child’s gender, and a set of household fixed effects. The coefficients (referred to
as ζ) and standard errors for the orphan indicator are graphed in Figure 6; their averages are
presented in the third panel of Table 3.
The results indicate that orphans of any type are less likely to be in school than are the
non-orphans with whom they live. All estimates of ζ shown in the top left-hand panel of Figure 6
are negative, all but 3 are significant, and the average estimate is –0.072. These effects are large,
given that school enrollment is on average low in many of these countries. Overall, 66 percent of
children aged 6-14 in these country-years are enrolled in school, so that a 7.2 percentage point
decline in school enrollment is equivalent to an 11% reduction in the chance of being in school.
The estimates for maternal and paternal orphans, shown in the top right and bottom left
panels, are also generally negative, with average values of roughly –0.05. However, these effects
are not precisely estimated, and are significantly different from 0 in only half of the country-years
for paternal orphans (10 cases) and in 7 country-years for maternal orphans. The largest effects
are for double orphans. In all but one case, double orphans are significantly less likely to go to
school than the children with whom they live. For the majority of countries, double orphans are

19

estimated to be between 10 and 30 percentage points less likely to be in school. The average value
of these coefficients across country-years is –0.157.15
The discrimination we find against orphans in school enrollment is equally severe for boys
and girls. This is in contrast to statements made by the World Bank (2002) and UNAIDS (2002),
both of which claim that girls are more likely to be pulled from school upon the death of a parent
than are boys. Our data on 19 country-years support no such claims. For each country-year, we
estimated a fixed effect model of school enrollment that included indicators for children’s ages
and sex, an indicator that the child is an orphan, and an interaction term between orphanage and
sex. In several country-years, girls are at significantly greater risk for not being enrolled in school
(true for Ghana 1993 and 1998, Malawi 1992, Mozambique 1997, Niger 1992 and 1998, Uganda
1995). However, with one exception (Mozambique 1997), girls who are orphans are at no
greater risk of not being enrolled than are boys who are orphans. In roughly half the cases (8 of
19 country-years), the interaction between orphanage and being female is positive (although not
significantly different from zero). Neither do we find increased discrimination among orphaned
girls when we limit our analysis to older children aged 11-14. In no country-year was the orphangender interaction term significant and negative in fixed effect models run on older children and,
in two cases (Tanzania 1999 and Uganda 2000), older girls who were orphans were significantly
more likely to be enrolled relative to older boy orphans.
That orphans and non-orphans living in the same household receive different levels of
education investments provides strong evidence against a model of equal sharing within the
15

Lloyd and Blanc (1996) estimate similar models for school enrollment using some of the same DHS surveys.
They generally reach similar conclusions for the relationship between orphanage and school enrollment. However,
rather than estimating fixed effects models, they work with smaller samples of only 1 randomly selected child per
household. In addition, they include indicators for whether the mother is deceased and the father is deceased but do
not include an indicator for whether the child is a double orphan, thereby implicitly restricting the coefficient for
double orphans to be the sum of the coefficients on indicators for whether the mother and father are deceased.

20

household. However, these effects are identified by comparing school enrollments of children who
live in “blended” households that contain both orphans and non-orphans. It may be that orphans in
blended households fare better than those living in households with orphans only. Likewise,
orphans may draw away household resources from non-orphans with whom they live, so that nonorphans in blended households receive less investment than other non-orphans. As an extension to
the fixed effects estimates, we examine school enrollment among these different groups of
children by estimating equations similar to those discussed above, but replacing the “orphan”
indicator with a set of indicators for whether the child is an orphan in a non-blended household, an
orphan in a blended household, or a non-orphan in a blended household, with non-orphans in nonblended households being the omitted category. We cannot include household fixed effects in
these regressions, but do control for a large set of household characteristics, including the
number of household members, the fraction of household members who are children aged 14 or
younger, the fraction who are aged 55 or older, and the age, education (in years) and sex of the
household head, and indicators for rural/urban status.
The results, shown in Table 4, indicate that orphans are less likely to be enrolled in school
regardless of whether they are members of blended households, and there is no systematic
difference in the enrollment rates of orphans in non-blended and blended households.16 (In what
follows, for ease of presentation we generally show results for the most recent year of data

16

These results are broadly consistent with existing research, which is based largely on case studies from small
regions in Africa. Research on the Kagera region of Tanzania identifies delayed enrollment of younger children as
one strategy for coping with adult death, but only among poorer households (Ainsworth, Beegle, and Koda, 2000).
Data from the Masaka district of Uganda and from rural Tanzania find lower school attendance among orphans,
but only at older ages (Kamali et al 1996, and Urassa et.al 1997). Lloyd and Blanc (1996), in a larger-scale study
of children’s education in seven African countries, finds some evidence that orphans are less likely to be in school
than non-orphans (after controlling for a large number of other household characteristics), although the differences
in enrollment rates between orphans and non-orphans are often not significant. Their research uses several of the
same data sets used in this paper, but they work with smaller samples that contain only one randomly-selected
child from each household.

21

available for each country. Results for earlier years are available upon request.) For two countries
(Ghana 1998 and Namibia 1992) orphans in non-blended households are significantly less likely to
be in school than orphans in blended households, and in three countries (Kenya 1998, Malawi
2000, and Zambia 1996) they are significantly more likely to be in school, and for the rest the
difference is not significant. (F-tests of equality of these coefficients are presented in column 4.)
The presence of orphans also appears to make little difference to whether non-orphans are in
school. The difference between non-orphans in blended and non-blended households is
significantly different from 0 in only a handful of countries (this can be read from the coefficients
in column 3) and, in these cases, non-orphans in blended households have higher school
enrollment than non-orphans in non-blended households.
A comparison of results from household fixed effect models (as in Figure 6) and those
from OLS models that include the household characteristics discussed above shows little
difference between the fixed effect and OLS estimates. For the “any orphan” coefficients, the OLS
and fixed effect estimates were significantly different for only 6 of 19 country-years. In 5 of these
6 cases, the fixed effect estimates were larger in absolute value. (Results available upon request.)
We find little evidence that the omission of controls for unobservable household characteristics
bias the orphan coefficients away from zero in our OLS estimation.
Overall, the results in Tables 3 and 4 and in Figure 6 provide evidence that orphans are at
significant risk for lower school enrollment, and that this risk is not due solely to their relative
poverty. Orphans are less likely than non-orphans to be enrolled, whether we consider nonorphans as a group and control for household characteristics (as in Table 4), or whether we
compare orphans with the non-orphans with whom they live and control for household fixed
effects.

22

Orphanage, school enrollment, and durables
If relative poverty were the sole cause of lower schooling for orphans, we should see the same
relationship between orphanage and durables that we find for orphanage and school enrollment.
We saw above that paternal orphans but not maternal or double orphans tend to live in poorer
households, as measured by the durable goods index. If household resources determine both
durables and school enrollment, then we should find similar patterns for the school enrollment of
these different types of orphans.
Figure 7 and the fourth panel of Table 3 present results from regressions of the school
enrollment indicator on a set of age dummies and an indicator for the child’s gender. The
specification and samples are identical to those used for the regressions for durables shown in
Figure 4. Orphans are less likely to be enrolled in school than non-orphans but, in contrast to the
results for durable goods, the lower rates of school enrollment are typically larger for maternal
and double orphans than for paternal orphans. Estimates for paternal orphans have an average
value across country-years of –0.041, and are significantly negative in 12 out of 19 cases.
Estimates for maternal orphans are always negative, with an average value of –0.059, and are
significantly different from zero in 13 of the 19 country-years. Consistent with the fixed effects
results discussed above, double orphans are typically much less likely to be in school than either
maternal or paternal orphans. The average estimate of δ for these children is –0.123, and the
individual estimates are significantly different from zero in all but 3 country-years. The finding
that paternal orphans are on average poorer than non-orphans but are only somewhat less likely to
be in school, whereas double orphans are not on average poorer than non-orphans but are
substantially less likely to be in school, provides evidence that the lower school enrollment among
orphans is not driven solely by wealth.

23

Although poverty may not be the sole cause of reduced enrollment among orphans, it may
be that discrimination against orphans within households is exacerbated by poverty. We have
examined whether the gap in enrollment between non-orphans and orphans is larger among
poorer households, where wealth is measured by the number of household durables. We estimated
models with household fixed effects identical to those presented above, but with the addition of
the “orphan” indicator interacted with the durable goods index. (The durable goods index itself
does not vary across children in a household, and its effect is absorbed in the household fixed
effect.) If wealthier households are less likely to discriminate against orphans relative to nonorphans, then the coefficient on the orphan/durable goods interaction will be positive. However,
the results indicate that the within household gap in enrollment between orphans and non-orphans
does not decrease with wealth. For orphans of ‘any’ type, the coefficient on the interaction
between the durables index and the orphan indicator is significant in only 6 if 19 cases, and is
positive and significant in only 2 of 19. The average value of the coefficient on the interaction is
–0.013 (with a standard error of 0.021). Results are similar for orphans of specific types.
It is indeed the case that children in wealthier households are more likely to go to school.
We estimated cross-sectional regressions that include a set of household controls, the durable
goods index, an orphan indicator, and an interaction of the orphan indicator and the durables
index. The results for orphans of any type indicate that higher durables are significantly associated
with higher school enrollment in 17 of the 19 country-years. However, consistent with the fixedeffects estimates we report, the gap in enrollment between orphans and non-orphans does not
become smaller as the durable goods index rises.
We take this as additional evidence that, although poverty does result in lower school
enrollment, orphans face an additional risk of non-enrollment that is not accounted for by

24

household wealth. In the section that follows, we explore the extent to which the risk orphans
face is related to their relationships to their adult caregivers.

5. The role of caregivers in investments in children
The living arrangements of children who have lost one or both parents differ from those of
children with two living parents. Table 5 shows that nearly 80 percent of children with two living
parents are the child of the household head, and less than 1 percent of non-orphans live in
households headed by a non-relative. In contrast, only 50 percent of maternal and paternal
orphans are the child of the household head. These children are twice as likely as non-orphans to
live in households headed by a grandparent, and three times as likely to be living in households
headed by “other relatives.” The living arrangements of double orphans differ even more from
those of children with two parents. Roughly 30 percent of double orphans are living in households
headed by other relatives, and over 4 percent in households headed by non-relatives. About 25
percent of double orphans are adopted or foster children of the household head, that is, they are
classified as a son or daughter of the head rather than as an “other relative” or “non-relative,”
which may signal a greater degree of caring or expectation of permanence of the child in the
home.
That the relationship of the child to the household head accounts for the lower schooling
enrollment of orphans can be seen in Table 6, which shows results of regressions that include an
orphan indicator, together with indicators for the relationship between the child and the head of
the household. These regressions include household fixed effects, so the effects of relationship to
the head are identified by within-household variation. Panel A shows the coefficients on an orphan
indicator when no indicators for the relationship to the head are included. These are identical to

25

those graphed in Figure 6, and are repeated here for purposes of comparison with the results in
Panel B, which include relationship indicators.
Adding controls for the relationship to the household head dramatically reduce the
coefficients on the orphan indicators. In Kenya 1998, for example, the “effect” of being an
orphan declines from –0.078 to 0.011 when the relationship indicators are included. In other
countries, for example Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe, the relationship indicators
account for between 30% and 60% of the lower school enrollment of orphans.
As a general pattern, the probability of school enrollment is inversely proportional to the
relatedness of the child to the household head. Children listed as grandchildren or as
adopted/foster children are generally at the smallest disadvantage. Children who live in household
headed by an “other relative” are less likely to be enrolled than are children living with parents or
grandparents, and children with the lowest rates of school enrollment are those who live in
households headed by non-relatives. In many cases, the level of disadvantage associated with
having a non-relative for a household head is very close in absolute terms to the average school
enrollment rate in the country. For example, 87.5 percent of all Kenyan children are enrolled in
school, and Kenyan children who live with non-relatives are estimated to be 80.4 percentage
points less likely than others to be enrolled.
We provide more formal tests, at the bottom of Table 6, of whether the child’s
relationship to the household head correlates with school enrollment in the way predicted by
Hamilton’s Rule. In all ten country-years, children living with other relatives are significantly less
likely to be enrolled than children living with a parental head of household and, in all countryyears, children living with other relatives are less likely to be enrolled than are those living with
grandparent head. In seven of the ten country-years presented, the difference between living with

26

a grandparent and with “other relatives” is significant at the 10 percent level. Moreover, children
who live with non-relative heads are even less likely to be enrolled in school. With the exception
of Niger 1998, in each country-year children living with “non-relative” heads are less likely to be
enrolled than are children living with “other relative” heads. These results are consistent with
Hamilton’s Rule, and suggest that the evaluation of the risk children face upon the death of a
parent must take into account the change in the child’s living arrangements.
Do children with absent parents have the same risk of lower school enrollment as children
with deceased parents? It is plausible that the children of parents who are absent but alive fare
better because their parents select “closer” care givers. We find mixed support for this hypothesis.
The last two columns of Table 5 shows the distribution of relationships to the household head for
double orphans and non-orphans with two absent parents. Children with absent parents are more
likely to live with grandparents and are less likely to live with adoptive or foster parents.
However, nearly equal fractions of children with absent and deceased parents live with “other
relatives” and with “non-relatives,” the two relationship categories most closely associated with
lower school enrollment.
It is also possible that absent parents select “better” care givers within each of the
relationship categories and also monitor and pay care givers. We find some evidence to support
this hypothesis. We selected samples of children who either live with both parents, are double
orphans, or are non-orphans with two absent parents, and regressed school enrollment on
interactions between relationship to head indicators and indicators for whether the child is an
orphan or has absent parents. To focus attention on the groups which are most at risk of low
enrollment and have large numbers of children with absent parents, we exclude all children who
are siblings or foster/adopted children of the household head. The results are used to assess

27

whether children with absent parents have lower enrollment rates than children who live with both
parents; whether the enrollment of children in this group declines as the relationship to the
household head becomes less close; and whether, given the relationship to the household head,
double orphans and children with two absent parents have the same school enrollment rates.
Results in Table 7 indicate that the enrollment of children with absent parents is
significantly different from children who live with both parents (see the F-tests for joint
significance of rows 2, 4 and 6). Relative to children who live with both parents, children whose
parents leave them in the care of other relatives are significantly less likely to be in school in 8 of
10 cases, and those who live with non-relatives are significantly less likely to be in school in all
cases. However, children with absent parents who are grandchildren of the household head are
often significantly more likely to be enrolled than children who live with both parents. It is
possible that parents who migrate for work are most likely to leave children with grandparents
and to send transfers that increase enrollment. However, this hypothesis cannot be tested without
data on income and transfers.
Although children with absent parents who live with relatives and non-relatives have lower
school enrollment rates than children who live with two parents, in most cases double orphans
fare worse than similarly situated children with absent parents. In one case (Malawi) non-orphans
with non-relative heads are less likely to go to school than are orphans with non-relative heads.
However, among children living with other relatives, orphans have significantly lower enrollment
than children with absent parents in 5 of the 10 countries. Among children living with nonrelatives, orphans fare worse in 6 of 10 countries. These results provide some evidence that the
ability of living parents to select, pay, and monitor non-related caregivers may result in higher
investments levels for these children than for orphans.

28

Although the finding that children who live with non-relatives are most at risk of low
enrollment is consistent with Hamilton’s rule, we know little about the selection process through
which such children are placed into households, and have no information about their possible
alternative living arrangements. It may be that, although orphans who live with non-relatives are
quite disadvantaged, better alternatives do not exist. Further research is required on this topic.

7. Conclusions
In at least one important dimension — school enrollment — orphans are significantly
disadvantaged. The results presented in this paper indicate that, although poorer children in Africa
are less likely to attend school, the lower enrollment of orphans is not accounted for solely by
their lower wealth. Furthermore, contrary to existing literature, we do not find that female
orphans are disadvantaged relative to males. Instead, our results suggest that the special
disadvantage orphans face is primarily due to their living arrangements. Across a large number of
sub-Saharan African countries we find, consistent with Hamilton’s Rule, that the degree of
relatedness between orphans and their adult caregivers is highly predictive of children’s outcomes.
The reduced enrollment of orphans will have long run consequences both for these children’s
lives, and for the long-run prospects for the countries in which they are being raised.
These results are relevant to an on-going policy debate about the best means of
maintaining orphans’ living standards. Recent work argues that the disadvantage that orphans
face is driven by poverty, and there is no rationale for directing resources towards orphans in
favor of equally poor non-orphans (Lundberg and Over, 2000). Our findings—that orphans are
less likely to be in school than non-orphans with whom they live, and that the lower withinhousehold enrollment of orphans does not decline as household wealth rises—provide strong

29

evidence against this view, and instead suggests that policies must be targeted specifically to
orphans. In addition, if resource allocation within households is biased against orphans, orphans
may benefit little from unconditional cash transfers to their households. Instead, it may be more
effective to provide orphans with non-transferable goods and services (such as vouchers for
schooling or medical care), and possibly subsidize households that provide orphans with these
goods and services. It is also worth examining whether policies that encourage “closer” relatives
to care for children would improve their treatment.

30

References
Ainsworth, Martha, Kathleen Beegle and Godlike Koda. 2000. “The impact of adult mortality on
primary school enrolment in Northwestern Tanzania.” The World Bank.
Ainsworth, Martha and Semali Innocent. 1998. “Who is most likely to die of AIDS?
Socioeconomic correlates of adult deaths in Kagera Region, Tanzania.” In Confronting AIDS:
Evidence from the Developing World. Martha Ainsworth, Lieve Fransen, and Mead Over, eds.
Washington, D.C.: The World Bank, pp. 95-110.
Ayieko, M.A. 1997. From Single Parents to Child-headed Households: The Case of Children
Orphaned by AIDS in Kisumu and Siaya Districts.
http://www.undp.org/hiv/publications/study/english/sp7e.htm
Bishai, David, El Daw Suliman, Fred Wabwire-Mangen, Godfrey Kigozi, Nelson Sewankambo,
David Serwadda, Ron Gray, and Maria Wawer. “Does the placement of AIDS orphans affect their
survival? Evidence from Uganda.” 2001. Preliminary results from this study were presented at the
Population Association of America in Washington, D.C. on March 29, 2001.
Case, Anne, I-Fen Lin and Sara McLanahan. 2000. “How Hungry is the Selfish Gene?” Economic
Journal 110(466): 781-804.
Case, Anne and Christina Paxson. 2001. “Mothers and Others: Who Invests in Children’s
Health?” Journal of Health Economics 20: 301-328.
Daly, Martin and Margo Wilson. 1987. “The Darwinian Psychology of Discriminative Parental
Solicitude.” Nebraska Symposium on Motivation 35, 91-144.
Filmer, Deon and Lant Pritchett. 1999. “The effect of household wealth on educational
attainment: evidence from 35 countries,” Population and Development Review 25(1):
Foster, G. 1996. “AIDS and the orphan crisis in Zimbabwe.” AIDS Analysis Africa 6(3): 12-13.
Foster, G., Makufa, C., Drew, R.& Kralovec, E. 1997. “Factors leading to the establishment of
children-headed households: the case of Zimbabwe.” Health Transition Review 7(supp. 2):
157-170.
Foster, G. and R. Shakespeare. 1995. “Orphan Prevalence and Extended Family Care in a PeriUrban Community in Zimbabwe.” 7(1): 3-17.
Hamilton, W.D. 1964a. “The Genetical Evolution of Social Biology.” Journal of Theoretical
Biology 7, 1-16.
Hamilton, W.D. 1964b. “The Genetical Evolution of Social Biology.” Journal of Theoretical
Biology 7, 17-52.

31

Hunter, Susan S. 1990. “Orphans as a window on the AIDS epidemic in sub-Saharan Africa:
initial results and implications of a study of Uganda.” Social Science and Medicine 27(6):
681-690.
Isiugo-Abanihe, Uche C. 1985. “Child Fosterage in West Africa.” Population and Development
Review, 11(1): 53-73.
Kamali, A., J.A. Seeley, A.J. Nunn, J.F. Kengeya-Kayondo, A. Ruberantwari and D.W. Mulder.
1996. “The orphan problem: experience of a sub-Saharan Africa rural population in the AIDS
epidemic.” AIDS Care 8(5): 509-515.
Lloyd, Cynthia B. and Ann K. Blanc. 1996. “Children’s Schooling in sub-Saharan Africa: The
Role of Fathers, Mothers, and Others.” Population and Development Review 22(2): 265-298.
Lundberg, Mattias and Mead Over. June 2000. “Transfers and household welfare in Kagera.”
Draft. http://www.iaen.org/files.cgi/199_38lundbergtext.pdf
Monk, Neil. 2000. “Underestimating the magnitude of a mature crisis: dynamics of orphaning and
fostering in rural Uganda.” Orphan Alert: International perspectives on children left behind by
HIV/AIDS. http://www.orphans.fxb.org/media/FXBDurban.pdf
Mukiza-Gapere, Jackson and James P.M. Ntozi. 1995. “Impact of AIDS on the family and
mortality in Uganda.” Health Transition Review 5(supp.): 191-200.
Ntozi, James P.M. 1997. “Effect of AIDS on children: the problem of orphans in Uganda.”
Health Transition Review 7(supp.): 23-40.
Ntozi, James P.M. and Jackson Mukiza-Gapere. 1995. “Care for AIDS orphans in Uganda:
findings from focus group discussions.” Health Transition review 5(supp.): 245-252.
Ntozi, James P.M. and Sylvia Nakayiwa. 1999. “AIDS in Uganda: how has the household coped
with the epidemic?” The Continuing African HIV/AIDS Epidemic: 155-181.
Ntozi, James P.M. and Samuel Zirimenya. 1999. “Changes in household composition and family
structure during the AIDS epidemic in Uganda.” In The Continuing HIV/AIDS Epidemic in
Africa: Responses and Coping Strategies. I.O. Orubuloye, J. Caldwell & J. P. Ntozi, eds.
Canberra: Health Transition Centre, pp.193-209.
Segu, Marta and Sergut Wolde-Yohannes. 2000. “A mounting crisis: Children orphaned by
HIV/AIDS in semiurban Ethiopia.” Orphan Alert: International perspectives on children left
behind by HIV/AIDS. http://www.orphans.fxb.org/media/FXBDurban.pdf
Sengendo, James and Janet Nambi. 1997. “The psychological effect of orphanhood: a study of
orphans in Rakai district.” Health Transition Review 7(supp.): 105-124.
UNAIDS. 2000. Report on the global HIV/AIDS epidemic.Geneva: UNAIDS.
32

UNAIDS. 2002. Report on the global HIV/AIDS epidemic,
www.unaids.org/barcelona/presskit/report.html.
UNAIDS/WHO. 2000 Update. Epidemiological Fact Sheets on HIV/AIDS and Sexually
Transmitted Infections.
Urassa, Mark, J. Ties Boerma, Japheth Z.L. Ng’weshemi, Raphael Isingo, Dick Schapink, and
Yusufu Kumogola. 1997. “Orphanhood, child fostering and the AIDS epidemic in rural
Tanzania.” Health Transition Review 7(supp. 2): 141-153.
The World Bank Group. Education and HIV/AIDS, A Window of Hope. 2002. Washington DC:
The World Bank.

33

Sub-Saharan Africa
Niger, 1998

Ghana, 1998
Uganda, 2000
Kenya, 1998
% of children aged 0-15
who are orphans

No Data
0-7
7-9
9 - 11
11 - 13
above 13

Tanzania, 1999

Zambia,
1996

Namibia,
1992

Malawi, 2000
Mozambique, 1997
Zimbabwe,
1999

Figure 1: Rate of orphanhood, DHS data

Namibia

0
1992, 96, 99

1992

Zambia

Zimbabwe
1996

1995
2000

1999
1994

1992

0
0

5

10

15

0

5

10

15

child's age

Figure 2: Rates of orphanhood by child’s age and year, DHS data

1997

1992
Tanzania

1992
1998

Uganda

2000

1993

1998
Niger

Mozambique

1998

1993

.3
.2
.1
0
.3
.2
.1

Malawi

Kenya

Ghana
.3
.2
.1
0

0

5

10

15

5

10

15

G han a, 19 9 8

K en ya, 1 9 98

M alaw i, 2 0 00

N iger, 1 9 98

N am ib ia, 19 9 2

T anzan ia, 19 9 9

.1 5
.1

M ozam b iq u e, 1 9 9 7

.0 5
0
.15
.1

0

.0 5
0
.1 5
.1

Z am b ia, 1 9 9 6

U g an d a, 2 0 0 0

5

10

15

0

5

10

Z im b ab w e, 19 9 9

15

0

ch ild 's ag e

Figure 3: Rates of paternal, maternal and double orphans, by child’s age

5

10

10

m atern al o rp h an
p atern al orp h an
d o u ble o rp han

.0 5
0
0

5

15

15

Uganda, 00
Uganda, 95
Tanzania, 99
Tanzania, 96
Tanzania, 92
Namibia, 92
Niger, 98
Niger, 92
Mozambique, 97
Malawi, 00

-.6

-.5

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

.3

-.6

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

-.5

coefficient, double orphan

.3

Malawi, 92
Kenya, 98
Kenya, 93
Ghana, 98
Ghana, 93

coefficient, maternal orphan

Zimbabwe, 99
Zimbabwe, 94
Zambia, 96
Zambia, 92
Uganda, 00
Uganda, 95
Tanzania, 99
Tanzania, 96
Tanzania, 92
Namibia, 92
Niger, 98
Niger, 92
Mozambique, 97
Malawi, 00

-.6

-.5

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.2

.3

-.6

-.5

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

.1

coefficient, paternal orphan

coefficinet, orphan of any type

.3

Malawi, 92
Kenya, 98
Kenya, 93
Ghana, 98
Ghana, 93

Figure 4: Coefficient estimates and confidence intervals. Regressions of household durables on orphan indicators; controls for child’s
age and sex; no controls for household characteristics. See Table 4 for details.

Zimbabwe, 99
Zimbabwe, 94
Zambia, 96
Zambia, 92

Uganda, 00
Uganda, 95
Tanzania, 99
Tanzania, 96
Tanzania, 92
Namibia, 92
Niger, 98
Niger, 92
Mozambique, 97
Malawi, 00

-.6

-.5

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

.3

-.6

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

-.5

coefficient, double orphan

.3

Malawi, 92
Kenya, 98
Kenya, 93
Ghana, 98
Ghana, 93

coefficient, maternal orphan

Zimbabwe, 99
Zimbabwe, 94
Zambia, 96
Zambia, 92
Uganda, 00
Uganda, 95
Tanzania, 99
Tanzania, 96
Tanzania, 92
Namibia, 92
Niger, 98
Niger, 92
Mozambique, 97
Malawi, 00

-.6

-.5

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.2

.3

-.6

-.5

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

.2

.1

coefficient, paternal orphan

coefficinet, orphan of any type

.3

Malawi, 92
Kenya, 98
Kenya, 93
Ghana, 98
Ghana, 93

Figure 5: Coefficient estimates and confidence intervals. Regressions of household durables on orphan indicators; controls for child’s
age and sex; household controls included. See Table 4 for details.

Zimbabwe, 99
Zimbabwe, 94
Zambia, 96
Zambia, 92

Uganda, 00
Uganda, 95
Tanzania, 99
Tanzania, 96
Tanzania, 92
Namibia, 92
Niger, 98
Niger, 92
Mozambique, 97
Malawi, 00

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

-.4

coefficient, double orphan

.1

Malawi, 92
Kenya, 98
Kenya, 93
Ghana, 98
Ghana, 93

coefficient, maternal orphan

Zimbabwe, 99
Zimbabwe, 94
Zambia, 96
Zambia, 92
Uganda, 00
Uganda, 95
Tanzania, 99
Tanzania, 96
Tanzania, 92
Namibia, 92
Niger, 98
Niger, 92
Mozambique, 97
Malawi, 00
Malawi, 92
Kenya, 98

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

.1

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

0

coefficient, paternal orphan

coefficinet, orphan of any type

.1

Kenya, 93
Ghana, 98
Ghana, 93

Figure 6: Coefficient estimates and confidence intervals. Regressions of school enrollment on orphan indicators; controls for child’s
age and sex; household fixed effects included. See Table 4 for details.

Zimbabwe, 99
Zimbabwe, 94
Zambia, 96
Zambia, 92

Uganda, 00
Uganda, 95
Tanzania, 99
Tanzania, 96
Tanzania, 92
Namibia, 92
Niger, 98
Niger, 92
Mozambique, 97
Malawi, 00

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

.1

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

-.4

coefficient, double orphan

.1

Malawi, 92
Kenya, 98
Kenya, 93
Ghana, 98
Ghana, 93

coefficient, maternal orphan

Zimbabwe, 99
Zimbabwe, 94
Zambia, 96
Zambia, 92
Uganda, 00
Uganda, 95
Tanzania, 99
Tanzania, 96
Tanzania, 92
Namibia, 92
Niger, 98
Niger, 92
Mozambique, 97
Malawi, 00
Malawi, 92

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

.1

-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

0

0

coefficient, paternal orphan

coefficinet, orphan of any type

.1

Kenya, 98
Kenya, 93
Ghana, 98
Ghana, 93

Figure 7: Coefficient estimates and confidence intervals. Regressions of school enrollment on orphan indicators; controls for child’s
age and sex; no household controls. See Table 4 for details.

Zimbabwe, 99
Zimbabwe, 94
Zambia, 96
Zambia, 92

Table 1. Rates of orphanage, DHS data
Sample size

maternal
orphan

paternal
orphan

double
orphan

orphan of
any type

Ghana 1993

10,395

0.017

0.042

0.018

0.077

Ghana 1998

9,783

0.019

0.036

0.008

0.063

Kenya 1993

18,420

0.014

0.051

0.014

0.080

Kenya 1998

16,881

0.018

0.065

0.019

0.102

Malawi 1992

11,172

0.030

0.046

0.017

0.092

Malawi 2000

28,888

0.029

0.065

0.023

0.117

Mozambique 1997

19,891

0.042

0.067

0.025

0.135

Namibia 1992

11,123

0.015

0.050

0.030

0.095

Niger 1992

16,061

0.027

0.037

0.007

0.071

Niger 1998

17,701

0.020

0.033

0.013

0.066

Tanzania 1992

20,851

0.019

0.046

0.023

0.088

Tanzania 1996

17,930

0.023

0.055

0.017

0.095

Tanzania 1999

8,339

0.022

0.053

0.016

0.091

Uganda 1995

17,618

0.030

0.080

0.028

0.138

Uganda 2000

18,449

0.029

0.072

0.027

0.127

Zambia 1992

15,780

0.022

0.050

0.012

0.084

Zambia 1996

18,107

0.029

0.074

0.023

0.126

Zimbabwe 1994

13,244

0.019

0.065

0.016

0.100

Zimbabwe 1999

11,999

0.026

0.093

0.034

0.153

Notes: Rates of orphanage are calculated using all children age 14 and under whose parents are coded as being
alive, deceased, or with unknown status. Orphans are classified into three mutually exclusive categories: “Maternal
orphans” are children with deceased mothers and living fathers. “Paternal orphans” are children with deceased
fathers and living mothers. “Double orphans” are children for whom the vital status of both parents is either
“deceased” or “unknown.” Children for whom one parent is living and the other parent has unknown vital status are
not counted as orphans but are retained in the sample for the purpose of calculating rates. Rates were calculated
using the survey weights provided in the DHS data.

Table 2. Living arrangements of orphans and other children, DHS data
Non-orphan

Survey:

Paternal orphan

fraction who live with mother

Non-orphan

Maternal orphan

fraction who live with father

Ghana 1993

0.823

0.705

0.593

0.610

Ghana 1998

0.827

0.704

0.624

0.589

Kenya 1993

0.898

0.841

0.659

0.680

Kenya 1998

0.892

0.840

0.680

0.561

Malawi 1992

0.872

0.730

0.716

0.519

Malawi 2000

0.869

0.708

0.700

0.271

Mozambique 1997

0.865

0.754

0.712

0.555

Namibia 1992

0.689

0.552

0.444

0.190

Niger 1992

0.868

0.618

0.831

0.594

Niger 1998

0.882

0.615

0.815

0.596

Tanzania 1992

0.842

0.735

0.739

0.555

Tanzania 1996

0.851

0.703

0.725

0.515

Tanzania 1999

0.843

0.634

0.728

0.373

Uganda 1995

0.815

0.586

0.722

0.559

Uganda 2000

0.839

0.648

0.739

0.504

Zambia 1992

0.846

0.677

0.750

0.400

Zambia 1996

0.854

0.682

0.737

0.399

Zimbabwe 1994

0.803

0.671

0.555

0.395

Zimbabwe 1999

0.795

0.634

0.570

0.433

Notes: The sample consists of children aged 0-14 years. “Non-orphans” are children for whom the vital status of
both parents is known and indicated to be living. “Maternal orphans” are children for whom the mother is indicated
to be deceased and the father is indicated to be living. “Paternal orphans” are children for whom the father is
indicated to be deceased and the mother is indicated to be living. Sample weights were used to compute rates.

Table 3: Summary of results in Figures 4-7
all orphans

maternal orphans

paternal orphans

double orphans

Average coefficients from Figure 4:durable goods, no household controls
–0.183
(0.036)

–0.058
(0.070)

–0.284
(0.046)

–0.024
(0.083)

Average coefficients from Figure 5: durables, household controls
–0.043
(0.031)

–0.001
(0.059)

–0.093
(0.040)

0.040
(0.070)

Average coefficients from Figure 6: school enrollment, household fixed effects
–0.072
(0.023)

–0.045
(0.040)

–0.053
(0.034)

–0.157
(0.049)

Average coefficients from Figure 7: school enrollment, no household controls
–0.060
(0.014)

–0.059
(0.025)

–0.041
(0.018)

–0.123
(0.031)

Notes: This table contains unweighted means of the coefficients shown in Figures 4-7. The numbers in parentheses
are the square roots of the averaged variances of these estimates. All of the underlying regressions are of an outcome
(either the numbers of household durables or an indicator for school enrollment) on an orphan indicator, and
indicators for the age and sex of the child. The results in Figure 5 are based on regressions that included a set of
controls for household characteristics. The household controls are indicators for urbanization (capital or large city,
small city, town, countryside), education of the household head, the age of the household head and whether the head
is female, the number of persons in the household, the fraction of household members who are children less than
age 16, and the fraction of household members who are adults aged 55 and above. The results in Figure 6 are from
regressions that included a set of household fixed effects.
Each cell in the table shows the average, across countries and years, of the coefficient on the orphan indicator
included in each regression. For the results in the column marked “all orphans”, the sample consisted of all
children in the sample described in the note to Appendix Table 1. The orphan indicator is an indicator that the child
is any orphan of any type, or is either a maternal, paternal, or double orphan. For the results in the column marked
“maternal orphan,” the orphan indicator is that the child has a deceased mother and living father. Children who are
paternal or double orphans are excluded from the sample. For the results in the column marked “paternal orphan,”
the orphan indicator is that the child has a deceased father and living mother. Children who are maternal or double
orphans are excluded from the sample. For the results in the column marked “double orphan,” the orphan indicator
is that both of the child’s parents are deceased or have unknown vital status. Children who are maternal or paternal
orphans are excluded from the sample.

Table 4: Effects of co-resident orphans on school enrollment of orphans and non-orphans.
coefficients and standard errors

F-tests and p-values

Orphan,
non-blended
household
(1)

Orphan,
blended
household
(2)

Non-orphan,
blended
household
(3)

column 1 =
column 2

column 2 =
column 3

Ghana 1998

–0.127
(0.023)

–0.008
(0.032)

0.051
(0.027)

9.37
(0.002)

2.07
(0.150)

Kenya 1998

–0.038
(0.011)

–0.102
(0.020)

0.003
(0.017)

8.35
(0.004)

16.95
(0.000)

Malawi 2000

–0.017
(0.010)

–0.044
(0.013)

0.024
(0.012)

3.05
(0.081)

16.11
(0.000)

Mozambique
1997

–0.095
(0.014)

–0.080
(0.018)

–0.015
(0.016)

0.48
(0.487)

8.08
(0.005)

Namibia 1992

–0.082
(0.022)

–0.010
(0.016)

0.009
(0.013)

7.34
(0.007)

1.11
(0.293)

Niger 1998

–0.039
(0.018)

–0.048
(0.019)

0.024
(0.015)

0.13
(0.718)

9.53
(0.002)

Tanzania 1999

–0.089
(0.024)

–0.086
(0.029)

0.040
(0.025)

0.01
(0.940)

12.05
(0.001)

Uganda 2000

–0.028
(0.011)

–0.050
(0.014)

0.022
(0.012)

1.82
(0.178)

18.66
(0.000)

Zambia 1996

–0.031
(0.015)

–0.067
(0.017)

0.026
(0.015)

2.87
(0.090)

19.88
(0.000)

Zimbabwe
1999

–0.030
(0.012)

–0.058
(0.016)

–0.013
(0.015)

2.25
(0.134)

4.90
(0.027)

Notes: Each row represents coefficients from a single regression of school attendance on a set of orphan measures
(coefficients and standard errors shown) and other controls. The three orphan measures are defined as follows: (1)
“orphan, non-blended household ” is an indicator that the child is an orphan who lives with no non-orphans aged 615; (2) “orphan, blended household” is an indicator that the child is an orphan who lives with at least one nonorphan aged 6-15; and (3) “non-orphan, blended household” is an indicator that the child is a non-orphan who lives
with at least one orphan aged 6-15. The excluded category is non-orphans who live in non-blended households, i.e.
with no orphans aged 6-15. Pooling all surveys, 36.2% of orphans and 8.67% of non-orphans live in blended
households. All regressions include a complete set of indicators variables for the child’s age, an indicator for the
child’s sex, indicators for urbanization (capital or large city, small city, town, countryside), education of the
household head, the age of the household head and whether the head is female, the number of persons in the
household, the fraction of household members who are children less than age 16, and the fraction of household
members who are adults aged 55 and above.

Table 5: Orphanage and the relationship to household head
relationship to head:

nonorphans

maternal
orphans

paternal
orphans

double
orphans

non-orphans
with two absent
parents

son/daughter

77.82

47.61

48.17

0.00

0.00

grandchild

11.75

23.48

20.06

32.02

52.99

brother/sister

1.21

4.25

6.09

9.37

6.18

other relative

6.50

18.42

16.42

29.26

32.23

adopted/foster child

1.72

4.15

7.23

25.24

2.93

non-relative

0.99

2.08

2.03

4.10

5.67

Notes: 164,689 observations. The data are for all children aged 6-14 whose orphan status can be determined. These
frequencies are based on pooled data from all countries and years, and are not weighted. 20.85 percent of double
orphans were originally classified as being the “son” or “daughter” of the household head, and we re-classified these
children as adopted/foster children. We also re-classified children to be adopted/foster children if they were: 1)
maternal orphans who were originally classified as sons or daughters of the head in female-headed households, or 2)
paternal orphans who were originally classified as sons or daughters of heads on male-headed households. Only 0.8
percent of maternal orphans and 1.34 percent of paternal orphans were re-classified. The last column, on
relationships of non-orphans with two absent parents, is based on a subset of non-orphans from the sample used in
the first column.

Table 6: School enrollment, orphanage, and the relationship to the household head. Household fixed effects included.
Ghana
1998

Kenya
1998

Malawi
2000

Mozambique 1997

Namibia
1992

Niger
1998

Tanzania
1999

Uganda
2000

Zambia
1996

Zimbabwe
1999

–0.015
(0.016)

–0.100
(0.021)

–0.125
(0.033)

–0.079
(0.015)

–0.097
(0.019)

–0.066
(0.019)

Panel A
orphan

–0.033
(0.033)

–0.078
(0.022)

–0.063
(0.015)

–0.064
(0.019)
Panel B

grandchild

0.008
(0.038)

–0.005
(0.024)

–0.055
(0.019)

–0.064
(0.029)

–0.033
(0.020)

–0.045
(0.026)

–0.062
(0.039)

–0.002
(0.025)

–0.047
(0.026)

–0.038
(0.023)

brother/sister

–0.020
(0.093)

–0.174
(0.067)

–0.125
(0.044)

–0.130
(0.050)

–0.023
(0.055)

–0.150
(0.061)

–0.085
(0.083)

–0.027
(0.053)

–0.094
(0.050)

–0.117
(0.057)

other relative

–0.082
(0.033)

–0.111
(0.024)

–0.077
(0.020)

–0.175
(0.024)

–0.042
(0.017)

–0.118
(0.026)

–0.070
(0.036)

–0.121
(0.018)

–0.150
(0.021)

–0.091
(0.025)

adopted/foster child

–0.022
(0.051)

–0.077
(0.039)

–0.047
(0.036)

–0.070
(0.033)

0.028
(0.051)

–0.097
(0.027)

–0.107
(0.054)

–0.010
(0.031)

0.003
(0.037)

–0.033
(0.044)

non-relative

–0.344
(0.084)

–0.807
(0.041)

–0.741
(0.036)

–0.526
(0.060)

–0.097
(0.026)

–0.175
(0.042)

–0.566
(0.101)

–0.539
(0.042)

–0.355
(0.096)

–0.487
(0.071)

orphan

–0.013
(0.033)

0.011
(0.024)

–0.013
(0.016)

–0.011
(0.020)

–0.008
(0.017)

–0.048
(0.023)

–0.088
(0.034)

–0.034
(0.016)

–0.051
(0.020)

–0.045
(0.020)

F-test (p-value):
grandchild=other relative

3.58
(0.059)

10.29
(0.001)

0.67
(0.413)

10.23
(0.001)

0.18
(0.672)

4.46
(0.035)

0.03
(0.868)

16.94
(0.000)

10.96
(0.001)

2.86
(0.091)

F-test (p-value): other
relative=nonrelative

8.72
(0.003)

231.12
(0.000)

292.6
(0.000)

31.77
(0.000)

4.28
(0.039)

1.51
(0.219)

22.30
(0.000)

94.35
(0.000)

4.53
(0.033)

28.34
(0.000)

5,585

9,797

16,109

10,377

5,310

9,012

4,702

10,053

9,951

6,922

observations

Notes: Panel A shows the coefficient on an indicator that the child is an orphan (of any type) from a regression of school enrollment on an orphan indicator, an
indicator for the age and sex of the child, and a set of household fixed effects. The regressions shown in Panel B add a set of indicators for the relationship of
the child to the household head. Standard errors in parentheses. The sample is of all children ages 6-14 who live in households in which all children in this age
group can be identified as “orphans” or “non-orphans.” Estimates in bold type are significant at the 10% level of better.

Table 7: School enrollment and the relationship to the household head among double orphans and children with two absent parents
Ghana
1998

Kenya
1998

Malawi
2000

Mozambi
que 1997

Namibia
1992

Niger
1998

Tanzania
1999

Uganda
2000

Zambia
1996

Zimbabwe
1999

(1)

grandchild x orphan

0.014
(0.091)

–0.025
(0.041)

–0.009
(0.025)

–0.337
(0.050)

–0.177
(0.054)

–0.013
(0.080)

–0.179
(0.070)

0.035
(0.029)

–0.017
(0.044)

–0.082
(0.030)

(2)

grandchild x absent
parents

(0.200)
(0.029)

0.012
(0.019)

0.018
(0.015)

0.070
(0.024)

–0.002
(0.018)

–0.039
(0.023)

0.061
(0.029)

0.072
(0.019)

0.052
(0.022)

–0.055
(0.018)

(3)

other relative x
orphan

–0.172
(0.101)

–0.188
(0.042)

–0.044
(0.027)

–0.315
(0.045)

–0.183
(0.042)

–0.188
(0.088)

–0.279
(0.074)

–0.059
(0.028)

–0.116
(0.037)

–0.149
(0.037)

(4)

other relative x
absent parents

–0.049
(0.032)

–0.102
(0.022)

–0.057
(0.018)

–0.097
(0.023)

0.001
(0.017)

–0.115
(0.027)

–0.090
(0.031)

–0.059
(0.017)

–0.032
(0.020)

–0.086
(0.023)

(5)

non-relative x orphan

–0.763
(0.207)

–0.900
(0.073)

–0.543
(0.066)

–0.549
(0.179)

–0.497
(0.080)

–0.334
(0.099)

–0.954
(0.243)

–0.570
(0.084)

–0.286
(0.182)

–0.880
(0.223)

(6)

non-relative x absent
parents

–0.351
(0.069)

–0.740
(0.035)

–0.779
(0.037)

–0.428
(0.068)

–0.068
(0.026)

–0.114
(0.040)

–0.255
(0.084)

–0.370
(0.043)

–0.342
(0.085)

–0.607
(0.059)

P-values from F-tests
Rows 1, 3 & 5 jointly
insignificant

0.001

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.001

0.000

0.000

0.006

0.000

Rows 2, 4 & 6 jointly
insignificant

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.062

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

0.000

Row 1 = Row 2

0.038

0.366

0.268

0.000

0.001

0.752

0.001

0.194

0.125

0.357

Row 3 = Row 4

0.238

0.063

0.677

0.000

0.000

0.423

0.017

0.979

0.037

0.131

Row 5 = Row 6

0.057

0.046

0.002

0.530

0.000

0.038

0.006

0.033

0.779

0.234

observations

3,566

6,324

10,871

6,372

3,358

6,980

3,240

6,534

6,743

3,999

Notes: The regressions shown in this Table are based on a sample of children aged 6-14 who are either live with both parents, are double orphans, or who have
two living but absent parents. Children who were siblings or foster/adoptive children of the household head were excluded. The coefficients and standard errors
shown are from a regression of schooling enrollment on a set of indicators of the relationship of the child to the household head (grandchild, other relative, or
non-relative) interacted with indicators for whether the child is an orphan or has absent parents. The excluded category is children living with both parents. All
regressions also include a complete set of indicators variables for the child’s age, an indicator for the child’s sex, indicators for urbanization (capital or large
city, small city, town, countryside), education of the household head, the age of the household head and whether the head is female, the number of persons in
the household, the fraction of household members who are children less than age 16, and the fraction of household members who are adults aged 55 and above.
Estimates in bold type are significant at the 10% level of better.

Appendix Table 1. Average household characteristics for children ages 6-14, DHS data.
average #
fraction members
household members who are children
aged 0-14

fraction of
members who
are aged 55+

average years of
education of
household head

fraction in
female headed
households

Orphan?

no

yes

no

yes

no

yes

no

yes

no

yes

Ghana 93

6.51

5.95

0.596

0.586

0.055

0.080

5.06

4.47

0.334

0.500

Ghana 98

6.27

5.49

0.563

0.559

0.064

0.101

5.83

4.90

0.346

0.558

Kenya 93

7.42

6.68

0.598

0.595

0.046

0.059

5.06

3.38

0.289

0.662

Kenya 98

6.61

5.91

0.584

0.573

0.041

0.058

6.31

4.47

0.269

0.679

Malawi 92

6.60

6.09

0.572

0.553

0.057

0.106

4.01

3.05

0.207

0.487

Malawi 00

6.43

5.93

0.574

0.549

0.052

0.100

4.42

3.87

0.221

0.532

Mozambique 97

6.86

6.44

0.555

0.556

0.052

0.062

2.75

1.87

0.209

0.448

Namibia 92

9.88

10.50

0.535

0.524

0.075

0.094

3.55

3.20

0.298

0.425

Niger 92

9.82

9.48

0.561

0.528

0.057

0.087

0.38

0.32

0.062

0.172

Niger 98

8.77

7.91

0.569

0.542

0.058

0.087

0.79

0.68

0.082

0.269

Tanzania 92

8.11

7.65

0.555

0.534

0.060

0.079

3.39

3.02

0.119

0.370

Tanzania 96

7.41

6.62

0.564

0.545

0.058

0.089

4.05

3.40

0.150

0.429

Tanzania 99

7.72

6.91

0.553

0.525

0.056

0.103

4.18

3.23

0.158

0.437

Uganda 95

7.33

6.78

0.617

0.604

0.048

0.079

4.71

3.92

0.196

0.494

Uganda 00

7.38

6.85

0.611

0.590

0.044

0.081

5.33

4.51

0.210

0.549

Zambia 92

8.44

7.65

0.554

0.545

0.041

0.058

5.87

5.05

0.099

0.367

Zambia 96

7.79

7.21

0.561

0.533

0.042

0.068

6.52

5.81

0.154

0.439

Zimbabwe 94

7.14

6.99

0.572

0.561

0.055

0.072

5.02

3.98

0.343

0.608

Zimbabwe 99

6.55

6.34

0.553

0.548

0.060

0.093

6.05

4.64

0.343

0.636

Notes: The sample consists of children aged 6-14 years living in households for which all children in this age group
can be classified as “orphans” or “non-orphans.” “Non-orphans” are coded as children for whom both parents are
indicated to be living. “Orphans” are those for whom one parent is living and other is deceased, or for whom both
parents are either deceased or have unknown vital status. Children who have one living parent but the vital status of
the other parent is unknown are not classified as orphans or non-orphans. They, and the children aged 6-14 with
whom they live, are excluded from the sample. Households with missing values for the controls used in the
following regressions are also excluded. Of the original sample of 184,403 children aged 6-14 years, 3,272 were
excluded because at least one child aged 6-14 could not be classified as an orphan or non-orphan. An additional
8,594 observations were excluded due to missing information on personal or household characteristics. The final
sample is contains 172,537 observations.

