                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              INSURANCE, SELF-PROTECTION, AND
                                THE ECONOMICS OF TERRORISM


                                             Darius Lakdawalla
                                              George Zanjani


                                           Working Paper 9215
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9215


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      September 2002




We are grateful to Steven Garber, Dana Goldman, Steven Haider, Jack Hirshleifer, Arie Kapteyn, Jim
Poterba, Robert Reville, and numerous seminar participants at RAND for helpful discussion and comments.
We thank Priya Gandhi for research assistance. Lakdawalla is grateful for the support of RAND’s Institute
for Civil Justice. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the
positions of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve System, the National Bureau or
RAND.

© 2002 by Darius Lakdawalla and George Zanjani. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Insurance, Self-Protection, and the Economics of Terrorism
Darius Lakdawalla and George Zanjani
NBER Working Paper No. 9215
September 2002
JEL No. H0

                                             ABSTRACT


       This paper investigates the rationale for government intervention in the market for terrorism
insurance, focusing on the externalities associated with self-protection. Self-protection by one target
encourages terrorists to substitute towards less fortified targets. Investments in self- protection thus
have negative external effects in the presence of rational terrorists. Government subsidies for terror

insurance can discourage self-protection and limit the inefficiencies associated with these and other

types of negative externalities. They may also serve as a complement to a policy of publicly
provided protection.



Darius Lakdawalla
RAND
1700 Main Street
Santa Monica, CA 90407
and NBER
darius@rand.org

George Zanjani
Capital Markets Function
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
george.zanjani@ny.frb.gov
1       Introduction
Soaring prices for terrorism coverage after September 11, 2001 led to calls for gov-
ernment intervention in the insurance market (McCool, 2001). Such appeals are not
uncommon after significant shocks to the insurance industry. Examples include the
crisis in the liability insurance market of the late 1980’s (sparked by asbestos-related
lawsuits) and the crisis in the catastrophe reinsurance market of the early 1990’s
(sparked by Hurricane Andrew), both of which were accompanied by failed cam-
paigns for federal intervention. Yet, the current push for federal involvement appears
to have reasonable prospects for success.
    Such success would have precedent. Government provision of terrorism coverage
is common in developed countries that face a serious threat. Both the Israeli and
British governments participate in terrorism coverage (McCool, 2001), although they
shun direct involvement in other apparently similar catastrophe markets. Will the
U.S. follow suit? If so, what distinguishes the terror insurance market from other
markets with similar risk profiles?1
    This paper argues that much of both the normative case and the practical impetus
for intervention lie not in the nature of terror risk—which, like that of natural disas-
ters, is both hard to predict and hard to diversify—but in the externalities associated
with self-protection. Market failure in this case arises because of fully informed, ra-
tional behavior. Potential targets of terrorism have incentives to protect themselves
against attack, but rational terrorists will substitute away from fortified targets and
toward vulnerable ones. Therefore, self-protection by one agent encourages attacks
on others, but this consequence is not considered by the agent that invests in protec-
tion. Government subsidies of terror coverage can dissuade agents from substituting
self-protection for insurance when self-protection has these negative external effects.
Hence, although economists usually compare terrorism risk with natural catastrophe
risk when discussing public intervention, we argue that better analogies are drawn
with deposit insurance and war-risk life insurance—where the real issues hinge on
self-protection.2
    The effects of self-protection (Ehrlich and Becker, 1972) extend beyond the cal-
culus of individual optimization problems in two respects. First, an agent’s decision
to self-protect may affect the price of insurance faced by other agents. Examples in-
clude anti-theft devices in automobiles, which may change overall insurance prices by
affecting the behavior of thieves,3 and automobile safety, which may change prices by
affecting the behavior of protected drivers or the damages associated with accidents
    1
      A general analysis of and review of the literature on catastrophe insurance markets is provided
by Froot (1997).
    2
      Hirshleifer (1953) provides one of the first analyses of insurance and self-protection decisions in
the context of war risk.
    3
      In one of the few empirical analyses of externalities in private self-protection, Ayres and Levitt
(1998) show that Lojack vehicle recovery systems generate positive externalities since the Lojack
system is unobserved.

                                                   1
(Peltzman, 1975). Second, self-protection decisions may generate externalities that
affect society as a whole. For example, trigger-happy bank depositors spark liquidity
crises and thereby affect the operating performance of the economy (Diamond and
Dybvig, 1983).
    When faced with such externalities, government policy can influence self-protection
through the use of taxes and subsidies. The obvious approach is to apply taxes,
subsidies, or regulations directly to the self-protection behaviors that generate ex-
ternalities, in the tradition of Pigovian welfare economics (Pigou, 1932). However,
if self-protection is difficult to define, monitor, or measure, the government can also
influence self-protection choices by instead taxing or subsidizing the purchase of in-
surance. Since insurance and self-protection are substitutes from the perspective of
the individual, a policy aimed at encouraging the purchase of insurance simultane-
ously discourages self-protection. Thus, government subsidization of insurance can
be interpreted, ironically, as a policy geared toward encouraging moral hazard.
    Still another approach is the provision of public protection. Distorting an unsub-
sidized (and thus efficient) market for insurance through subsidies is initially costless,
on the margin. Therefore, even in the presence of public protection, some amount of
insurance subsidization remains optimal. Moreover, in many important cases, sub-
sidies and public protection are actually complements. It is not surprising that the
two are often observed in tandem, as is the case with deposit insurance and banking
regulation.
    The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a simple model
of terrorist behavior, and develops its implications for the probability of terrorist
attack, and its relationship to private self-protection. Given these attack probabilities,
Section 3.1 explores individual decision making by targets of terror, while Section 3.2
investigates the effects of government policies regarding insurance subsidies and public
protection.


2        Terrorist Behavior and the Probability of Attack
If we were considering insurance and self-protection against, say, natural disasters, we
could take as given the probability of loss as a function of self-protection. The prob-
ability of terrorist attack though is the outcome of interaction between terrorists and
their targets. In this section, we present a simple model of terrorist behavior and use
it to derive some important properties for the probability of terrorist attacks.4 In par-
ticular, if terrorists respond to self-protection by targets, this can create externalities
in protection.5
    Consider a “syndicate” of terrorists, criminals, or soldiers with resources R intent
on attacking a set of N targets. From the syndicate’s perspective, the probability of

    4
        An analysis of terrorist behavior is also presented in Major (2002).
    5
        An analysis of criminal deterrence and the associated externalities is offered in Eck (1993).

                                                     2
succeeding against any given target depends upon what they spend attacking it, and
what the target spends on self-protection.6 The source of the externalities lies in the
responses of terrorists to private self-protection.
    When terrorists inflict the loss L on target j, they receive the benefit B(L).7 The
probability of inflicting this loss is a function ρ(sj , rj ), where sj is the self-protection
expenditure of target j, and rj is the level of resources spent by terrorists on attacking
target j, so that ρs < 0 and ρr > 0 with the concavity conditions ρss > 0 and ρrr < 0.
Expenditures on self-protection make terrorist investments less productive, so that
ρsr < 0. Terrorists have available resources R, which may be affected by the self-
protection of targets, according to R(s1 , ..., sN ). For example, by lowering the returns
to terrorist activity, self-protection could discourage its funding.
    After the self-protection levels have been set, terrorists allocate their resources
across N targets according to:

                                                      N
                                                      X
                                               max          ρ(si , ri )B(L)
                                                 ri
                                                      i=1
                                       N
                                                                                                (2.1)
                                       X
                                s.t.         ri ≤ R (s1 , ..., sN )
                                       i=1

The first order conditions of this problem equate the marginal productivity of terrorist
resources across all targets:

                                        ρr (si , ri ) = ρr (sj , rj )                           (2.2)
If we perform comparative statics in a symmetric equilibrium with identical targets,
we obtain:

                                                            ∂R
                                 ∂ri   (N − 1)(−ρrs ) + ρrr ∂s
                                     =                         i

                                 ∂si             N ρrr
                                                 ∂R
                                                                                                (2.3)
                                 ∂rj   ρrs + ρrr ∂s
                                     =              i

                                 ∂si       N ρrr
Increases in self-protection result in a substitution effect and a wealth effect on ter-
rorism. Protection by one target causes terrorists to substitute resources toward
   6
      The self-protection expenditures of other targets has no effect on this probability. We abstract
from technological externalities, such as a surveillance camera that provides protection to a whole
neighborhood.
    7
      We assume here that the value of inflicting a loss is independent of the target’s level of self-
protection. This may not always be the case: terrorists may value the destruction of well defended
targets simply as a demonstration of their capabilities. In this case, there could be a “race to the
bottom” in self-protection, where every target would attempt to undercut the others in protective
investments.

                                                      3
other targets; this substitution effect is embodied by ρrs < 0. In other words, each
target’s probability of attack falls with its own self-protection, but rises with the
self-protection investments of others. On the other hand, wealth effects arise if self-
protection affects terrorist resources.
                                                                          ∂ri
    Absent wealth effects (e.g., if R is fixed), the appendix shows that ∂s i
                                                                              < 0 and
∂rj
∂si
     > 0. In this case, the substitution effects dominate. Terrorists substitute away
from the fortified target and toward other targets, yielding negative externalities in
protection.
    The case of no wealth effects seems a relevant one for global terrorist groups, for
several reasons. First, there may be no substitute for terrorism, in the sense that
extremist groups without political wings may view it as their only option. If so,
internal funding levels may not respond to self-protection or other changes in the
returns to terrorism. Furthermore, many factors—such as the power of states that
sponsor terrorism, a history of religious or ethnic conflict, or the perceived wrongdoing
of the targeted society or group—influence terrorists’ external funding levels. These
factors are probably of more direct importance to terrorists’ funding levels than self-
protection. In the context of these other factors, the influence of self-protection may
not be large.
    Although we abstract from wealth effects for most of our discussion, one should
bear in mind their possibilities. If protection makes terrorists poorer (Rs < 0), they
will spend less on all targets. This reinforces the substitution effect associated with si
for target i, but could offset the effect for the other targets j 6= i. Terrorists will always
spend less attacking the target that defended itself, but the net change in resources
spent on other targets is ambiguous. On the other hand, protection could make
terrorists richer. For example, if outside sponsors seek to maximize terror, increases
in self-protection after an attack might be interpreted as signs of insecurity and taken
as an indicator of success, leading to more funding. In this case, the wealth effect
would counteract the substitution effect for target i, but reinforce it for the other
targets.
    Wealth effects also raise an interesting issue with respect to alternative specifi-
cations of the terrorist problem. We have structured the static problem with self-
protection levels taken as fixed inputs to the terrorist problem, implicitly assuming
that targets commit to self-protection levels in advance of the terrorist attacks. With-
out precommitment, however, terrorists would not take self-protection levels as given.
They would consider the impact of their strategies on self-protection choices and,
hence, their current or future funding. This complication is beyond the scope of this
paper.
    An illustration of the potential importance of wealth effects is provided by the
case of unobserved protection. So far, we have assumed that self-protection is observ-
able to terrorists. This seems a reasonable assumption, since terrorists can observe
security guards, surveillance cameras, fences, military installations, the vigilance of
airport or other screeners, or the accessibility of a location. Moreover, terrorists

                                              4
have incentives not to attack targets about which they know little. However, in cer-
tain specific cases of crime or terrorism, protection may be unobserved, and this can
have important consequences. For example, as Ayres and Levitt (1998) have shown,
Lojack—a tracking device on automobiles designed to recover vehicles in the event of
theft—is unobservable. Criminals cannot tell which cars have Lojack installed and
appear to be discouraged from stealing as a result. This is a case where unobservable
protection has positive externalities. Self-protection yields benefits for all, even the
unprotected.
    To see this formally, suppose terrorists or criminals know only the mean level of
self-protection, s̄, but not the self-protection of a particular target. In this case, the
syndicate solves the problem:

                                              "                        #
                                               X
                                      max E           ρ(si , ri )B(L)|s̄
                                       ri
                                X
                                                  i                                  (2.4)
                         s.t.       ri ≤ R(s̄)
                                i

When terrorists cannot distinguish any differences among targets, optimal behavior
implies an even allocation across targets. In this case, private investments in self-
protection change the mean level of self-protection (and, hence, the overall level of
terrorist resources), but they have no effects on the syndicate’s relative allocation
of resources across targets. The substitution effect present in the case of observed
protection disappears, and only the wealth effect remains. In this case, a free-rider
problem emerges, because no private agent has the incentive to undertake the socially
efficient level of self-protective expenditure. This is a source of positive externalities.
It applies to certain classes of crime, such as auto theft in the presence of Lojack.


3     Private Choices and Public Safety
To understand the impact of negative externalities in self-protection on the behavior
of targets, consider an economy with N agents facing a risk of terrorist attack. The
j-th agent faces risk of experiencing a loss of fixed size L and allocates wealth W
between expenditures on insurance coverage Ij —available at a price π j for every
dollar of coverage—and on self-protection sj . Self-protection is purchased at a per
unit price of k, and the individually-chosen levels of self-protection jointly determine
the probabilities of loss faced by each of the agents. Thus, the probability of loss for j
is written as:

                                        pj (s1 , ..., sN ).
    Agent j’s probability of loss is decreasing in her own chosen level of self protec-
tion, but increasing in the levels of self-protection chosen by the other agents. The

                                                 5
probability of attack satisfies:

                                        ∂pj           ∂rj
                                            = ρs + ρr     <0
                                        ∂sj           ∂sj
                                                                                      (3.1)
                                            ∂pj       ∂rj
                                                 = ρr     >0
                                            ∂si       ∂si
Other agents’ protection investments influence the probability of attack, because ter-
                                                      ∂r
rorists substitute towards less fortified targets, or ∂sji > 0. The probability of loss
affects the price of insurance, written as:

                               π j (s1 , ..., sN ; α) ≡ pj (s1 , ..., sN ) + α,
where 0 ≤ α ≤ 1 reflects other influences on the price of insurance such as administra-
tive expenses, capital costs, and information costs. We will assume that the pricing
reflects “real” costs (such as administrative costs or underwriting costs) in the sense
that they cannot be avoided by government intervention.
    Finally, we include a public good (or bad) influenced by self-protection. We write
this as V (s1 , ..., sN ). The influence of self-protection could be either positive or neg-
ative, but the key point is that the public good, which is enjoyed by all, is jointly
determined by the individually-chosen levels of self-protection.

3.1    Private Decisions
In this environment, agent j solves:


                     max {pj U0 (W − L + (1 − π j )Ij − ksj )+
                      sj ,Ij
                                                                                      (3.2)
                     (1 − pj )U1 (W − π j Ij − ksj ) + V (s1 , ..., sN ) },

where U0 and U1 are increasing functions representing the utility of wealth in the
loss and no-loss states, respectively. If all functions are differentiable, the individual
optimality condition for the choice of insurance is the familiar
                                                            0
                                                  pj U0
                                      πj =            0         .                     (3.3)
                                           (1 − pj )U1 + pj U00
When pricing is actuarially fair (π j = pj ), this condition equates marginal utilities
across states. The condition for the choice of self-protection may be written as:
             ∂pj             h    0             0
                                                  i    ∂π j        ∂V
                 (U0 − U1 ) − pj U0 + (1 − pj )U1 (k +      Ij ) +     = 0.           (3.4)
             ∂sj                                       ∂sj         ∂sj



                                                      6
The first term is positive and reflects self-protection’s mitigating impact on the prob-
ability of loss. The second term reflects the net marginal pecuniary cost of self-
protection, including any premium reductions realized. The last term reflects the
marginal impact of the individual’s choice on his private valuation of the public good.
To illustrate, when the third term is negative, the agent balances the marginal benefit
associated with loss prevention (the first term), with the marginal out-of-pocket cost
(the second term) and the marginal impairment of the public good (the third term).
    We now study how individual choices may be socially inefficient. Consider the
social planner’s problem, where, for simplicity, the Pareto weights have been equalized
across agents:

                                            N
                                            X
                      max               {         [pj U0 (W − L + (1 − π j )Ij − ksj )+
                s1 ,...,sN ;I1 ,...IN
                                            j=1
                                                                                          (3.5)
                (1 − pj )U1 (W − π j Ij − ksj ) ] + N V (s1 , ..., sN ) }

This is simply the sum of the utilities of the N agents. The last term is the indi-
vidual valuation of the public good multiplied by the total number of individuals,
representing the total social value of the public good.
   The optimality condition for the choice of Ij is identical to Equation 3.3 from the
individual agent’s problem. However, the socially optimal choice for sj is:

           ∂pj                  h     0             0
                                                      i        ∂π j        ∂Vj
                 (U0j − U1j ) − pj U0j + (1 − pj )U1j (k +          Ij ) +       + ...
           ∂sj                                                 ∂sj         ∂sj
           X · ∂pi                     ³   0              0
                                                             ´ ∂π
                                                                  i       ∂Vi
                                                                               ¸          (3.6)
                        (U0i − U1i ) − pi U0i + (1 − pi )U1i        Ii +         = 0,
            i6=j
                   ∂s j                                        ∂s j       ∂s j


where U0i and U1i represent agent i’s utility in the loss and no-loss states, respectively.
The first three terms (the top line) are simply the individual effects from Equation 3.4.
The summation term (the bottom line) includes the three marginal “spillover” effects
considered by the social planner but neglected by the individual. This captures the
marginal impact of sj on the probabilities of loss for the other agents, any associated
changes in insurance prices for other agents, and the marginal impact of sj on the
public good values enjoyed by the other agents.
    The first and second spillovers concern risk and associated costs. In choosing self-
protection, the individual does not consider any effects on the probabilities of loss
faced by other agents and the associated prices of insurance. In the case of terrorism,
the cross-effects could be detrimental, in which case the individual overinvests in self-
protection from a social perspective. In the case of Lojack, they could be beneficial,
in which case the individual underinvests. The total externality is measured by two
components: the direct equilibrium impact of self-protection on the utility of others,

                                                         7
and the impact on other agents’ insurance premiums. In more general terms, self-
protection by one agent encourages others to undertake remedial expenditures, but
it may also have a direct impact on others’ utility if remedial expenditures are not
complete. For example, if individuals are fully insured, the externality consists solely
of the increase in remedial expenditures on insurance. Conversely, when there is no
terror insurance—and thus no remedial expenditures—the externality consists solely
of the direct effect on utility.8
    The last spillover concerns the public good. In choosing self-protection, the in-
dividual does not consider any benefits or costs that accrue to other agents. As an
example, consider cautious behavior by a soldier. It is individually rational for a
soldier to avoid mortality risk at the margin, but such behavior might jeopardize the
nation’s chances of winning a war. To take another salient example, self-protection
against terrorism by a firm may dictate moving out of downtown areas and avoiding
prominent high-rise buildings. However, there may well be public goods associated
with the presence of prestigious properties in downtown locales.
    The source of the inefficiency becomes particularly clear if we rewrite this condi-
tion in terms of the primitive probabilities
                                       P      ρ. Substituting in the expressions from
                                             ∂rj
Equation 3.1, and using the fact that N  j=1 ∂si = 0 when terrorist resources are fixed,
Equation 3.6 becomes:
             ∂ρj               h    0              0
                                                     i     ∂ρj        ∂Vj
                 (U0j − U1j ) − pj U0j + (1 − pj )U1j (k +     Ij ) +     = 0,                       (3.7)
             ∂sj                                           ∂sj        ∂sj
                                                                          ∂ρ                   ∂p
    The social planner would like individuals to consider ∂sjj rather than ∂sjj . This
amounts to taking terrorists’ resource allocation decisions as fixed and ignoring the
effect of protection on the decisions of terrorists. Social efficiency dictates that agents
treat terrorism just like earthquakes, hurricanes, and other risks of loss where the
probability of loss is independent of self-protection expenditures.

3.2      Government Policy
In this section, we study government policy when it cannot directly control choices,
but must instead rely on policies that influence market prices. Since the spillovers
are generated by self-protection behavior, that behavior would seem to be the first
target for government policy. However, taxes, subsidies, or restrictions aimed at
self-protection may not be cost-effective or even feasible.
    For example, consider taxes on bank deposit withdrawals or suspensions of deposit
convertibility. Both of these policies dissuade depositors from running on banks, but
they fail to differentiate between depositors who “need” the money and those who
    8
      While the change in the insurance premium is, strictly speaking, a pecuniary externality, it
reflects an underlying technical (or real) externality, namely the effect of other agents’ self-protection.
The underlying technical externality has a pecuniary impact and a non-pecuniary impact, and thus
its total cost includes both these components.

                                                    8
do not. Thus, the burden of the policy is highest for the least fortunate, making the
overall social cost of the policy high. Another example is the case of the soldier. It
may be difficult to identify the range of behaviors that qualify as suboptimal self-
protection at the margin. Likewise, self-protection in the case of terrorism entails
a wide range of activities—such as beefing up security, avoiding public places, relo-
cation, and emigration—all of which may be difficult to describe and regulate in a
policy aimed at promoting the national interest. It may be infeasible to isolate and
tax the myriad methods for protecting against terrorism. Even if the government
could identify all such methods, it could not account for investments that are more
than just anti-terrorist in nature. For instance, dogs that sniff bombs and drugs, or
background checks on employees are both ways to protect against terrorism, but they
also have a variety of other functions that the government should not be discouraging.
    Instead of directly regulating self-protection, the government can subsidize (or
tax) insurance purchases. Even if the insurance market itself is functioning efficiently,
insurance subsidies can be justified by failures in the market for protection. Another
means of regulating private protection is to provide public protective services, such
as law enforcement in the case of terrorism, or banking regulations in the case of
deposit insurance. If public protection is substitutable with private protection, this
can also limit excessive private protection. Even if it is not, however, the government
may still find it optimal to provide public protection when it is uniquely positioned
to limit the probability of loss for its citizens. In this case, public protective policies
would provide an additional impetus for insurance subsidies.

3.2.1   Insurance Subsidies
In cases where it is costly or infeasible to tax self-protection, the indirect approach
of insurance subsidies may yield the desired results. By encouraging or forcing the
purchase of insurance, the government encourages moral hazard and therefore reduces
the negative or positive externalities associated with self-protection.
    To see this, consider a government that has access to lump-sum taxation τ in order
to subsidize (or tax) insurance prices. The subsidy rate, fj ≡ f (φ, π j ), is controlled
                                                      ∂f                ∂f
by the government through the choice of φ, with ∂φ       > 0 and 0 ≤ ∂π   j
                                                                            ≤ φ. Agent
j pays the price π j − fj . This general specification can accommodate a variety of
subsidy schemes. In particular, it allows an “additive” subsidy as in

                                      f (φ, π j ) ≡ φ,
where the government offers a fixed contribution per unit of coverage purchased. It
also supports a “multiplicative” subsidy such as

                                     f (φ, π j ) ≡ φπ j ,
where the government pays for a fixed fraction of total insurance costs.
  Agent j now solves:

                                              9
               max      {pj U0 ((W − τ j −L + (1 − π j + f (φ, π j ))Ij − ksj ) + ...                (3.8)
               sj ,Ij

               (1 − pj )U1 ((W − τ j −(π j − f (φ, π j ))Ij − ksj ) + V (s1 , ..., sN ) }.
    The value of the insurance subsidy as a policy tool will depend on whether or
not it discourages self-protection. How will subsidies influence behavior? The answer
depends on two conditions. First, insurance and self-protection must be substitutes.
In other words, there must be moral hazard: the purchase of more insurance ought to
discourage protective investments. Second, the Nash equilibrium across agents must
be stable in a sense we will outline below. If not, subsidies may not affect coverage
or protection decisions.
    Introducing subsidies into Equation 3.3 and Equation 3.4 results in:
                                                                  0
                                                           pj U0
                              π j − f (φ, π j ) =              0                                     (3.9)
                                                    (1 − pj )U1 + pj U00

                    h                    i               µ                    ¶
    ∂pj                  0             0                     ∂π j      ∂π j                ∂V
        (U0 − U1 ) − pj U0 + (1 − pj )U1 (k +                     − fπ            Ij ) +       =0   (3.10)
    ∂sj                                                      ∂sj       ∂sj                 ∂sj
    A budget-balancing subsidy (i.e., one for which τ j = f (φ, π j )Ij ) has no impact on
consumption. However, it will lower the price of insurance in Equation 3.9 and thus
raise the net marginal utility of insurance. If fπ > 0 (e.g., if the subsidy is multiplica-
tive), it also lowers the marginal utility of self-protection. When the government pays
a share of the insurance premium, the agent realizes a smaller share of the premium
reduction associated with investments in self-protection. This weakens incentives for
protection. In the case of an additive subsidy, this effect is not present. In either
case, a subsidy raises the marginal utility of insurance and weakly lowers the marginal
utility of self-protection. These substitution effects will be reinforced if insurance and
self-protection are substitutes–i.e., if there is moral hazard. In the presence of moral
hazard, therefore, subsidies boost insurance and discourage self-protection.
    We identify two sets of conditions—outlined more formally in the appendix—that
give rise to moral hazard. In both cases, we employ constant absolute risk aversion
(CARA) and pj < 0.5. The first set of conditions is actuarially fair insurance pricing
and a multiplicative subsidy, under which f (φ, π j ) = φπ j . Under actuarially fair
pricing, the marginal effect of self-protection on the marginal utility of insurance
                  ∂p
simplifies to fπ ∂sjj (pj U00 + (1 − pj )U10 ). With an additive subsidy, this is equal to
zero,9 but with a multiplicative subsidy, it is negative. For example, suppose the
   9
     Thus, contrary to the findings of Ehrlich and Becker (1972), we find that insurance and self-
protection are independent at the point where pricing is actuarially fair when the relationship be-
tween price and self-protection is maintained. This is because we define insurance as coverage, while
Ehrlich and Becker define it as coverage minus premium. Since self-protection always lowers the
insurance premium, their formulation builds in complementarity at the point of actuarial fairness.

                                                    10
government pays for half the insurance bill. This reduces the agent’s incentives to
lower her premium bill through self-protection.
    Without actuarially fair pricing, it is possible to have moral hazard under more
general types of subsidies, including additive subsidies. With unfair pricing, there
exists a partially offsetting income effect. Extra expenditures on insurance still sub-
stitute for self-protection by narrowing the difference between income in the loss and
no-loss states; this lowers the gains to self-protection. However, extra expenditures
on insurance also lower income and thus may increase risk aversion; this raises the
gain to self-protection. This effect may be particularly significant if the premium and
probability of loss are so high that they sum to more than unity. Sufficient condi-
tions for this outcome to be averted are CARA utility (which eliminates the effect of
income on risk-aversion) and π j − f < 0.5.
    When insurance and self-protection are substitutes, subsidies will encourage insur-
ance and discourage self-protection, but only if the equilibrium across agents is stable
in a sense we outline in the appendix. To see why this condition matters, consider
a terrorist group that seeks to hit only one of N identical targets, and to hit only
the least defended target.10 This case has no stable Nash equilibrium with terrorism.
Suppose there is one, so that all targets purchase the same levels of insurance and
self-protection, and all face the probability N1 of attack. Any one target can lower
her attack probability to zero with just an infinitesimal increase in self-protection.
Therefore, the only stable equilibrium is one in which there is no probability of at-
tack. In this case, government subsidies cannot alter behavior.11 The appendix lists
two conditions sufficient to rule this out. Effectively, we require that an individual’s
own self-protection expenditures have a larger impact on her attack probability than
the expenditures of others. Moreover, Proposition 2 in the appendix shows that these
two conditions are met when terrorists solve the problem outlined in Section 2.
                                                                                   ∂I
    As the appendix demonstrates in more detail, subsidies encourage insurance, ∂φj >
                                               ∂s
0 and discourage self-protection, ∂φj < 0 under the circumstances outlined above.
The government can then use insurance subsidies as a tool to correct failure in the
market for self-protection. Denote the optimal choices of agent j by Ij∗ and s∗j . The
lump sum taxes are fixed in advance of the agent’s maximization (i.e., the agent takes
these as given), but must be consistent with government budget balance, so that τ j =
f (φ, π j )Ij . Define p∗j ≡ pj (s∗1 , ..., s∗N ), π ∗j ≡ π j (s∗1 , ..., s∗N ; α; φ) and Vj∗ ≡ V (s∗1 , ..., s∗N ).
With equal Pareto weights, the government chooses subsidies to solve:




   10
      This strategy is incompatible with the model of terrorism outlined earlier. It requires the
presence of fixed costs of attack that are high enough to cause terrorists to concentrate all their
resources on a single target.
   11
      An exception occurs if subsidies are so high as to encourage full insurance by every target.

                                                        11
                   N
                   X
         max         {p∗j U0 (W − τ j −L + (1 − π ∗j + f (φ, π ∗j ))I ∗j − ks∗j ) + ...              (3.11)
           φ
                   j=1

                   (1 − p∗j )U1 (W − τ j −(π ∗j − f (φ, π ∗j ))Ij∗ −ks∗j ) + V (s∗1 , ..., s∗N )}.

When the budget remains balanced, subsidies have no direct effects on consumption.
They operate through effects on insurance and self-protection choices. When the indi-
vidual chooses insurance and self-protection optimally (given the taxes and subsidies
imposed by the government), the government’s first order condition simplifies to

                                                 N
                                                 X     dIj∗ £ ∗ 0                    ¤
                                              −     fj                           0
                                                             pj U0j + (1 − p∗j )U1j )
                                                j=1
                                                       dφ
                              XN
                                   ∂fj ∂π ∗j ds∗j £ ∗ 0                      ¤
                                 −               Ij pj U0j + (1 − p∗j )U1j
                                                                         0
                                                                           ) +                       (3.12)
                              j=1
                                   ∂π j ∂sj dφ
   XN X         ·                                                              ¸
            ds∗m ∂p∗j                ∂Vj∗     ∂π ∗j ∗ ∗ 0              ∗    0
                      (U0j − U1j ) +       −       I (p U + (1 − pj )U1j ) = 0
   j=1 m6=j
             dφ ∂sm                  ∂sm ∂sm j j 0j

When subsidies are zero, the top two lines are zero and the third line is positive. As
a result, some subsidization is always optimal. Intuitively, it is costless to distort an
(unsubsidized and) efficient market, so that subsidies are always beneficial initially.
This is true even if prices are actuarially fair.12
    The first term (top line) reflects the marginal cost of distorting the insurance
market. Without subsidies, fj = 0, and this term is zero. As subsidies rise, however, it
                                                                                 dI ∗
becomes negative, because the subsidies encourage insurance consumption ( dφj > 0).
In this case, agents are overconsuming insurance relative to its true marginal cost
because they do not consider the effect of their consumption decisions on their tax
bill.
    Similarly, the second term (middle line) reflects the costs associated with distorting
incentives for individual self-protection. If there are no subsidies, or if the price does
                             ∂f
not affect the subsidy level ∂πjj = 0, this term is zero. On the other hand, if there is a
subsidy and the subsidy rises in price (as is the case for a multiplicative subsidy), this
                                  ds∗
term will be negative because dφj < 0. In other words, subsidies that rise with price
distort the pecuniary incentives for individuals to self-protect, and this term reflects
the effect of that distortion.

  12
     One possible caveat applies to a case of adverse selection in the insurance market. If adverse
selection results in a knife-edge separating equilibrium, it is possible that an infinitesimally small
subsidy could break this equilibrium and have adverse consequences for welfare.

                                                   12
    The final term (bottom line) reflects the benefit of lowering self-protection when it
has external effects. This includes the external effects of others’ self-protection on an
individual’s premium, probability    of loss, and the public good. This term is positive
   ∂pj      ∂Vj           ds∗m
if ∂sm > 0, ∂sm < 0, and dφ < 0. That is, in the case of negative externalities to self-
protection, this term will reflect a benefit, because subsidies limit these externalities.

3.2.2   Public Protection
In practice, governments do more to fight terrorism than just intervene in the insur-
ance markets. They develop military and law enforcement strategies to protect their
citizens against terror. The linkages among public protection, self-protection, and in-
surance influence the effectiveness of insurance policy. Even in the presence of public
protection though, the optimal policy is likely to involve some level of subsidies for
terror insurance, because it is costless (on the margin) to distort a perfectly function-
ing insurance market. However, insurance subsidies may be either complementary
or substitutable with public protection, depending on the technological relationship
between public and private protection.
    Suppose investments in public protection, σ, are available at a normalized price
of 1. They lower the probability of loss, but are free from the externalities that
characterize private protection. Finally, the cost of public protection is assumed to
be spread equally over the N agents in the tax bill, so the government’s new budget
constraint is now
                                                     σ
                                    τ j = f (φ, π j ) + .
                                                     N
    Insurance subsidies remain optimal even in the presence of public protection.
The left-hand side of Equation 3.12 gives the marginal utility to the government of
insurance subsidies. As discussed earlier, at a zero subsidy level, the first two lines
are zero, because it is costless to distort a perfectly functioning  market for insurance.
                                                       ds∗m
The third line is always positive, provided that dφ < 0, or that subsidies lower
self-protection. This will be true under the conditions discussed earlier,13 so long as
we have an interior solution in private protection. In other words, if targets protect
themselves at all, the marginal utility of subsidies is always positive in an unsubsidized
equilibrium.
    While subsidies are always optimal, it is less clear whether or not they are com-
plementary or substitutable with public protection. To investigate this, we will
first examine the relationships among public protection, insurance, and private self-
protection. Under the types of conditions we have been considering, insurance and
public protection are substitutes, because increases in public protection make it
less risky to go uninsured. To see this, denote the marginal utility of wealth as
λj ≡ pj U00 + (1 − pj )U10 and observe that under a balanced budget constraint,
  13
    These conditions are: π − f < 0.5, unfair pricing, and CARA utility. Alternatively, we can
assume fair insurance pricing, π < 0.5, CARA utility, and f (φ, π j ) = φπ j .

                                              13
                ∂ 2 Uj∗   ∂p∗j
                        ≡      [(1 − π ∗j − p∗j + f (φ, π ∗j ) + p∗j fπ )(U0j
                                                                            0    0
                                                                              − U1j )+
                ∂I∂σ      ∂σ                                 ·                ¸                 (3.13)
                                                     0         1      ∂π ∗j ∗    ∂λj
                                                fπ U1j ]+         +        Ij [−      ]
                                                               N       ∂σ         ∂I
We will impose the same three conditions as in the previous section: π−f < 0.5, unfair
pricing, and CARA utility. Under these assumptions, this expression is negative.
Unfair pricing and π − f < 0.5 ensures that the first term is negative. The second
term is an income effect that could be positive or negative (or zero), depending on
the productivity of public protection. CARA utility ensures that it is zero.
    Public and private protection may be either complements or substitutes. Com-
puting the cross-partial between private and public protection reveals that


  ∂ 2 Uj∗
          ≡
  ∂s∂σ
           ∂ 2 pj                                         ∂ 2π                  ∂π j          ∂π j
                  (U0 − U1 ) − [pj U00 + (1 − pj )U10 ][       Ij (1 − fπ ) +        Ij (−fππ      )]
          ∂sj ∂σ                                         ∂s∂σ                   ∂sj            ∂σ
               ∂pj 0                ∂π
          −[       (U0 − U10 )](k +     (1 − fπ )Ij )
                ∂σ                  ∂sj
                1    ∂π j ∂pj 0                     ∂π j                     00               00
          −( +           )[     (U0 − U10 ) − (k +        (1 − fπ )Ij )(pj U0 + (1 − pj )U1 )]
                N    ∂σ ∂sj                         ∂sj

                                                                                                (3.14)

For simplicity, suppose that fππ = 0, so that the subsidy is at most linear in the
premium. (This accommodates a multiplicative or additive subsidy.) The first line
represents the technological relationship between public and private protection—the
direct impact of public protection investment on the productivity of private protec-
tion in reducing the loss probability. The sign of this effect can be positive (if public
protection makes private investments more productive at reducing the loss probabil-
ity) or negative (if the reverse is true). The second line, which is positive, captures an
indirect income effect; by reducing the probability of loss, public protection effectively
makes the agent richer and more willing to spend on private protection. The third
line represents another type of income effect. Spending on private protection affects
the marginal utility of wealth, and this affects the marginal cost of spending resources
on public protection. The sign of this effect depends on two factors: the form of the
utility function, which determines the relationship between self-protection and the
marginal utility of wealth; and whether public protection is costly or beneficial in a
strictly pecuniary sense. Under CARA utility, self protection has no impact on the
marginal utility of wealth and this term is zero.

                                                 14
    If public and private protection are technological complements in reducing the loss
probability, Equation 3.14 is positive under CARA utility; public protection would
then encourage private protection by making it more productive. The technological
effect is positive and reinforced by the indirect income effect (the second line), while
the traditional income effect disappears due to CARA utility. The appendix shows
that, in this case (along with our assumptions of unfair pricing, π < 0.5, and CARA
           ∂s                 ∂I
utility): ∂σ    > 0, and ∂σ      < 0.
    If, on the other hand, public and private protection are substitutes in reducing the
loss probability, the technological effect will be negative, while the indirect income
effect is positive. The response of the consumer will then depend on which effect
dominates. The appendix proves that, in the case where public and private protection
                                 ∂s             ∂I
are perfect substitutes, ∂σ         < 0, and ∂σ       =0
    These findings have important implications for how subsidies should respond
to increases in the efficiency of public protection technology. Include the public
protection level σ in the equilibrium loss probability and premium, according to
p∗j ≡ pj (s∗1 , ..., s∗N ; σ), and π ∗j ≡ π j (s1∗ , ..., s∗N ; α; σ). With equal Pareto weights, the
government chooses subsidies and public protection to solve:

                   N
                   X
         max         {p∗j U0 (W − τ j −L + (1 + f (φ, π ∗j ) − π ∗j )I ∗j − ks∗j ) + ...             (3.15)
          φ,σ
                   j=1

                   (1 − p∗j )U1 (W − τ j −(π ∗j − f (φ, π ∗j ))Ij∗ −ks∗j ) + V (s∗1 , ..., s∗N )}.

The first order condition for insurance subsidies is essentially the same as before.
Assuming that individuals choose insurance and self-protection optimally, the gov-
ernment’s first order condition for public protection simplifies to:

                         N ·
                         X                                                              ¸
                             ∂p∗j             ∂π ∗j           ∗ ∗ 0             ∗    0
                               (U0j − U1j ) −       (1 − fπ )Ij (pj U0j + (1 − pj )U1j ) +
                      j=1
                            ∂σ                 ∂σ
   XN X         ·                                                                       ¸
            ds∗m ∂p∗j                 ∂Vj∗    ∂π ∗j           ∗ ∗ 0             ∗    0
                       (U0j − U1j ) +      −        (1 − fπ )Ij (pj U0j + (1 − pj )U1j ) +
   j=1 m6=j
             dσ   ∂s m                ∂s m    ∂s m

                                              X N ·                                   ¸
                                                        dτ ∗ 0                ∗    0
                                                     (− )(pj U0j + (1 − pj )U1j ) = 0
                                               j=1
                                                        dσ
                                                                                                     (3.16)

The first line represents the social benefit of reducing the probability of loss through
public protection, while the third line represents the pecuniary cost of financing pro-
tection. The middle line reflects the impact of public protection on private protection
decisions. If public and private protection are complements, this is a cost: public

                                                   15
protection worsens externalities in private protection. However, if public protection
is sufficiently productive, the benefits can overcome the costs. In other words, there
can be public protection, even if it worsens these externalities. In this case, increases
in public protection worsen externalities and thus increase the productivity of subsi-
dizing insurance in order to limit them.
    On the other hand, when public protection makes private protection less produc-
        ∂2p                                                              ∂s
tive ( ∂s∂σ > 0), public protection may discourage private protection ( ∂σ  < 0). Public
protection then has the added benefit of reducing externalities in private protection.
As a result, additional public protection limits protective externalities and makes
insurance subsidies less productive. In other words, it functions as a substitute for
insurance subsidies. Both are policy techniques that can be used to discourage self-
protection. Insurance premium subsidies accomplish the task indirectly by encourag-
ing higher levels of insurance purchase and thus lowering the gains to self-protection,
while public protection expenditures are direct substitutes for private protection.
    Public protection and insurance subsidies may be complementary in other circum-
stances, even in the absence of any strong relationship between public and private
protection. For example, consider the case where the government pays for all insur-
ance premiums to the point of full insurance. In this case, all agents fully insure and
set private protection to zero. In this case, neither insurance nor private protection
respond to changes in public protection, but it may still be optimal for the govern-
ment to provide public protection in order to reduce the tax bill. Mathematically,
Equation 3.16 reduces to
                    N
                    X                                       ·                   ¸
                      ¡                                 ¢         ∂π ∗j ∗   1
                          p∗j U0j
                               0
                                    + (1 −   p∗j )U1j
                                                   0
                                                                −      Ij −         = 0,
                    j=1
                                                                  ∂σ        N

a marginal utility weighted average balancing of the marginal pecuniary cost of public
                                                                  ∂π ∗
protection, N1 , with its marginal premium reduction benefit, − ∂σj Ij∗ .
    This example, though extreme, illuminates another sense in which public protec-
tion and insurance subsidies can be complements. Insurance subsidies can mitigate
private incentives for premium reductions while simultaneously increasing the gov-
ernment’s share of insurance premiums. As this share rises, the government is faced
with increased incentives for reducing insurance premiums, and public protection
accomplishes such a reduction.
    In general, the government will find it optimal to mix subsidies and public pro-
tection according to their cost-efficiency in reducing private protection and according
to their level of complementarity. Changes in the efficiency of public protection can
be expected to affect the optimal mix according to the relationship between public
protection and private protection. When public protection and private protection are
substitutes, changes in the efficiency of public protection—manifested by an increase
   ∂p
in ∂σ —would cause an increase in public protection, but a decrease in subsidies. On
the other hand, if public and private protection are complements, the same increase


                                                  16
in efficiency might result in more subsidies, not less. In the latter case, subsidies are
used in part to counteract the ill effects of public protection on the market for private
protection.


4     Conclusion
Insurance and protection against terrorism—like insurance against crime or war—is
distinguished by its influence on the behavior of terrorists and thus on the probability
of loss. This creates externalities in the market for protection. A terrorist group can
create negative externalities in protection that call for government insurance subsidies,
just by pursuing its own objectives rationally. These subsidies are still optimal even
in the presence of public law enforcement strategies.
    This paper argues that, if the U.S. federal government does decide to subsidize
terrorism insurance, the primary motivation will likely have been these externali-
ties. Indeed, the capital market frictions emphasized in this and other catastrophe
markets (see, e.g., Froot, 1997) may be the catalyst for government action, but the
distinguishing feature of the terrorism insurance market—and the feature that may
ultimately trigger the enactment of subsidies—is the external effects associated with
self protection. A construction project foundering in Manhattan due to lack of af-
fordable terrorism insurance coverage may be seen as a national public policy issue,
while similar foundering associated with windstorm or earthquake insurance coverage
is not. The framework of this paper can be used to interpret terrorism insurance sub-
sidies as a strategy of influencing behavior in the context of a war effort. In this light,
government-sponsored terrorism insurance appears to have more in common with war-
risk life insurance (government insurance provided to soldiers) or propaganda (which
discourages behavior likely to generate negative externalities, and vice-versa) than
with programs aimed at remedying the problems in catastrophe insurance markets
(such as the National Flood Insurance Program).
    Although the main focus of this paper was the terrorism insurance market, the
paper’s ideas need not be so limited in their application. To illustrate the exten-
sion of the ideas, we have highlighted deposit insurance and banking regulation as
an example of insurance subsidies and public protection working in tandem, with
the former a policy specifically aimed at discouraging self-protective behavior. Going
further, it seems likely that the government’s policy of subsidization in other insur-
ance markets—such as health insurance—may also have behavioral goals that have
remained largely unexplored by economists. This seems a fruitful area for future
research.




                                            17
     Mathematical Appendix
     The individual chooses insurance and self-protection to maximize the objective func-
     tion discussed in the text:

                       Q ≡ pj U0 (W − L − τ j + (1 + f (φ, π j ) − π j )Ij − ksj )+
                                                                                                       (A.1)
                          (1 − pj )U1 (W − τ j + (f (φ, π j ) − π j )Ij − ksj ) + Vj
     This is subject to the budget-balancing constraint:

                                               τ j = f (φ, π j )Ij                                     (A.2)
         The problem in Equation A.1 has the following two first order conditions:

                 ∂pj                                                ∂π j      ∂π j
        Qs j =       [U0 − U1 ] − [pj U00 + (1 − pj )U10 ](k + Ij (      − fπ      )) + Vsj = 0        (A.3)
                 ∂sj                                                ∂sj       ∂sj

                    QIj = pj U00 (1 + f (φ, π j ) − π j ) − (1 − pj )U10 (π − f (φ, π j )) = 0         (A.4)
         The second derivatives are given by:
                                          00                             00
                             QIj Ij = pU0 (1 + f − π)2 + (1 − p)U1 (π − f )2                           (A.5)

                                                   µ                      ¶
                ∂ 2 pj                ∂pj 0     0           ∂π j
    Qsj sj =           [U0 − U1 ] − 2     [U − U1 ] k + Ij       (1 − fπ ) + Vsj sj        (A.6)
               ∂sj ∂sj                ∂sj 0                 ∂sj
                                                     "                                ¶2 #
 ³ 00            00
                    ´µ        ∂π j
                                            ¶2
                                                        ∂ 2πj
                                                                               µ
                                                                                 ∂π j
+ pU0 + (1 − p)U1      k + Ij      (1 − fπ ) − λj Ij           (1 − fπ ) − fππ
                              ∂sj                      ∂sj ∂sj                   ∂sj

         It is also useful to calculate the cross-partial of Q.

                 ∂pj 0                                  ∂pj 0 ∂π j
         Qsj Ij =    (U0 − U10 )(f (φ, π j ) − π j ) +        U −         (1 − fπ )λj −
                 ∂sj                                    ∂sj 0 ∂sj
                   ∂π j
              (k +      (1 − fπ )Ij )[pj U000 (1 + f (φ, π j ) − π j ) + (1 − pj )U100 (f (φ, π j ) − π j )]
                   ∂sj
                                                                                                         (A.7)
     The term λj ≡ pj U00 + (1 − pj )U10 represents the marginal utility of wealth.
         Before proceeding with comparative statics, we must verify that the second order
     conditions hold. The fulfillment of the second order conditions turns out to depend
     on the “curvature” of the loss probability function relative to the curvature of the
     utility function. The following proposition identifies some conditions sufficient for the
     first order conditions to represent a maximum.

                                                       18
Proposition 1 Let p be decreasing and convex and U be a CARA utility function with
                                                               00            0
coefficient of absolute risk aversion given by µ. Let Z = pp0 and Y = pp , with µ =
|Y | ≤ |Z|. If, in addition, subsidized prices are weakly unfair, fππ = 0, V = 0, k = 1,
and π < 0.5, the second order conditions are satisfied.

Proof: The SOC are satisfied if (a) QIj Ij < 0, (b) Qsj sj < 0, and (c) QIj Ij Qsj sj −
¡       ¢2
  Qsj Ij > 0. Inspection of Equation A.5 reveals that (a) is satisfied. To see that (b)
is satisfied, use the assumptions above, together with the fact that π 0 = p0 , to write
Equation A.6 as:
                     ³ 0                               ´     ¡                    ¢2
           Qsj sj = Z pj [U0j − U1j ] − λpj (1 − fπ )Ij + µλj k + Ij p0j (1 − fπ )
                                          0


or
                                             ¡                    ¢2
                         Qsj sj = Zλj k + µλj k + Ij p0j (1 − fπ )
Since 0 < (k + Ij p0 (1 − fπ )) < k = 1 and −Z ≥ µ, Qsj sj < 0.
    To see that (c) is satisfied, use CARA utility and Equation A.4) to write Equa-
tion A.5 as

                              QIj Ij = −µλj (1 + f − π j )(π j − f ).
Similarly, use Equation A.4 to write Equation A.7 as
                               ·                                        ¸
                                 (1 + f − π j )(π j − f )
                 Qsj Ij = Y λj                            − pj (1 − fπ ) .
                                       (1 − pj )
Next, solve for εj = Ij p0j (1 − fπ ). From Equation A.3,

                                          p0 [U0 − U1 ]
                                                        − k = εj ,
                                               λj
which simplifies to
                                µ                      ¶            µ                  ¶
                         Y           p[U00 − U10 ]                      π j − f − pj
                  εj = −                                    −k =                           − k.
                         µ                λj                               (1 − pj )
     So, we can now write:

                 QIj Ij Qsj sj > µ2 λ2j (π j − f )(1 + f − π j ) [k − (k + εj )]2

                                                       ·                              ¸2
                        ¡            ¢2                    (1 + f − π j )(π j − f )
                            Qsj Ij        <   µ2 λ2j
                                                                 (1 − pj )
Some algebra shows that
                                   ¡      ¢2
                    QIj Ij Qsj sj − Qsj Ij > 0 ⇐⇒ p < 0.5.                         QED.

                                                            19
    Even if the second order conditions hold, comparative statics are complicated by
the interactions among the agents. We must consider these interactions when deter-
mining how a change in an underlying parameter—such as the level of the subsidy—
will affect individual behavior. To do this, we study a symmetric equilibrium where all
agents have the same preferences, make identical choices, and face the same prices, loss
probabilities, subsidies, and taxes. Furthermore, we impose additional restrictions on
the relationship between the probability of loss and agent actions. Specifically,
                                                                             " ∂p    #as de-
                                             ¯ ¯ ¯P               ¯               j
                                             ¯ ∂p ¯ ¯        ∂p ¯              ∂s
lineated in Proposition 3, we require that ¯ ∂sjj ¯ > ¯ k6=j ∂skj ¯ and ∂s∂ j P j ∂pj > 0.
                                                                               k6=j ∂sk

    Are these restrictions reasonable? To shed more light on what they mean, consider
the terrorist problem outlined in Equation 2.1. In the following proposition, we show
that both restrictions are plausible. The first restriction is a direct implication of
terrorist maximization in a symmetric setting under standard regularity conditions.
The second restriction depends, in part, on third derivatives of the loss probability
function; if these terms are sufficiently small relative to the second and first order
effects, the second restriction will hold. To illustrate this, we assume that the third
derivatives are zero in the following proposition.

Proposition 2 Suppose terrorists solve Equation 2.1, with fixed R, ρs < 0, ρr > 0,
ρ
¯ rr ¯< 0,¯Pρss > 0,¯ ρsr < 0, and si = sj observed ∀i, j. Let pj = ρ(sj , rj ). Then,
¯ ∂p ¯ ¯          ∂p ¯
¯ ∂sjj ¯ > ¯ k6=j ∂skj ¯ . Suppose, in addition, that ρs and psr are bounded from below, ρr
and ρss are bounded away      " from zero,
                                        #    and all third partials of ρ are zero. Then, for
                                    ∂pj
                         ∂          ∂sj
sufficiently large N,   ∂sj     P      ∂pj   > 0.
                                  k6=j ∂sk



Proof: Rewrite the maximization problem as
                       (N −1                 µ                ¶)
                        X                              NP
                                                        −1
                   max       ρ (si , ri ) + ρ sN , R −     ri    .
                        {ri }                                    i=1
                                    i=1

This leads to the first order conditions

                                 ρir − ρN
                                        r = 0        i = 1, ..., N − 1.
The Hessian is given by:
                                                                         
                                ρ1rr + ρN
                                        rr    ρN
                                               rr    . . .     ρNrr
                                    N
                                    ρrr     2     N
                                           ρrr + ρrr           ρN         
                                                                rr       
                                    .               .           .        
                  H=
                    
                                                                          ,
                                                                          
                                    .                 .         .        
                                    .                   .       .        
                                     N         N
                                    ρrr       ρrr    . . . ρrr + ρN
                                                            N −1
                                                                    rr



                                                    20
where the superscripts indicate the subscript of the first argument in the probability
function (i.e., ρ1rr = ρrr (s1, r1 )). Evidently, for all i and j, ρirr = ρjrr = ρrr < 0. It is
then easy to verify that the second order conditions for a maximum hold.
   The determinant of H can be calculated as N (ρrr )N −1 . A simple exercise in com-
parative statics reveals that

                           ¯                                                ¯
                           ¯ −ρsr ρrr     .                 . . ρrr         ¯
                           ¯                                                ¯
                           ¯ 0    2ρ     ρ                  . . ρrr         ¯
                           ¯          rr   rr                               ¯
    ∂r1        1           ¯ .    ρ      2ρ                      .          ¯ −ρsr (N − 1)   ∂ri
        =                  ¯        rr      rr                              ¯=             =     , ∀i.
    ∂s1   N (ρrr )N −1     ¯ .      .                       .    .          ¯    ρrr N       ∂si
                           ¯                                                ¯
                           ¯ .      .                         .  .          ¯
                           ¯                                                ¯
                           ¯ 0     ρrr    .                 . . 2ρrr        ¯
                                                                                                    (A.8)
Similarly,
                                          ∂ri   ρ
                                              = sr , ∀ i, j 6= i.                                              (A.9)
                                          ∂sj  ρrr N
   We can then write

                                          ∂pi   ∂ρi ∂ρi ∂ri
                                              =     +         ,                                               (A.10)
                                          ∂si   ∂si   ∂ri ∂si
                                                  ∂pi   ∂ρi ∂ri
                                                      =         .                                             (A.11)
                                                  ∂sj   ∂ri ∂sj
Evidently,
                                                     ¯     ¯ ¯          ¯
                     X ∂ρi ∂ri           ∂ρi ∂ri     ¯ ∂pi ¯ ¯¯X ∂pi ¯¯
                                      =−         =⇒ ¯¯     ¯>¯          ¯.
                       j6=i
                              ∂ri ∂sj    ∂ri ∂si       ∂si ¯ ¯ j6=i ∂sj ¯

   Moving on, note that
                       "       ∂pj        #        ∂ 2 pj   P         ∂pj       ∂pj   P          ∂ 2 pj
                  ∂            ∂sj                ∂sj ∂sj        k6=j ∂sk   −   ∂sj        k6=j ∂sj ∂sk
                           P        ∂pj
                                              =                    ³P                 ´2                  .   (A.12)
                 ∂sj           k6=j ∂sk
                                                                             ∂pj
                                                                        k6=j ∂sk

To determine the value of this expression, we calculate
                                                    µ     ¶2
                ∂ 2 pj              ∂rj     ∂ 2 pj    ∂rj          ∂ 2 rj
                       = ρss + 2ρsr       +                  + ρr                                             (A.13)
               ∂sj ∂sj              ∂sj ∂rj ∂rj ∂sj               ∂sj ∂sj
                                            µ      ¶µ      ¶
                ∂ 2 pj       ∂rj     ∂ 2 pj   ∂rj      ∂rj         ∂ 2 rj
                       = ρsr     +                           + ρr                                             (A.14)
              ∂sj ∂sk        ∂sk ∂rj ∂rj ∂sj           ∂sk        ∂sj ∂sk


                                                            21
The proposition is proven if the numerator of Equation A.12 is positive. Using Equa-
tions A.8, A.9, A.10, A.11, A.13, and A.14, we write the numerator as

                   "                                            #µ     ¶
                                                            2
                             (N + 1) (N − 1) (ρsr )        ρsr (N − 1)
                       ρss −                            ρr               −
                               N          N    ρrr         ρrr N
                             "                   #µ                     ¶                              (A.15)
                               1 (ρsr )2 (N − 1)            ρsr (N − 1)
                                                    ρs − ρr               ,
                               N ρrr        N               ρrr N

where we have noted that the last terms in both Equations A.13 and A.14 are zero, as
they depend only on third derivatives of ρ. Furthermore, Equation A.15 > 0 reduces
to

                                        (N − 1) (ρsr )2   1 ρs
                                ρss −                   −      ρ >0
                                          N      ρrr      N ρr sr
         ¯         ¯
         ¯         ¯
   Since ¯ ρρs ρsr ¯ is bounded and ρss is positive and bounded away from zero, the
             r
                                                                   " ∂p     #
                                                                                                  j
                                                                                       ∂        ∂sj
preceding condition holds for sufficiently large N. Therefore,                        ∂sj   P    ∂pj        > 0.
                                                                                            k6=j ∂sk

QED.
                                                        "              #
                 ¯ ¯ ¯P                       ¯                 ∂pj
                 ¯ ∂p ¯ ¯                  ∂pj ¯                ∂sj
Proposition 3 If ¯ ∂sjj ¯ > ¯ k6=j               , ∂
                                           ∂sk ¯ ∂sj        P    ∂pj        > 0, CARA utility, and V = 0,
                                                            k6=j ∂sk
            ds             ds                      dI                       ds
then sign( dφj ) = sign( dφj |sk ), and sign( dφj ) = −sign( dφj ).

Proof: We can decompose the first-order effects of subsidies as follows:

                                                            X               dsk
                                  Qsj φ = Qsj φ |sk +              Qsj sk
                                                            k6=j
                                                                            dφ
                                                            X                                          (A.16)
                                                                    dsk
                                  QIj φ   = QIj φ |sk +      QIj sk
                                                        k6=j
                                                                    dφ

                 dsj
   Computing     dφ
                     and applying these identities yields the expression:
                       µ    P                                       ¶
                   dsj        k6=j (Qsj sk QIj Ij − QIj sk Qsj Ij )     dsj
                         1+                                           =     |s                         (A.17)
                   dφ                        D                          dφ k
                                                                                       ds              ds
    D is the determinant of the Hessian matrix. To prove sign( dφj ) = sign( dφj |sk ),
it suffices to show that the term in parentheses is positive. To begin, observe the
following equivalence:

                                                    22
                            "     ∂pj          Ã                         !#
                                  ∂sj
                                                X
                   Qsj ≡ P             ∂pj
                                                          Qsk − Vsk               + Vsj − λj k,                     (A.18)
                                  k6=j ∂sk       k6=j


where λj is the marginal utility of wealth. Differentiating this equivalence, and ob-
serving that λj is independent of Ij and sj under CARA utility and V = 0, we
obtain:
                      "     Ã ∂pj         !#                ∂pj
                         ∂       ∂sj
                                             X              ∂sj
                                                                     X
             Qsj sj =        P       ∂p
                                                  Q s   + P     ∂p
                                                                          Qsk sj (A.19)
                        ∂sj     k6=j
                                        j
                                             k6=j
                                                      k
                                                           k6=j
                                                                   j
                                                                     k6=j
                                               ∂sk                                      ∂sk


                                                       ∂pj
                                                       ∂sj
                                                                    X
                                  Qsj Ij = P                ∂pj
                                                                         Qsk Ij                                     (A.20)
                                                       k6=j ∂sk k6=j


   Using the above two expressions, we can derive:

                                           P                                   P
                                  QIj Ij        k6=j   Qsj sk − Qsj Ij             k6=j     QIj sk
                                                                                                       =
                                                              D
                                                                P     ∂pj                    ∂pj
                                               P                k6=j ∂sk                     ∂sj                    (A.21)
                   P        ∂pj       QIj Ij       k6=j   Qsk     ∂pj         [ ∂s∂ j ( P        ∂pj   )]
                       k6=j ∂sk                                   ∂sj                       k6=j ∂sk

                        ∂pj
                                  −
                                                                    D
                        ∂sj
                                                                              "                 #
                          ¯ ¯ ¯P                           ¯                          ∂pj
                          ¯ ∂p ¯ ¯                     ∂pj ¯             ∂            ∂sj
Using the conditions that ¯ ∂sjj ¯ > ¯ k6=j            ∂sk ¯
                                                            , and       ∂sj       P     ∂pj          > 0, it is straightfor-
                                                                                   k6=j ∂sk
                                                                                                       ds           ds
ward to show that this expression exceeds −1. This proves sign( dφj ) = sign( dφj |sk ).
                                                                                  ¯ 2 ¯
                           dI            ds                                       ¯     ¯
   To prove that sign( dφj ) = −sign( dφj ), observe from Equation A.19 that ¯ ∂∂sQ2 ¯ >
¯P               ¯                       P ∂2Q                            PN
                                                                                      j
¯         2Q ¯
¯ k6=j ∂s∂j ∂s k
                 ¯. This implies that ds
                                      dφ   k ∂s j ∂s k
                                                       < 0. Therefore, ds
                                                                       dφ  k=1 Qsj sk < 0.
                 ds
As a result, if dφ  > 0, the change in self-protection levels will lower Qsj . Since a
budget-balancing subsidy has the direct effect of weakly lowering Qsj , the only way
for the individual to remain at her optimal level of self-protection is for her to lower
                                                          ds
insurance and thus boost Qsj in response. Similarly, if dφ   < 0, the resulting change in
self-protection levels will raise Qsj and necessitate an offsetting increase in Ij . QED
                                                                                              ds               ds
Corollary 3.1 Under the conditions of Proposition 3, sign( dσj ) = sign( dσj |sk ), and
     dI             ds
sign( dσj ) = −sign( dσj ).



                                                          23
                             ds                ds
Proof. The proof of sign( dσj ) = sign( dσj |sk ) is identical to the one in the proposition,
if
¯ we    replace
          ¯   ¯Pφ with2 σ. ¯To prove the second  result, observe from Equation A.20 that
¯ ∂2Q ¯       ¯       ∂ Q ¯                ds
                                              PN                                 ds
¯ ∂sj ∂Ij ¯ > ¯ k6=j ∂Ij ∂sk ¯. Therefore, dσ k=1 QIj sk < 0. As a result, if dσ    > 0, the
change in self-protection levels will lower QIj . Recall from the text that QIj σ < 0.
Therefore, the change in σ will also lower QIj . The only way for the individual to
                                                                                     ds
remain at an optimal level of insurance is to lower Ij in response. Similarly, if dσ    < 0,
equilibrium requires that Ij rises. QED

Proposition 4 Assume 0.5 > π − f > p, fφπ ≥ 0, CARA utility, and the conditions
                            ds              dI
of Proposition 1 hold. Then dφj |sk < 0 and dφj |sk > 0.

                                          ∂p
Proof. With 0.5 > π > p, ∂π       ∂s
                                      = ∂sj , and CARA utility, Qsj Ij < 0. To see this,
                   ∂p                                   ∂p         ∂π
observe first that ∂sjj (U00 − U10 )(f (φ, π j ) − π) + ∂sjj U00 − ∂s j
                                                                        (1 − fπ )λ < 0, provided
             ∂p
that ∂π ∂s
                                                          ∂π
           = ∂sj , and π + p < 1. In the last term, (k + ∂s j
                                                              (1 − fπ )Ij ) > 0, because
U0 < U1 . CARA utility guarantees that the final term in parentheses (which equals
dλj
 dIj
     ) is zero.
     Under a balanced budget constraint, we have the relationships QIj φ |sk = fφ λj > 0,
                      ∂π
and Qsj φ |sk = fφπ ∂sjj λj ≤ 0. Therefore, standard comparative statics arguments
imply that:

                             dsj       −QIj Ij Qsj φ + QIj φ QIj sj
                                 |sk =                                                  (A.22)
                             dφ                     D
                             dIj       −QIj φ Qsj sj + QIj sj Qsj φ
                                 |sk =                                                  (A.23)
                             dφ                     D
where D is the (positive, by virtue of Proposition 1) determinant of the Hessian
                   ds                                dI
matrix. Evidently, dφj |sk is strictly negative, and dφj |sk is strictly positive. QED

                                                                           dsj              dIj
Corollary 4.1 Under the conditions of Propositions 1, 2, and 4,            dφ
                                                                                 < 0, and   dφ
                                                                                                  >
0.

Proof. Under the conditions of CARA utility, π > p, and π + p < 1, Proposition
               ds               dI
4 implies that dφj |sk < 0, and dφj |sk > 0. The strategic equilibrium conditions and
                                   dsj               dIj
Proposition 3 then imply that      dφ
                                         < 0 and     dφ
                                                           > 0. QED

Proposition 5 If π − f = p, π < 0.5, CARA utility, the conditions of Proposition 1
                                    ds              dI
hold, and f (φ, π j ) = φπ j , then dφj |sk < 0 and dφj |sk > 0.

                                               ∂p
Proof. With fair pricing, Qsj Ij = λfπ ∂sjj . With a multiplicative subsidy, this expres-
sion is strictly negative. Equations A.22 and A.23 then imply the results. QED


                                                    24
                                                                                   dsj              dIj
Corollary 5.1 Under the conditions of Proposition 1, 2, and 5,                     dφ
                                                                                         < 0, and   dφ
                                                                                                           > 0.
                                                                    dsj
Proof. The conditions of Proposition 5 imply that                       |
                                                                    dφ sk
                                                                              < 0. Propositions 2 and 3
                        dsj             dIj
then imply that         dφ
                              < 0 and   dφ
                                              > 0. QED
                                      ∂ p          2
Proposition 6 If 0.5 > π − f > p, ∂s∂σ      < 0, utility is CARA, and the conditions of
                         dsj              dIj
Proposition 1 hold, then dσ |sk > 0 and dσ |sk < 0.
Proof. In the text, it was shown that these conditions imply QIj σ < 0 and Qsj σ > 0.
The proof of Proposition 4 showed that they implied QIj sj < 0. Standard comparative
statics arguments imply that:

                                     dsj       −QIj Ij Qsj σ + QIj σ QIj sj
                                         |sk =                                                       (A.24)
                                     dσ                     D

                                     dIj       −QIj σ Qsj sj + Qsj σ Qsj Ij
                                         |sk =                                                       (A.25)
                                     dσ                     D

The results then follow from these expressions. QED
                                                                                     dsj                  dIj
Corollary 6.1 Under the conditions of Propositions 1, 2, and 6,                      dσ
                                                                                           > 0, and       dσ
                                                                                                                <
0.
                                               dsj                                                  dsj
Proof. Proposition 6 implies that                  |
                                               dσ sk
                                                       > 0. Corollary 3.1 then implies that         dσ
                                                                                                           > 0,
    dI
and dσj < 0. QED.
                                                                                             ∂p       ∂pj
Proposition 7 If 0.5 > π − f > p, σ and s are perfect substitutes ( ∂sjj =                            ∂σ
                                                                                                                <
   ∂ 2 pj      ∂ 2 pj
0, ∂sj ∂σ =   ∂sj ∂σ
                        > 0), the conditions of Proposition 1 hold, and CARA utility, then
dsj                 dI
    |
dσ sk
        <0    and dσj |sk     = 0.
Proof. These conditions imply that QIj σ = QIj sj and Qsj σ = Qsj sj . Comparative
statics (and substitution) yields:

                              dsj        −QIj Ij Qsj sj + QIj sj QIj sj   −D
                                  |s k =                                =    <0                      (A.26)
                              dσ                       D                   D

                                 dIj       −QIj sj Qsj sj + QIj sj Qsj sj
                                     |sk =                                =0                         (A.27)
                                 dσ                      D

   QED.
                                                                                     dsj                  dIj
Corollary 7.1 Under the conditions of Propositions 1, 2, and 7,                      dσ
                                                                                           < 0, and       dσ
                                                                                                                =
0.
                                                  ds                 dIj
Proof. Proposition 7 implies that dσj |sk < 0 and                        |
                                                                     dσ sk
                                                                               = 0. Corollary 3.1 then
             ds           dI
implies that dσj > 0, and dσj < 0. QED.

                                                       25
References
Ayres, I., and S. D. Levitt (1998). “Measuring Positive Externalities From Unobserv-
 able Victim Precaution: An Empirical Analysis of Lojack.” Quarterly Journal of
 Economics 113(1):43–77.

Diamond, D. W., and P. H. Dybvig (1983). “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and
  Liquidity.” Journal of Political Economy 91(3):401–19.

Eck, J. E. (1993). “The Threat of Crime Displacement.” Criminal Justice Abstracts
  25(3):527–546.

Ehrlich, I., and G. S. Becker (1972). “Market Insurance, Self-Insurance, and Self-
  Protection.” Journal of Political Economy 80(4):623–648.

Froot, K. A. (1997). “The Limited Financing of Catastrophe Risk: An Overview.”
  Working Paper 6025. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Hirshleifer, J. (1953). “War Damage Insurance.” Review of Economics and Statistics
  35(2):144–153.

Major, J. A. (2002). “Advanced Techniques for Modeling Terrorism Risk.” Technical
 report. Guy Carpenter and Company, Inc.

McCool, T. J. (2001). “Terrorism Insurance: Alternative Programs for Protecting In-
 surance Consumers.” Testimony Before the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing
 and Urban Affairs.

Peltzman, S. (1975). “The Effects of Automobile Safety Regulation.” Journal of
  Political Economy 83(4):677–726.

Pigou, A. C. (1932). Economics of Welfare. London: Macmillan and Co., 4th edition.




                                        26
