                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                     BORDERS AND GROWTH


                                            Enrico Spolaore
                                           Romain Wacziarg


                                          Working Paper 9223
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9223


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




Jessica Seddon provided excellent research assistance. We thank David Baron, Herschel Grossman, Peter
Howitt, Larry Jones, Pravin Krishna, Jeffrey Sachs and David Weil, as well as seminar participants at the
University of California Berkeley, Stanford University, Brown University and Venice International
University for useful comments. All errors remain ours. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
Borders and Growth
Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg
NBER Working Paper No. 9223
September 2002
JEL No. F1, O5

                                       ABSTRACT

       This paper presents a framework to understand and measure the effects of political borders
on economic growth and per capita income levels. We present a model providing a theoretical
foundation to estimate empirically the effects of political borders on growth. In our model, political
integration between two countries results in a positive country size effect and a negative effect
through reduced openness vis-à-vis the rest of the world. We estimate the growth effects that would
have resulted from the hypothetical removal of national borders between pairs of adjacent countries.
We also identify country pairs where political integration would have been mutually beneficial.



Enrico Spolaore                                               Romain Wacziarg
Department of Economics                                       Stanford Graduate School of Business
Brown University                                              Stanford University
Providence, RI 02912                                          518 Memorial Way
enrico_spolaore@brown.edu                                     Stanford, CA 94305
                                                              and NBER
                                                              wacziarg@gsb.stanford.edu
1        Introduction

What is the eﬀect of national borders on economic growth? It is widely recognized that
national borders constitute barriers to trade, thereby limiting the scale of economic activity.1
Moreover, many observers have stressed the importance of economic scale as a determinant of
growth and productivity.2 Together, these ideas suggest that political borders should have an
impact on economic growth and per capita income levels. In this paper, we oﬀer a theoretical
framework to understand the relationship between borders and growth, and we propose an
empirical methodology to estimate this relationship.3

        In principle, national borders could have ambiguous eﬀects on a country’s growth per-
formance. To the extent that market size matters, borders can reduce the scale of economic
activity. However, since larger countries tend to trade less with the rest of the world, re-
moving a specific political border can also result in trade reduction vis-à-vis third countries.4
Finally, borders can shield fast growing countries from slow growing neighbors, and vice versa,
in which case the eﬀect of political integration on growth depends on how it would aﬀect the
determinants of steady-state income levels.
    1
        A vast theoretical and empirical literature documents the eﬀect of national borders and country size on
international trade. See for instance, among many other studies, Helliwell [1998] and McCallum [1988].
    2
        This idea has given rise to a considerable volume of empirical research on the interaction between country
size and trade openness as determinants of economic growth. See Ades and Glaeser [1999] and Alesina,
Spolaore and Wacziarg [2000] for the relationship between growth and market size. A related literature
deals more broadly with the eﬀect of trade on growth, without examining specifically how this relationship is
mediated by market size. See Frankel and Romer [1998], Rodríguez and Rodrik [2000], Wacziarg [2001] and
Sachs and Warner [1995], among many others.
    3
        In his important book on border eﬀects in international trade, Helliwell [1998, chapter 6, p. 112] states
that “assessing the possible growth implications of home preferences is not a job for a one-handed economist,
nor for the faint of heart”. We are not aware of research that tries to accomplish such measurement.
    4
        This eﬀect is referred to as trade diversion in the classical theory of customs unions. See for instance
Vousden [1990], chapter 10. However, as will become clear below, by trade reduction we mean something
diﬀerent from classical trade diversion. Alesina and Wacziarg [1998] document empirically how larger countries
tend to be more closed to trade, after controlling for a variety of determinants of trade volumes. Wacziarg
[2001] shows empirically that larger countries tend to have trade policy regimes that are more closed, after
controlling for a variety of determinants of trade policy. Both of these eﬀects will be features of our theoretical
model.




                                                          1
       We present a theoretical framework accounting for these eﬀects. We start with a simple
thought experiment: consider two countries, for example France and Italy. What would the
growth rate of per capita income in France have been if its border with Italy had not existed,
that is, if they had been a single country? In our model, politically integrated economies can
save on trading costs, generating a market size eﬀect of political integration. Trade openness
responds endogenously to political integration, generating a trade reduction eﬀect. Finally,
political integration can generate changes in the other determinants of steady-state income
levels, besides openness and country size, an eﬀect we call the steady-state determination
eﬀect.

       We then turn to an empirical evaluation of the border eﬀect on growth. Firstly, we
estimate the eﬀect of market size on economic growth in a cross-country context. In our
specification, derived directly from the model, market size can be increased by two means:
expanding the internal market or gaining greater access to foreign markets. Existing empirical
evidence demonstrates that larger countries benefit less from trade openness than smaller
ones in terms of economic growth, suggesting that trade openness aﬀects growth through the
channel of market size.5 As a result, it is also the case that smaller countries face incentives
to adopt more open trade regimes, as demonstrated formally in our model. Therefore, we
also estimate the trade-reducing eﬀect of a larger domestic market.

       Together, these estimates allow us to quantify the impact of an exogenous change in
country size on economic growth. We can estimate the eﬀect of specific borders by creating
hypothetical merged countries (for example the one that would result from France merging
with Italy), and estimating their growth rate. This empirical exercise corresponds to our the-
oretical counterfactual. We present estimates of the market size eﬀect, the trade reduction
eﬀect and the steady-state determination eﬀect for all pairs of adjacent countries and proxi-
mate islands for which data is available. The methodology can be easily extended to a case in
which more than two countries are considering integrating politically. We identify geographic
   5
       In other words, the interaction term between country size and trade openness in a cross-country growth
regression bears a robustly negative sign. See Alesina, Spolaore and Wacziarg [2000] and Ades and Glaeser
[1999]. Previous findings pointing to no eﬀects of country size on growth were likely due to the omission of
openness and the interaction term between openness and country size from growth regressions. For example,
the fact that smaller countries tend to be more open could lead researchers to wrongly conclude that country
size did not matter for economic growth.



                                                       2
zones where political integration would be mutually beneficial to the merging countries, and
discuss the conditions under which this occurs.

        This paper is structured as follows: Section 2 presents a model of economic growth based
on scale eﬀects, and analyzes the eﬀect of borders on growth in this context. Section 3
describes our empirical methodology for estimating the border eﬀect and discusses extensions.
Section 4 presents our empirical results, and Section 5 concludes.


2        A Model of Political Integration and Growth

2.1        Assumptions of the Model

This section presents a stylized model that links political borders, international openness and
productive activity. In this model, market size aﬀects growth and income levels, and depends
both on the degree of openness of the economy and on country size. Openness, measured by
the ratio of trade to output, is itself endogenous, and responds to country size via endogenous
barriers to trade.

        There is a continuum of regions, measured on the interval [0, W ]. Time is continuous.
The intertemporal utility function in each region i is given by:
                                        Z ∞
                                   Ui =      ln ci (t)e−ρt dt                                              (1)
                                                       0

where ci (t) denotes consumption at time t by the representative household living in region
i, and ρ > 0.6 At time t region i’s capital and labor are denoted, respectively, by Ki (t) and
Li (t). Both inputs are supplied inelastically and are not mobile across regions. Each region
i produces a specific intermediate input Xi (t) using the region-specific capital according to
the following linear production function:

                                                  Xi (t) = Ki (t)                                          (2)

There exists a unique final good. Each region i produces yi (t) units of the final good, according
to the production function:
                                                  µZ   W             ¶
                                       yi (t) =            xαji (t)dj L1−α
                                                                       i   (t)                             (3)
                                                   0
    6                                                                            1−σ
        As usual, the results generalize to any standard CRRA utility function (Cit  − 1)/(1 − σ) with σ > 0.



                                                            3
with 0 < α < 1. xji (t) denotes the amount of intermediate input j used in region i at time t.

   Regions are divided into N countries. Country 1 includes all regions in the interval [0 ,
S1 ]; country 2 includes all regions in the interval [S1 , S1 + S2 ], country n includes all regions
in the interval [Sn−1 , Sn−1 + Sn ], etc. Each region inelastically supplies one unit of labor
(i.e., Li (t) = 1 for every i at every t.). Hence, the “size” of country 1 (measured by total
labor) is equal to S1 , the size of country 2 is S2 , the size of country n is Sn , etc.

   Intermediate inputs can be traded across regions that belong to the same country at no
cost (i.e., we assume no internal barriers to trade). By contrast, if one unit of an intermediate
good j that belongs to country a is shipped to a region that belongs to a diﬀerent country (say,
country b), only (1 −ξ a −ξ b ) units of the intermediate good will arrive, where 0 < ξ a + ξ b ≤ 1.
Hence, the levels of ξ n ’s measure barriers to trade across national borders.


2.2    Market Equilibrium

Intermediate inputs are sold in perfectly competitive markets. In equilibrium, each unit of
each input will be sold at a price equal to its marginal product. All regions that belong to
the same country will use identical levels of a given input. Hence, we can let xin denote
the amount of input i used in each region of country n. Let Pi (t) denote the market price
of intermediate input i, where region i belongs to country a. Therefore, for every input i
belonging to a country a and for every country n 6= a we must have:

                          Pi (t) = αxα−1                       α α−1
                                     ia (t) = α(1 − ξ a − ξ n ) xin (t)                         (4)

At each time t, the resource constraint for each input i ∈ [0, W ] produced in a region i
belonging to a specific country a of size Sa is:
                                                 X
                                 Sa xia (t) +           Sn xin (t) = Ki (t)                     (5)
                                                 n6=a

Equations (4) and (5) imply that each region in country a will use the same amount of
domestically produced input i:

                                                            Ki (t)
                              xia (t) =          P                            α                 (6)
                                          Sa +          Sn (1 − ξ a − ξ n ) 1−α
                                                 n6=a




                                                        4
On the other hand, each region of a country b 6= a will use the following amount of input i
produced in country a:
                                                                    α
                                                (1 − ξ a − ξ b ) 1−α Ki (t)
                                   xib (t) =       P                        α                               (7)
                                             Sa +     Sn (1 − ξ a − ξ n ) 1−α
                                                      n6=a

The above equations show how ξ a is inversely related to the international openness of country
a : the lower is ξ a , the more open is country a (i.e., the higher are its use of foreign inputs
and its exports of domestic inputs).7

       By substituting (6) into (4) we have that the price of input i produced in country a is
given as follows:
                                             X                          α
                           Pi (t) = α[Sa +          Sn (1 − ξ a − ξ n ) 1−α ]1−α Ki (t)α−1                  (8)
                                             n6=a

Households’ net assets in region i are identical to the stock of region-specific capital Ki (t).
Since each unit of capital yields one unit of intermediate input i, the net return to capital is
equal to the market price of intermediate input Pi (t) (for simplicity, we assume no depreci-
ation). From standard intertemporal optimization we have the following Euler equation for
consumption in region i belonging to country a:
                  dcit 1                        X                      α
                          = Pi (t) − ρ = α[Sa +   Sn (1 − ξ a − ξ n ) 1−α ]1−α Ki (t)α−1 − ρ                (9)
                   dt cit
                                                     n6=a

Hence, the steady-state level of capital in each region i belonging to country a is
                               µ ¶ α           X
                          ss     α 1−α                                  α
                       Ki =              [Sa +     Sn (1 − ξ a − ξ n ) 1−α ]                               (10)
                                 ρ
                                                             n6=a

The steady-state level of output per capita in a region i of a country of size Sa is given by:8
                              µ ¶ α          X
                         ss    α 1−α                                  α
                        yi =           [Sa +     Sn (1 − ξ a − ξ n ) 1−α ]                 (11)
                                ρ
                                                             n6=a

Our model has standard neoclassical implications as far as the growth rate is concerned. In
particular, at each point in time the growth rate of income per capita is positively related to
steady-state income per capita and negatively related to the current (initial) level of income:9
   7
       Below we will explictly derive “openness” as the ratio of exports to output.
   8
       Equation (11) is obtained from equation (3) by susbtituting domestically-produced and imported inter-
mediate inputs with their equilibrium values, as specified in equations (6) and (7), and Ki with its stead-state
value in (10) .
   9
       For a derivation of these standard results see, for example, Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995).


                                                             5
                                       d ln yn (t)
                                                   = f(ynss , yn,t−τ )                               (12)
                                           dt
with
                                      ∂f                      ∂f
                                           >0       ,               <0                               (13)
                                     ∂ynss                  ∂yn,t−τ
Therefore, the eﬀects of size, openness or other variables on the level of income per capita
also translate into eﬀects on the growth rate in the transition to the steady-state. Thus, in
this theoretical section we will focus our analysis on steady-state income. Implications for
growth will be studied in the empirical section.


2.3       Steady-state income, country size and openness

We are now ready to derive the relationship between income per capita, country size and
barriers to trade. Specifically, equation (11) implies the following:

       Proposition 1 - A country’s income per capita in steady-state is increasing in the coun-
try’s size and decreasing in the country’s barriers to trade. All other things equal, barriers
reduce income more in smaller countries, and size is more important for countries with higher
barriers to trade.

       Proof. See Appendix 1.

       As we have mentioned, barriers to trade are directly related to degree of a country’s
openness. Let Oa measure the exports to output ratio in country a. We will refer to this
measure as “openness.”10 Steady-state Oa can be easily derived as follows. Each region in
country a will use xss                                                         ss
                    ia units of inputs locally, and will sell an equal amount xia to each of the

other Sa − 1 regions belonging to country a. Hence, total exports of input i will be given by
Kiss − Sa xss
           ia . Since all regions in country a export the same amount, total exports in country

a are given by (Kiss − Sa xss                                             ss
                           ia )Sa . Country a’s total output is given by yi Sa . Therefore, the

exports to output ratio Oa in steady-state is given as follows:

                                                  (Kiss − Sa xss
                                                              ia )Sa
                                         Oass =          ss                                          (14)
                                                        yi Sa
  10
       In this model we abstract from international borrowing and lending - hence exports are always equal
to imports in equilibrium. Therefore, measuring openness as exports/output is identical, up to a scalar
multiplication, to measuring openness as (exports + imports)/output.




                                                        6
   By substituting the corresponding steady-state values in the above equation we obtain
                                           P                          α
                                                  Sn (1 − ξ a − ξ n ) 1−α
                                           n6=a
                              Oass =           P                            α               (15)
                                       Sa +          Sn (1 − ξ a − ξ n ) 1−α
                                              n6=a

Clearly, the above ratio Oass is decreasing in ξ a and in Sa :

   Proposition 2 - Openness in steady-state is inversely related to a country’s size and to
a country’s barriers to trade.

   Equation 15 can be used to express steady-state output per capita in equation (11) as a
function of a country’s size and openness:
                                             µ ¶ α
                                              α 1−α   Sa
                                    yiss   =                                                (16)
                                              ρ     1 − Oass

As equation 15 clearly show, Oass itself is a function of size Sa . However, it is useful to
consider the partial eﬀects of size and openness on income per capita and their interaction.
That is, it is useful to consider the eﬀect of size on income for given openness and the eﬀect
of openness of income for a given size. Since openness is inversely related to barriers, it is
not surprising that these eﬀects are reminiscent of Proposition 1:

   Proposition 3: Income per capita in steady-state is increasing in country size (for given
openness) and increasing in openness (for given country size). The positive eﬀect of size is
higher the lower is openness, while the positive eﬀect of openness is higher the smaller is size.

   Formally,
                                          µ ¶ α
                                  ∂yiss     α 1−α    1
                                        =                   >0                              (17)
                                  ∂Sa       ρ     1 − Oass
                                         µ ¶ α
                               ∂yiss       α 1−α     Sa
                                    ss
                                       =                      >0                            (18)
                               ∂Oa         ρ     (1 − Oass )2
                                            µ ¶ α
                             ∂(yiss )2        α 1−α      1
                                        = −                      <0                         (19)
                            ∂Sa ∂Oass         ρ     (1 − Oass )2
   As we will see in the empirical section, the data seem to be consistent with Proposition 3’s
main insights, which point to: a) positive eﬀects of size and openness on income per capita
in steady-state (and hence growth in the transition to the steady-state), and b) a negative
“interaction” between size and openness - meaning that the eﬀect of size is smaller for more
open countries, and the eﬀect of openness is smaller for larger countries.

                                                      7
       As we have already mentioned, “openness” is an endogenous variable, and even for given
barriers, it does depend on size Sa . Moreover, as we will see below, barriers to trade should
also be viewed as an endogenous function of size - a relationship that would introduce an
additional channel through which size will aﬀect openness. This endogenous link between
openness and size will be taken into account in the empirical analysis.


2.4       Endogenous Barriers to Trade

So far, we have considered barriers to trade as given. We will now extend the analysis to
allow for an endogenous determination of barriers. Specifically, we will assume that, for each
country n:
                                                          ξ
                                                   ξn =     − λn                                         (20)
                                                          2
In equation (20), λn is the endogenous reduction in barriers by country n.

       Lowering trade barriers may entail political and administrative costs, adjustment costs,
costly improvements in trading infrastructure, etc. We capture the costs of reducing one’s
barriers in a stylized manner, by assuming a convex cost of barriers reduction:

                                                              φ 2
                                                   Bn =        λ                                         (21)
                                                              2 n

We assume that each country chooses its degree of barrier reduction λn in order to maximize
income in steady-state minus the convex cost of barrier reduction.11

       Therefore, the equilibrium level of barrier reduction λ∗a for a country a of size Sa is given
implicitly by the following first-order condition:
                                  µ ¶ α X
                            α      α 1−α                         2α−1
                                          Sn (1 − ξ + λ∗a + λ∗n ) 1−α ] = φλ∗a                           (22)
                           1−α     ρ
                                            n6=a

  11
       We assume that the costs of barriers reduction are expressed on a per capita basis, and are independent
of country size. In particular, we do not assume that the reduction of barriers presents economies of scale
(say, because barriers reduction is nonrival across regions) or diseconomies of scale (for example, because
of coordination problems, congestion, heterogeneity, which may increase with the number of regions). An
interpretation of our model is that economies and diseconomies of scale in barrier reduction, if they exist,
cancel out. Our results can be extended to a more general model that include net economies or diseconomies
of scale in barriers reduction. Such an extension is available upon request.




                                                          8
In general, the equilibrium level of barriers reduction in each country is a function of the size
distribution of all countries.12 Other things being equal, smaller countries tend to have lower
barriers. For example, in a world of two countries (W = Sa + Sb ), we have:13
                                      µ ¶ α
                    dλ∗a     1 α       α 1−α                      2α−1
                         =−                   (1 − ξ + λ∗a + λ∗b ) 1−α < 0                                 (23)
                   dSa       φ1−α ρ
A simple closed-form solution can be obtained for the case α = 1/2. Then, the degree of
barrier reduction λ∗n that maximizes output per capita minus barriers reduction costs for a
country of size Sn is
                                                             W − Sn
                                                     λ∗n =                                                 (24)
                                                              2φρ
which again implies a negative relationship between barrier reduction and size:14
                                                   dλ∗n     1
                                                        =−     <0                                          (25)
                                                   dSn     2φρ
Hence, we have the following:

       Proposition 4 - All other things equal, larger countries will have less open trade policies
- that is, they will choose smaller reductions of barriers ( λ∗n ) - and, consequently, higher
barriers ξ ∗n .

       Similarly, countries with lower costs of reduction (φ) or a lower discount rates (ρ) will be
more open (that is, will have a lower λn ).


2.5       Political Mergers

Now, let us consider a merger between country a (of size Sa ) and country b (of size Sb ). To
keep things simple we will assume α = 1/2. The steady-state levels of income per capita in
country a is:                                µ      ¶
                                                  1         X
                                  yass   =            [Sa +   Sn (1 − ξ a − ξ n )]                         (26)
                                                 2ρ
                                                             n6=a

The steady-state income per capita in the new country of size Sm = Sa + Sb will be:
                              µ ¶           X
                         ss       1
                        ym =          [Sm +     Sn (1 − ξ m − ξ n )]                                       (27)
                                 2ρ
                                                             n6=m

  12
       We assume that each country will reduce barriers taking other countries’ barriers as given (Nash equilib-
rium). Joint maximization of world welfare would imply lower barriers.
  13
       The result can be generalized to the case of three or more countries.
  14
       It is immediate to check that (23) reduces to (25) for α = 1/2.


                                                             9
The net change in steady-state income for country a will be given by:
                            µ ¶
                  ss   ss      1
                ym − ya =          [Sb (ξ a + ξ b ) − (W − Sa − Sb )(ξ m − ξ a )]               (28)
                              2ρ

In equation (28), the first term, (1/2ρ) Sb (ξ a + ξ b ), measures the direct positive scale eﬀect of
the merger, which we call the market size eﬀect. It is evaluated at the level of trade barriers
prevailing before the merger and corresponds to adding the size of country b to country a.

   The second term in equation (28), (1/2ρ) (W − Sa − Sb )(ξ m − ξ a ), measures the indirect
negative eﬀect of the merger, via a fall in openness. We call this eﬀect the trade reduction
eﬀect. It corresponds to the increase in trade barriers between the regions of former country
a and the rest of the world (i.e., all other countries except country b), brought forth by the
larger size of the merged country (Sm ). That is, this eﬀect is due to the fact that the larger
country will be less open with respect to the rest of the world.

   Note that there is no guarantee that the net gain in terms of steady-state income (and
growth) will be positive. That is, there is no guarantee that steady-state income per capita
                                                                          ss − y ss > 0.
in the new, larger country will be higher than in country a - i.e., that ym     a

   From equation (24) we have:

                                          ξ       ξ W − Sa
                                   ξa =     − λa = −                                            (29)
                                          2       2  2φρ
                                          ξ       ξ W − Sb
                                   ξb =     − λb = −                                            (30)
                                          2       2  2φρ
                                          ξ       ξ W − Sm
                                  ξm =      − λm = −                                            (31)
                                          2       2  2φρ
which, when substituted in equation (28), imply the following:

                                                           ss − y ss > 0 is:
   Proposition 5 - A necessary and suﬃcient condition for ym     a


                                    Sm = Sa + Sb > W − ξφρ                                      (32)

The intuition for this results is as follows. A higher Sm means a bigger positive eﬀect from
the merger via the market size eﬀect, because the two merging counties had larger barriers
between themselves before the merger. A larger Sm (relative to W ) also means that the rest
of the world is relatively smaller, and therefore the openness reduction eﬀect (with respect
to the rest of the world) has smaller costs.


                                                 10
       It is important to notice that even if a merger increases income per capita, it does not
necessarily imply an increase in consumption per capita and welfare. In order to calculate
changes in consumption and welfare one should subtract the costs related to barriers reduction
and any other costs associated with a merger. For example, a merger may bring about
direct costs in order to eliminate internal barriers to trade. A merger may also imply higher
“heterogeneity” costs due to diﬀerent preferences over public goods, more costly coordination,
etc.15 In our empirical exercises we will focus on changes of income per capita.


2.6       Other Determinants of Steady-State Income Levels

In our model so far, diﬀerent countries’ steady-states diﬀer only because 1) their size diﬀers
and 2) as a result, their level of openness also diﬀers. There are obviously many other
diﬀerences across countries, apart from size, that could yield diﬀerences in steady-state income
levels and openness. In the context of our model, the φ and ρ parameters could diﬀer across
individual countries. Particularly patient countries, or countries where the costs of openness
reduction are lower (for example through natural access to the sea, proximity to trading
partners, and other geographic factors) will have higher levels of steady-state income and
greater levels of openness, all else equal.

       Such diﬀerences will not aﬀect country a’s growth performance under political integration
with country b, unless they aﬀect the other determinants of steady-state income levels and
openness within country a. But it is easy to see that a merger between country a and
country b, when they diﬀer along these other dimensions, will change the growth eﬀect of the
merger on country a, to the extent that the merger aﬀects these parameters within country a.
We should stress again that this would only occur if country a’s steady-state and openness
determinants (other than its size and induced openness level) would change under political
integration. This could occur as the result of factor movements such as migration or capital
flows, or changes in geographic factors brought forth by the removal of borders.16

       In the case where countries diﬀer in φ and ρ, the thought experiment described above to
  15
       On the costs of larger, more heterogeneous countries see Alesina and Spolaore (1997, 2002).
  16
       For instance, a previously landlocked country can gain easier access to the sea as a result of a political
merger. This could aﬀect the level of openness of the country, and consequently its growth rate. See for
instance Sachs [2001], and Gallup et al. [1999] for evidence on the importance of geography for growth.




                                                        11
evaluate the growth incidence of political mergers can be amended to account for changes
in steady-state determinants under a merger. For example, if countries have diﬀerent costs
φ’s, the analysis can be easily generalized as follows. Let φm denote the costs of barriers
reduction in the unified country of size Sm . Then we have the following:

    Proposition 6: A political merger between a country of size Sa and a country of size Sb
                                                             ss − y ss > 0) if and only if the
will increase income in country a in steady state (that is, ym     a

following condition holds::

                   W − Sa W − Sa                        W − Sa − Sb W − Sa
         Sb (ξ −         −       ) > (W − Sa − Sb )(ξ −            −       )              (33)
                    ρφa    ρφb                             ρφm       ρφa

In what follows, we will label the eﬀect of potential changes in steady-state determinants,
besides openness and country size, as the steady-state determination eﬀect.


3     Estimating the Growth Eﬀect of Borders

3.1   Basic Methodology

The model presented above, specifically Proposition 3, suggests that income in steady-state
is positively related to both country size and openness, and negatively related to their inter-
action. Hence, growth in the transition to the steady-state will also be a function of such
variables. A specification consistent with those insights is:

                              yat
                       log             = β 0 + β 1 log yat−τ + β 2 Oat + β 3 log Sat
                             yat−τ
                                           +β 4 Oat log Sat + β 05 Zat + εat              (34)

where a refers to a country, Sat denotes country size, Oat denotes trade openness, yat denotes
per capita income, and Zat is a vector of control variables. Compared to our model, we have
simply added additional determinants of steady-state income levels (the Zat variables), which
the model abstracts from, and an error term. The predictions of our model are that β 2 > 0,
β 3 > 0 and β 4 < 0.

    In our model, Propositions 2 and 4 suggests that openness is negatively related to country
size. The second part of our econometric model reflects the negative relationship between
trade openness and country size:

                                    Oat = α0 + α1 log Sat + α02 Wat + ν at                (35)

                                                      12
where Wat is a vector of additional determinants of trade openness and the model predicts
α1 < 0. In this econometric model, the exogenous variables are Sat , Zat and Wat . We are
considering the growth eﬀect of an exogenous change in a country’s size brought about by
merging with a neighbor. Substituting equation (35) into (34), we obtain:

                    yat
             log            = γ 0 + γ 1 log yat−τ + γ 2 log Sat + γ 3 (log Sat )2 + γ 04 Wat log Sat
                   yat−τ
                                +γ 5 ν at log Sat + γ 06 Wat + γ 07 Zat + µat                              (36)

where the γ coeﬃcients are functions of the parameters of the growth and trade equations,
as defined in Appendix 2.

       Define ∆Gabt as the change in growth of country i resulting from its merger with country
b. Since the only exogenous variable that has changed under a merger is country size, we
term this particular exercise a “size merger”.17 We focus on the expected eﬀect on growth,
as we have little knowledge of what the random component of growth or openness (captured
by εat and ν at ) would have been had the countries been politically merged during the sample
period.18 Assuming E(ν at |Sat , Smt , Wat ) = 0, the expected eﬀect on the growth rate of
country a of merging with neighbor b, where the size of the merged country is denoted Smt
(= Sat + Sbt ), is:
                                        µ                               ¶
                                                 yat
                           ∆Gabt    ≡ E ∆ log          |Sat , Smt , Wat
                                                yat−τ
                                          µ     ¶
                                            Smt £                                      ¤
                                    = log          γ 2 + γ 3 log (Sat Smt ) + γ 04 Wat                     (37)
                                            Sat

Thus, the eﬀect of the merger on growth is a multiple of the percentage increase in country
size, where the multiplicative factor depends on the determinants of openness, the estimated
parameters of the model and the sizes of countries a and b. Since our model predicts that
γ 3 = β 4 α1 is positive, Proposition 4 is also directly apparent in equation (37).

       In this basic setup, the induced eﬀect of political integration on growth will depend on
the home country’s size, the size of the country it is considering merging with, and the
determinants of the home country’s trade openness volume. This combines three distinct
eﬀects of political integration on growth. Firstly, the direct (positive) eﬀect of an increase
  17
       Below we will examine how to account for changes in the Z and W variables under a merger.
  18
       In section 3.3 below, we discuss an alternative method that allows us to include the error term component
of the growth eﬀect of mergers, using the estimated values of error term in the original countries.


                                                         13
in country size, equal to β 3 times the percentage increase in country size resulting from the
merger (log(Smt /Sat )). Secondly, the indirect (negative) eﬀect through openness reduction,
which is equal to β 2 α1 times the percentage increase in country size. Thirdly, the eﬀect going
through the interaction term, which captures the increasing impact of country size on growth
as openness decreases. This eﬀect, of ambiguous sign, depends on the determinants of a’s
openness level and the sizes of both a and b, and is equal to β 4 (α0 + α1 log (Smt Sat ) + α02 Wat )
times the percentage increase in country size. It should be noted that the determinants of
openness (Wat ) and the sizes of countries a and b can be such that the openness reducing
eﬀect of political integration outweighs the positive direct scale eﬀect of merging. In this
case, ∆Gabt will be negative.

   Finally, an exogenous change in openness yielding an equivalent expected change in eco-
nomic growth without a political merger can be computed using equation (34) as:

                                                               ∆Gabt
                            E(∆Oat |Sat , Smt , Wat ) =                                         (38)
                                                          β 2 + β 4 log Sat

The benefits of exogenous increases in openness can thus be directly compared to those of
bilateral political mergers.


3.2    Changes in Conditioning Variables

Equations (37) and (38) implicitly assume that a political merger does not aﬀect the deter-
minants of the home country’s steady-state income level, or the determinants of its openness
levels, other than country size. For example, if France were to merge with Italy, France and
Italy would each retain their own Zat and Wat variables. These may include the savings rate,
investment in human capital, characteristics of governance and government involvement in
the economy, and gravity type factors such as geographic variables. As suggested in Section
2.6, this is clearly an extreme assumption since factors other than the size of the population
alone would likely be diﬀerent in each merged country under political integration, aﬀecting
both growth and the degree of openness. For example, increased migration and capital mo-
bility across countries a and b under a merger will imply that the rates of investment in
human and physical capital will diﬀer compared to what they would have been in the sepa-
rate countries. Taking this steady-state determination eﬀect into consideration generates an
additional sources of ambiguity in the sign of the overall eﬀect of political integration on eco-
nomic growth. Clearly, this eﬀect would tend to be negative for the home country when the

                                                 14
hypothetical merger is with a country with “worse” overall determinants of the steady-state
income level than itself.

       We can relax the assumption that political integration aﬀects growth only through country
size and the induced eﬀect of changes in country size on trade openness by assuming that
other conditioning variables will change in both merged units after political integration, and
in particular that they will take on the same value in a and b under a merger. We term this
alternative scenario “full integration”.

       There are obviously many ways to specify what values the other determinants of growth
(the Z variables) and openness (the W variables) will take under full political integration.19
One reasonable assumption is that each of the merged countries would end up with the same
population weighted average of the initial conditioning variables, which we can denote Zmt
and Wmt , where the subscript m denotes that a political merger has occurred and that the
resulting variables are, where applicable, the population weighted averages of the regional
measures.20 The resulting eﬀect of a political merger on growth, ∆Gm
                                                                   abt , is then computed

as:
                      µ                                                  ¶
                                 yat
            ∆Gm
              abt ≡ E   ∆  log        |S  , S
                                        at mt   , Wat , W mt , Zat , Zmt
                               yat−τ
                        µ      ¶
                          Smt ¡                                        ¢
                  = log           γ 2 + γ 3 log (Sat Smt ) + γ 04 Wat                                         (39)
                          Sat
                             ymt−τ £ 0                     ¤
                    +γ 1 log         + γ 4 log Smt + γ 06 (Wmt − Wat ) + γ 07 (Zmt − Zat )
                             yat−τ

This formulation includes the same size eﬀects as equation (37), namely those that occur
through the direct eﬀect of market size, the indirect eﬀect through trade reduction and the
changes in the interaction term. But in addition to these eﬀects, we now have the steady-state
determination eﬀect, equal to the terms in the second line of equation (39).21 An important
  19
       For example, we could assume that the merged country is assigned the best - or worst - values of the Z
and W variables from each of country a and b. We choose an intermediate - and more reasonable - assumption
by assigning to the merged country the population-weighted average of these variables from countries a and b.
  20
       Of course, in the case of the land area, the merged variable is the sum of the corresponding areas of
countries a and b. For the dummy variables in our specification, the definitions of the merged variables are
as follows: the merged country is landlocked if both a and b are landlocked; the merged country is an island if
both a and b are islands; the merged country is an oil exporter if either a or b is an oil exporter.
  21                                                                                         ymt−τ
       We can further decompose the steady-state determination eﬀect into the term γ 1 log   yat−τ   which reflects




                                                       15
consequence of this framework is that, under full political integration, expected growth will
be equal for both country a and country b.22

       To summarize, equations (37) and (39) result from two diﬀerent assumptions about the
eﬀects of political integration on growth; one with complete averaging of steady-state deter-
minants (“full integration”), the other with no changes in these variables (“size merger”).
The eﬀect of a hypothetical merger likely falls in between these two extremes. The corre-
sponding estimates should therefore be viewed as extreme bounds on the eﬀects of bilateral
political mergers on economic growth.


3.3       Treatment of the Error Term

Above, we focused on estimating the expected eﬀects of political mergers on growth, dis-
regarding the unexplained portion of growth and openness in our counterfactual exercises.
Whether to consider the residuals µt and ν t from the growth and openness equations when
evaluating the eﬀects of borders on growth is largely a matter of interpretation. On the one
hand, if one believes that they reflect omitted determinants of growth and openness, then
they should be treated as another steady-state determination variable (analogous to the W
and Z variables). As it turns out, since the explained portion of growth and openness are
typically on the order of 50% and 60% respectively, in our baseline regressions, accounting for
the unexplained components of growth and openness could alter our estimates of the merger
eﬀects. On the other hand, if one believes that the residuals reflect true “randomness”, then
there is no good justification for including them in the analysis: we do not know what the
random component of growth would have been, had the countries been merged over the
sample period.

       Since both interpretations seem equally defensible, we also present merger eﬀects that take
into account the estimated residuals. Fortunately, we can easily accommodate this change in

diﬀerences in initial income and the terms that are functions of (Wmt − Wat ) and (Zmt − Zat ) ,which reflect
diﬀerences in steady-state determinants proper. For identical values of the Z and W variables, if country a
starts out with an initial income that is lower than country b’s, full integration will slow a’s growth simply
because it will raise its initial income - the force of convergence implies that countries grow slower, the closer
they are to their steady-states.
  22
       This is not the case when we do not take into account the steady-state determination eﬀect (section 3.1),
because post-merger Z and W variables still diﬀer across a and b.



                                                        16
our basic empirical methodology. Instead of computing the expected eﬀect of a merger on
growth, we can use:

                                    yat
                    ∆Geabt ≡ ∆ log
                                   yat−τ
                                 µ     ¶
                                   Smt £                                                ¤
                           = log         γ 2 + γ 3 log (Sat Smt ) + γ 04 Wat + γ 5 ν at                   (40)
                                   Sat

and replace γ 2 , γ 3 , γ 4 and ν at with their regression estimates in computing the empirical
∆Geabt . In equation (40), the superscript “e” indicates that the residual terms are taken
into account. Note that since the error term of the growth regression, µat , is assumed to be
unchanged between the merged and unmerged states, it gets diﬀerenced away from equation
(40).23

       Similarly, and perhaps more interestingly, we could treat the error terms as additional
(unobserved) growth determinants, and compute the empirical ∆Gme
                                                              abt directly using the ap-

propriate population weighted averages of the estimated residuals:

                                  yat
                  ∆Gme
                    abt ≡ ∆ log
                                 yat−τ
                              µ      ¶
                                Smt £                                                  ¤
                        = log           γ 2 + γ 3 log (Sat Smt ) + γ 04 Wat + γ 5 ν at
                                Sat
                                   ymt−τ £ 0                     ¤
                          +γ 1 log         + γ 6 + γ 04 log Smt [Wmt − Wat ]                              (41)
                                    yat−τ
                              0
                          +γ 7 [Zmt − Zat ] + (ν mt − ν at ) [γ 5 log Smt ] + µmt − µat

where ν mt and µmt are the population weighted averages of ν at and ν bt and µat and µbt .
Again, this equation involves the same terms as equation (40), with the steady-state determi-
nation eﬀect (including that which results from merging the estimated unexplained portion
of growth) added on.


3.4       Eﬀects of Borders on Steady-State Income Levels

As explained in the theoretical section, because our model shares the dynamic features of
the neoclassical growth model, it is straightforward to present our results in terms of steady-
state income levels rather than growth. We do not observe steady-state income, but it can
be estimated readily under the assumptions of our framework, because the right-hand side
  23
       The only reason ν at remains in this equation is the nonlinearity of the eﬀect of country size on growth
brought forth by the interaction term between openness and size in the growth equation.



                                                       17
variables of equation (34) are the determinants of steady-state income levels. Theory delivers
a growth equation of the following form, based on equation (12):
                                             yat
                                      log         = λ (log yass − log yat−τ ) + εat                       (42)
                                            yat−τ
where yat is current income per capita, yat−τ is initial income per capita, and yass is (un-
observed) income in steady-state.24 Assume that the steady-state level of income takes the
form:
                         log yass = δ 1 + δ 2 Oat + δ 3 log Sat + δ 4 Oat log Sat + δ 05 Zat              (43)

This specification choice for log yass reflects the fact that the right-hand side variables of
empirical growth regressions (except initial income) are to be interpreted as the determinants
of the steady-state level of income in the neoclassical growth model. On the other hand, our
actual growth specification is that of equation (34):
                                    yat
                             log            = β 0 + β 1 log yat−τ + β 2 Oat + β 3 log Sat
                                   yat−τ
                                                 +β 4 Oat log Sat + β 05 Zat + εat                        (44)

Substituting equation (43) into equation (42), we can write:
                              yat
                       log             = λδ 1 + λδ 2 Oat + λδ 3 log Sat
                             yat−τ
                                             +λδ 4 Oat log Sat + λδ 05 Zat − λ log yat−τ + εat            (45)

Thus, we can recover:25
                                     β0 β2    β           β               1
                    log yass = −       − Oat − 3 log Sat − 4 Oat log Sat − β 05 Zat                       (46)
                                     β1 β1    β1          β1              β1
This provides a methodology for backing out the eﬀects of political mergers on steady-state
income levels. The percentage change in the steady-state income level of country a after
merging with country b can be computed in terms of the reduced form parameters defined in
Appendix 2, under the two scenarios under consideration - a pure size merger or full political
integration:

                       ∆Y SSabt ≡ E (∆ log yass |Sat , Smt , Wat )
                                    1      Smt £                                      ¤
                                = − log           γ 2 + γ 3 log (Sat Smt ) + γ 04 Wat                     (47)
                                    γ1     Sat
  24
       See Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995), p.37 and p.82 for a derivation of this standard specification in the
context of the neoclassical growth model.
  25
       Note that β 1 , the conditional convergence coeﬃcient, is negative.


                                                            18
and:

                  m
             ∆Y SSabt ≡ E (∆ log yass |Sat , Smt , Wat , Wmt , Zat , Zmt )
                          1      Smt ¡                                       ¢
                      = − [log           γ 2 + γ 3 log (Sat Smt ) + γ 04 Wat              (48)
                          γ1      Sat
                          ¡ 0                 ¢
                        + γ 4 log Smt + γ 06 (Wmt − Wat ) + γ 07 (Zmt − Zat )]

Equations (47) and (48) are the analogs to equations (37) and (39), respectively, applied to
income levels rather than growth. Note that equation (47) implies that ∆Y SSabt is simply
−1/γ 1 times ∆Gabt - hence, since γ 1 = β 1 is negative, the eﬀect of a size merger on steady-
state income will have the same sign as its eﬀect on economic growth. However, the signs of
     m and ∆Gm may diﬀer. This is because we have:
∆Y SSabt     abt
                                  µ                     ¶
                         m            ymt−τ         m
                     ∆Gabt = γ 1 log         − ∆Y SSabt                                   (49)
                                       yat−τ
                                                              m of full integration may
A country a that has a positive steady-state level eﬀect ∆Y SSabt
display a negative growth eﬀect ∆Gm
                                  abt simply because it has a suﬃciently low initial level of

income relative to country b (and hence enjoys relatively fast growth holding the steady-state
level of income constant).


4      Empirical Results

4.1     Estimates of the Growth and Openness Equations

4.1.1    Data and Estimators

Equations (34) and (35) can be readily estimated using cross-country data on growth, country
size, openness and other control variables. Our measure of openness consists of the ratio of
imports plus exports to GDP, a commonly used indicator of a country’s overall level of
openness. Moreover, this is precisely the measure derived in the theory of Section 2 (see in
particular Propositions 2 and 3) The measure of country size consists of the log of a country’s
population. The Zit variables are the common determinants of steady-state income levels in
the cross-country literature: male and female human capital, the fertility rate, the ratio of
government consumption to GDP and the rate of physical capital investment (see Barro and
Sala-i-Martin [1995], chapter 12). Finally, the Wit variables consist of common determinants
of openness such as geographic factors (land area, whether a country is landlocked or an


                                              19
island, whether it is an oil exporter) and the terms of trade shocks. In order to capture
long-term phenomena, variables are averaged, where appropriate, over the sample period.

       Our base estimates for calculating merger eﬀects are based on PPP per capita income data
from version 5.6 of the Penn World Tables. This 1960-1989 sample consists of 96 countries.
A preliminary issue of version 6.0 of this data has recently been circulated, extending the
data to 1998.26 We use this data for the purpose of reestimating equations (34) and (35),
as a robustness check. However, because some of the other conditioning variables are not as
readily available for recent years, the updated sample only features 77 countries. Moreover,
some “important” countries such as Germany are not part of this dataset for the entire sample
period, precluding any calculation of the eﬀect of political mergers on growth for such a key
country in Europe.27 Therefore, in order to maximize the number of mergers we consider,
and to base our estimates on the largest possible sample, we use estimates from version 5.6 of
the Penn World Tables for the purpose of calculating merger eﬀects. Since the estimates of
equations (34) and (35) do not diﬀer much between samples, we are confident that using the
more recent data would not alter our results - other than by limiting the country coverage.

       One issue that arises immediately from our empirical model is the endogeneity of openness
(and the interaction term between openness and country size) in the growth equation. To
address this, we treat equations (34) and (35) as a system of simultaneous equations to be
estimated jointly. Our baseline results therefore consist of three-stage least squares estimates
(3SLS). 3SLS treats all of the exogenous variables in the system (i.e. country size, initial
per capita income, Zit and Wit ) as potential instruments for the endogenous variables in
the system (growth, openness and the interaction term between openness and country size).
Given that openness and the interaction term are the only endogenous variables to appear on
the right hand side of either equation in the system, only the Wit variables serve as instruments
for them in the growth regression. As noted above, these variables consist of plausibly
exogenous geographic and terms of trade variables. In addition to these instruments, we can
gain precision by using additional instruments which do not necessarily appear as exogenous
  26
       See http://webhost.bridgew.edu/baten/.
  27
       In the case of Germany, this is due to reunification in 1989. The new version of the Penn World Tables
only features data for reunified Germany since 1990. Our estimates of merger eﬀects refer to West Germany
prior to 1990.




                                                      20
variables in either the trade or the growth equations.28 Finally, 3SLS allows for cross-equation
covariance in the error terms εit and ν it , generating potential eﬃciency gains.29 For the sake
of robustness, we also present results obtained from seemingly unrelated regression (SUR),
as well as regressions excluding the Zit and Wit control variables.


4.1.2       Estimation Results

Tables 1 and 2 display results for the joint estimation of equation (34) and (35). The baseline
estimates used for the merger calculations appear in column (1). The theoretical predictions
are borne out empirically. Specifically, openness and country size are positively and signif-
icantly related to growth, while their interaction enters negatively and significantly. This is
consistent with the model’s results 1 and 3, and extends related findings in Alesina, Spolaore
and Wacziarg [2000]. Moreover, as expected, country size aﬀects openness negatively. This
is consistent with our theoretical results 2 and 4, and extends previous findings in Alesina
and Wacziarg [1998].

       Several additional observations are called for. Firstly, the pattern of signs and statistical
significance is unchanged when the Zit and the Wit control variables are excluded from the
system, and the magnitude of the coeﬃcients of interest is raised. While this specification
is likely to be tainted by omitted variables bias, it corresponds directly to the relationships
derived from theory, where countries diﬀered in no other way than size and openness. It
is therefore reassuring that the predictions of the theory hold unconditionally as well as
conditionally. Secondly, as in Frankel and Romer [1999], instrumenting for openness using
geographic variables increases the magnitude of the estimated coeﬃcient on trade openness
compared to the specifications that do not account for the endogeneity of openness (SUR).

       These results hold up when using the updated dataset for the period 1960-1998, despite
the loss of 15 data points. Due to this, estimates are sometimes less statistically significant,
  28
       Following Alesina, Spolaore and Wacziarg [2000], these are dummy variables for small countries, small
islands, and the interaction terms between population and the each of dummy variables for small countries,
small islands, islands, and landlocked countries. Geographic variables such as these are likely to be plausibly
exogenous with respect to growth, yet aﬀect the level of openness. See Frankel and Romer [1999] for a further
details on employing geographic variables to instrument for openness in growth regressions.
  29
       See Wacziarg [2001] for further technical details on the use of 3SLS to estimate systems of equations in a
cross-country growth context.



                                                        21
but the pattern of signs and the magnitude of the coeﬃcients are unchanged compared to
the 1960-1989 dataset. Therefore, we are confident that our estimates of the border eﬀects
on growth would be robust to using coeﬃcients from the updated dataset. As explained
above, we refrain from using these estimates as this would result in a loss of 15 countries, in
particular Germany.

       Finally, Table 3 presents F-tests on the instruments, from simple OLS regressions of
openness and the interaction term on all of the exogenous variables in the system, for the
1960-1989 data. These F-tests demonstrate that the instruments are jointly related to the
variables they are instrumenting for, at high levels of statistical significance.


4.2       The Eﬀects of Hypothetical Mergers

4.2.1       Eﬀects on Expected 1960-1989 Growth

The parameter estimates presented in Tables 1 and 2 can be used to calculate, for pairs of
adjacent countries, what their growth rate would have been had they formed a single country
over the sample period under consideration.30 Namely, we can now calculate the impact of
specific borders on growth, under alternative definitions of political integration. As described
above, under a “size merger”, which is reflected in equation (37), a political merger simply
entails full access to the neighbor’s markets, without any change in the home country’s Wat
and Zat variables. Under “full integration”, reflected in equation (39), both hypothetically
                                 m and Z m , and therefore the same growth rate under
merged countries share the same Wat     at

political integration. Since there is no a priori reason to prefer one definition over the
other, we calculate the eﬀect of borders under both definitions, and further decompose this
eﬀect into the direct positive eﬀect of an increase in country size, the indirect negative eﬀect
via openness reduction, the ambiguous eﬀect via the interaction term, and the steady-state
determination eﬀect.

       Table 4 shows summary statistics for these various eﬀects based on 123 hypothetical pair-
wise mergers. A salient feature of these statistics is the wide dispersion of the various eﬀects.
The pure size eﬀect on growth, ∆G, has a standard deviation of 0.377 and a positive mean of
  30
       We also considered mergers between proximate islands and up to five neighboring countries, such as the
United Kingdom and Ireland, or the United Kingdom and France. Our results pertain to a total of 123
hypothetical mergers of country pairs (i.e. 246 merger experiments).



                                                      22
0.123 percentage points of growth annually, suggesting that the average country would benefit
from merging with a neighbor based on increased size alone. Indeed, the direct eﬀect of size
on growth, on average, more than outweighs the indirect eﬀect via openness reduction (while
the interaction eﬀect is on average very close to zero). Under a full integration scenario,
however, a typical country would lose slightly, on the order of ∆Gm = −0.112 percentage
points of annual growth. Since the diﬀerence between ∆Gm and ∆G is equal to the steady-
state determination eﬀect, the latter is on average negative (and equal to −0.235). Therefore,
borders shield the average country from slow growing neighbors. There is, however, a wide
dispersion of eﬀects around this mean. This suggests that these simple summary statistics
mask relevant country-specific features of the border eﬀect on growth.

   Figures 1 through 8 provide perhaps a more complete picture. They plot the distributions
of the estimated eﬀects. The total size eﬀect ∆G is generally positive but moderate, in
most cases smaller than 0.5 percentage points of annual growth. The eﬀect of full political
integration ∆Gm is more symmetrically distributed around zero, with slightly fatter tails.
Turning to the decomposed eﬀects confirms previous observations, namely that the interaction
term eﬀect is tightly distributed around zero, while the steady-state determination eﬀect is
slightly skewed, with a negative mean.


4.2.2   An Example: France and Italy

While these summary statistics and plotted distributions are useful, they are no substitute
for the estimates obtained individually for each pair of adjacent countries. To illustrate the
results, we can examine more specifically the example of France and Italy (Table 5). The eﬀect
on France from merging with Italy would have been quite large and positive. We estimate that
the total size eﬀect would have resulted in a gain of 0.281 points of growth annually for France.
To achieve a similar increase in growth via openness, France would have had to increase her
trade to GDP ratio by 27.79 percentage points (for comparison, the average trade to GDP
ratio of France over the sample period was 36%). Since Italy started with a lower level of
per capita income than France in 1960, but has a higher estimated steady-state income level
given its observed steady-state determinants, France would also have gained from the steady-
state determination eﬀect. This eﬀect alone would have accounted for ∆Gm − ∆G = 0.492




                                               23
additional points of growth.31

       Turning to the eﬀect on Italy from merging with France, it follows from what precedes
that the steady-state determination eﬀect would have been negative for Italy. Moreover,
the positive size eﬀect of a merger on Italian growth, equal to 0.237, would not have been
suﬃcient to outweigh the negative steady-state determination eﬀect. Under full integration,
Italy would have lost −0.316 points of growth annually. A possible interpretation of these
results is that, if France and Italy could somehow have achieved the more restrictive form
of political integration implied by the “size merger” definition, i.e. a removal of the border
without changes in national savings rates, human capital, etc., both could have benefited in
terms of growth.

       Interested readers can ponder upon the estimated eﬀects of their favorite hypothetical
political merger among the 246 examples listed in Table 6.


4.2.3       Residual Eﬀects

Section 3.3 above outlined a methodology to include the residuals from the growth and
openness regressions into our analysis. Table 6 (columns 9 and 10) presents estimates of
∆Gme and ∆Ge as in equations (40) and (41). The distribution of these eﬀects is also
displayed in Figures 9 and 10. Interestingly, the results do not change as much as expected
given that the explained portions of growth and openness in the baseline regressions are only
60% and 50%, respectively. The simple correlation of ∆G with and without the residual eﬀect
is 0.737, while the corresponding figure for ∆Gm is 0.640. Out of 246 mergers, accounting
for the residual leads to a change in the sign of the eﬀect in 31 cases for ∆G (12.6% of the
cases) and 75 cases for ∆Gm (30.1%).32

       Again, the case of France and Italy is illustrative (Table 5). Because France’s explained
  31
       This is another way of saying that Italy was a faster growing country than France over the time period
covered in the sample. In fact, the average observed annual growth rate of per capita income in Italy over the
1960-1989 period was 3.40%, while for France it was 2.94%. Our model predicts that, if France and Italy had
merged, their unified growth rate over this period would have been 3.15% per year (under “full integration”).
  32
       In general, accounting for the residual eﬀect has a much smaller eﬀect on estimates of pure size mergers
than it does on estimates of full integration, because the former only involves the residual from the openness
regression (multiplied by the coeﬃcient on openness in the growth regression), while the latter involves the
population weighted average of the residual from the growth regression. See equations (40) and (41).



                                                       24
annual growth falls short of its observed growth by 0.56 points, while Italy’s observed and
explained growth are about equal, accounting for the residual in the merger experiment is
now slightly beneficial to Italy - which would have gained both under a size merger and full
integration.


4.2.4    Eﬀects on Steady-State Income Levels

Columns 11 and 12 of Table 6 presents, for each country pair, the estimated eﬀect of a merger
on the steady-state income level of country a, while the last row of Table 4 presents summary
statistics for the steady-state level eﬀects (the distribution of these level eﬀects is displayed
in Figures 11 and 12 for a size merger and full integration, respectively). On average, size
mergers would raise a country’s steady-state income level by 10.98 percentage points and full
integration would reduce it by 2.07 percentage points. These averages reflect the generally
positive eﬀect of a size merger and the ambiguous eﬀect of full integration. However, they
again mask considerable case-specific diﬀerences. The eﬀect of full integration ranges from
−421.07 percentage points (the eﬀect on Malta from merging with Algeria - a small rich
country merging with a relatively large poor country) to 325.63 percentage points (the eﬀect
on Papua New Guinea from merging with Australia - a small poor country merging with a
rich country with five times its population). Logically, large eﬀects such as these are found
in cases where neighbors have very diﬀerent sizes and income determinants.

   More moderate eﬀects are found in regions that are homogeneous in terms of income
and size. For example, Table 5 shows that a size merger between France and Italy would
have raised both countries’ steady-state income levels by 25.1 percentage points for France
and 21.12 points for Italy. Full integration would have reduced Italy’s steady-state income
by 15.89 percentage points. This partly reflects compounding the negative growth eﬀect on
Italy of full integration with France, as discussed earlier. The merger would raise France’s
steady-state income by 57.01 points, reflecting Italy’s superior steady-state determinants.


4.3     Convergent Interests in Political Integration

An interesting application of our framework is to examine pairs of countries that would have
both benefited from merging politically. As suggested above, it is much easier for two countries
to have convergent interests in a size merger than in full integration, because the eﬀect of
the former is far more likely to be positive for any given country. Out of the 123 political

                                               25
mergers we considered in this paper, 94 entail growth gains for both country a and country
b based on a size merger alone, and only 6 cases did the trade reduction eﬀect dominate in
both countries - so that both would have experienced reduced growth under a merger. These
cases pertain to pairs of very small and already open countries, such as Singapore and Hong
Kong or Jamaica and Haiti.

         More interestingly perhaps, in only 14 cases would both countries in a merging pair have
benefited from full integration in terms of economic growth.33 These pairs are listed in Table
7. Salient examples include Argentina and Chile, France and Germany, Canada and the
US, India and Pakistan, as well as several country pairs involving Brazil. Of course, many
more cases would entail a winner and a loser among the merging pair. 92 cases out of 123
entail exactly one country that would have gained from full political integration, while the
other would have lost, and in the remaining 17 cases both countries would have lost. The
conclusion is that, in 109 of the 123 cases we considered, borders shield at least one country
from the other.

         An implication of these observations is that, when unions of country pairs are considered,
it may be easier to gain mutual support for a form of political integration that shields countries
from having to share their Zat and Wat variables but focuses instead on taking advantage of
scale eﬀects, through the formation of free trade areas and the reduction of physical trading
costs.


5         Conclusion

This paper has provided a theoretical framework to understand the relationship between
political borders and growth. We suggested that, whenever scale eﬀects are present, political
borders aﬀect steady-state per capita income levels and transitional growth rates by reducing
the extent of the market. We also pointed out that, in a world of more than two countries,
the removal of only one border will result in trade reduction from the merging countries
vis-à-vis the rest of the world, with correspondingly adverse eﬀects on growth and income.
We examined formal conditions under which the extent of the market eﬀect dominates the
    33
         All of these pairs are also composed of countries that would both have benefited from size mergers with
each other.




                                                         26
trade reduction eﬀect, and discussed situations in which countries might diﬀer in more that
just size and openness levels.

   We then derived an empirical specification directly from the theoretical model, and found
strong empirical support for the predictions of our theory. The parameter estimates from this
empirical model were used to estimate, for specific countries, the growth eﬀects of merging
with another country. We have applied this framework to 123 pairs of adjacent countries and
proximate islands.

   Our framework can be extended in several directions. Firstly, we have limited our in-
vestigation to hypothetical mergers involving only two countries. However, our framework is
readily applicable to studying the growth eﬀects of more than one political border. We could
apply our methodology, for example, to the removal of all borders within Europe, in order
to study the growth implications of proposals for European political integration. Our results
for France and Germany suggest that both would have benefited, in terms of growth, from
merging politically. Whether European countries would have benefited from the removal of
all intra-European borders is an open and equally interesting question.

   Secondly, our estimation method focuses exclusively on growth and income levels. There
are obviously many other reasons, beyond growth, why countries would want to merge or
stay separate. We can interpret our estimates of the growth eﬀects of borders, whenever they
are negative, as the amount of growth a country is willing to forego in order to avoid the
non-economic costs of sharing a single polity with a neighbor. These may include increases
in cultural, ethnic, religious or linguistic heterogeneity. Future work could relate changes
in heterogeneity resulting from political integration to the magnitude of the growth costs
or benefits. One interesting hypothesis to test is whether countries that remained separate
despite large potential growth eﬀects of merging have done so because political integration
would have entailed large increases in heterogeneity.




                                             27
                                       References


    Ades, Alberto and Edward Glaeser (1999), Evidence on Growth, Increasing Returns and
the Extent of the Market, Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114, no. 3, August, pp.
1025-1045.

    Alesina, Alberto, and Enrico Spolaore (1997), On the Number and Size of Nations, Quar-
terly Journal of Economics, November, pp1027-1056.

    Alesina, Alberto, and Enrico Spolaore (2002), The Size of Nations, MIT Press, forthcom-
ing.

    Alesina, Alberto, Enrico Spolaore and Romain Wacziarg (2000), Economic Integration
and Political Disintegration, American Economic Review, vol. 90, no. 5. December, p.
1276-1296.

    Alesina, Alberto and Romain Wacziarg (1997), Openness, Country Size and the Govern-
ment, Journal of Public Economics, vol. 69, no 3, September, pp.305-321.

    Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1995), Economic Growth, New York: McGraw
Hill.

    Frankel, Jeﬀrey A. and David Romer (1999), Does Trade Cause Growth? American
Economic Review, vol. 89, no. 3, June, pp. 379-399.

    Gallup, John Luke, Jeﬀrey D. Sachs, Andrew D. Mellinger (1999), Geography and Eco-
nomic Development, International Science Review, Vol. 22, no. 2, August, p. 179-232.

    Helliwell, John (1996), How Much Do National Borders Matter?, Washington, DC: Brook-
ings Institution Press.

    McCallum, J. (1995), National Borders Matter: Canada-US Regional Trade Patterns,
American Economic Review, June, 615-23.

    Rodrik, Dani (1998), Why Do More Open Countries Have Larger Governments?, Journal
of Political Economy, vol. 106, no. 5, October.

    Rodrik, Dani and Francisco Rodríguez (2000), Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A
Skeptics Guide to the Cross-National Evidence, in Ben Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, eds.,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual 2000, Cambridge (MA): MIT Press.

                                             28
       Sachs, Jeﬀrey D. (2001), Tropical Underdevelopment, NBER Working Paper #8119, Feb-
ruary.

       Sachs, Jeﬀrey and Andrew Warner (1995), Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no.1, p. 1-118.

       Vousden, Neil (1990), The Economics of Trade Protection, Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press.

       Wacziarg, Romain (2001), Measuring the Dynamic Gains from Trade, World Bank Eco-
nomic Review, vol. 15. no. 3, October.




                                                Appendix 1

       Proof of Proposition 1.

       1) Output in steady-state in each region i belonging to country a is decreasing in the
country’s barriers to trade ξ a . That is, more “open” countries have higher income per capita.

       Formally:
                                            µ ¶ α X
                          ∂yiss     α        α 1−α                     2α−1
                                =−                  Sn (1 − ξ a − ξ n ) 1−α < 0                           (50)
                          ∂ξ a     1−α       ρ
                                                       n6=a

       2) Output in steady-state in each region i belonging to country a, is increasing in size Sa .

       Consider a change in size Sa that leaves the total size of the world W unchanged. Hence,
such increase must change the size of at least another country. Without loss of generality,
assume that the change aﬀects a country b of size Sb , while leaving all other countries diﬀerent
                                                                       P
from a and b unaﬀected.34 Hence, by substituting Sb = W − Sa −             Sn in (11) and taking
                                                                                n6=a,b
the partial derivative of yiss with respect to Sa we have:
                                   µ ¶ α
                          ∂yiss      α 1−α                       2α−1
                                =           [1 − (1 − ξ a − ξ b ) 1−α ] > 0                               (51)
                          ∂Sa        ρ

       3) The positive eﬀect of size Sa on steady-state output is larger for less open countries
(i.e., for countries with a larger ξ a ). The negative eﬀect of barriers on steady-state output is
larger (in absolute terms) for smaller countries.
  34
       The result can be easily generalized to the case in which the increase in country a’s size is matched by
reductions in the size of two or more other countries.


                                                         29
  Formally,
                                     µ ¶ α
                   ∂(yiss )2    α     α 1−α                 2α−1
                             =              (1 − ξ a − ξ b ) 1−α > 0   (52)
                   ∂ξ a ∂Sa    1−α    ρ
QED.



                                  Appendix 2

  Reduced Form Parameters in equation (36):
                            
                            
                                  γ 0 = β 0 + β 2 α0
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                       γ1 = β1
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                             γ 2 = β 3 + β 2 α1 + β 4 α0
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                      γ 3 = β 4 α1
                            
                                       γ 4 = β 4 α2
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                       γ5 = β4
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                      γ 6 = β 2 α2
                            
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                       γ7 = β5
                            
                            
                            
                            
                                  µ = εi + β ν it
                                      it        2




                                           30
                           Table 1 - System Estimates of the Growth Equation

                                     1960-1989                                   1960-1998
                          3SLS         3SLS            SUR           3SLS          3SLS            SUR
                            (1)         (2)             (3)            (4)          (5)             (6)
Intercept                      2.217     -14.447           8.676           9.783     -16.243           15.415
                             (3.327)   (2.760)**      (2.662)**      (4.697)**     (3.574)**       (3.127)**
Log population                 0.678        1.337          0.263           0.472        1.387           0.130
                          (0.185)**    (0.254)**      (0.134)**        (0.249)*    (0.311)**          (0.136)
Open* Log pop                 -0.007       -0.007         -0.003         -0.005        -0.009          -0.001
                          (0.003)**     (0.004)*        (0.002)*        (0.004)     (0.006)*          (0.002)
Openness                       0.081        0.118          0.040           0.055        0.124           0.010
                          (0.023)**    (0.032)**      (0.017)**        (0.036)*    (0.048)**          (0.019)
Log 1960 per                  -1.120        0.120         -1.262         -1.437         0.322          -1.611
capita income             (0.269)**       (0.205)     (0.245)**         (0.321)       (0.216)      (0.263)**
Fertility Rate                -0.185                      -0.308         -0.601                        -0.717
                             (0.121)                  (0.114)**         (0.152)                    (0.136)**
Male human                     1.550                       1.745           0.079                        0.010
capital                   (0.443)**                   (0.402)**         (0.317)                       (0.295)
Female human                  -1.183                      -1.415           0.162                        0.165
capital                   (0.472)**                   (0.433)**         (0.395)                       (0.373)
Government                    -0.053                      -0.061         -0.024                        -0.031
consumption ratio         (0.020)**                   (0.019)**         (0.018)                     (0.017)*
Investment rate                0.091                       0.087           0.073                        0.075
                          (0.024)**                   (0.022)**         (0.026)                    (0.021)**
R-Squared                      0.558        -0.277         0.683           0.662        -0.221          0.726
(Standard errors in parentheses)
* Denotes significance at the 90% confidence level; ** denotes significance at the 95% level.
92 observations in specifications for 1960-1989 and 77 observations in the specifications for 1960-1998.
Estimated jointly with the openness equation.




                                                     31
                         Table 2 – System Estimates of the Openness Equation

                                       1960-1989                                  1960-1998
                           3SLS          3SLS             SUR           3SLS         3SLS        SUR
                            (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)         (5)         (6)
Intercept                    161.089        169.337         152.610       253.343     196.654     255.884
                          (33.890)**     (34.354)**      (34.432)** (47.309)**     (49.215)** (47.731)**
Log population                 -6.744        -15.003          -5.862        -7.723     -15.356      -7.093
                           (2.671)**      (2.254)**       (2.699)**     (3.185)**   (2.935)**   (3.213)**
Log 1960 per                    1.335           3.378          1.888         1.526        0.753      1.696
capita income                 (3.868)         (4.139)        (3.902)       (4.802)      (5.314)    (4.826)
Log land                       -9.868                       -10.537        -10.511                 -11.271
area                       (2.124)**                      (2.179)**     (2.542)**               (2.596)**
Terms of                      -45.202                        48.984       373.600                 377.467
trade shocks               (205.930)                      (221.254)     (291.622)               (302.285)
Oil                            13.999                          9.771       -13.199                 -15.031
dummy                        (21.898)                      (23.596)      (28.132)                (29.393)
Landlock                       -2.472                          1.807        -6.386                  -5.702
Dummy                         (8.889)                        (9.602)     (10.285)                 (10.772)
Island                          3.186                          4.337        12.643                  11.276
Dummy                         (7.766)                        (8.351)       (9.934)               (10.385)
R-Squared                       0.508           0.333          0.511         0.506        0.270      0.507
(Standard errors in parentheses)
* Denotes significance at the 90% confidence level; ** denotes significance at the 95% level.
92 observations in all specifications for 1960-1989 and 77 observations for 1960-1998. Estimated jointly
with the growth equation.


                            Table 3 - First stage F-Tests for the Instruments

  Specification           Test              Openness            Openness*Log
                                                                 Population
(1)                 F(11, 73)                         3.11                  3.09
                    (p-value)                      (0.002)               (0.002)
(2)                 F(11, 78)                         3.55                  3.72
                    (p-value)                     (0.0005)              (0.0003)




                                                        32
                    Table 4 – Summary Statistics of the Effects of Border Removals
                                 Based on Specification (1) estimates

                         Variable                             Mean      Std. Dev.     Min       Max
Observed average growth                                           2.127      1.671     -1.231     6.580
Fitted growth                                                     2.167      1.369     -0.006     6.150
Direct effect of size                                             0.745      0.743      0.005     3.452
Indirect effect via openness reduction                           -0.601      0.600     -2.784    -0.004
Effect via change in interaction term                            -0.021      0.405     -2.400     1.056
Steady-state determination effect                               -0.235       0.678     -3.442     2.350
'G (“size merger”)                                                0.123      0.377     -1.733     1.367
'G (“full integration”)
    M
                                                                 -0.112      0.914     -4.965     3.350
Openness equivalent (“size merger”)                             10.184     22.517     -40.281   184.332
Openness equivalent (“full integration”)                          0.403    43.089    -144.379   315.772
'G (“size merger” with residual effect)
    e
                                                                  0.097      0.524     -4.214     1.511
'G (“full integration” with residual effect)
    me
                                                                 -0.092      1.047     -4.036     4.220
'SSY (steady–state level effect of a “size merger”) (%)         10.976     33.623    -154.651   121.956
'SSY (steady–state level effect of “full integration”) (%)
       m
                                                                 -2.068    83.400    -421.068   325.630
(Based on 246 effects calculated from 123 hypothetical political mergers)



                                 Table 5 - An Example: France and Italy

                   Effect on (country a):                     France           Italy
               of merging with (country b):                    Italy          France
Observed Growth (country a)                                         2.936           3.404
Fitted Growth (country a)                                           2.374           3.464
Direct effect of size                                               0.491           0.451
Indirect effect via openness                                       -0.396          -0.364
Effect via change in interaction term                               0.186           0.149
Steady-state determination effect                                   0.492          -0.553
'G (“size merger”)                                                  0.281           0.237
'Gm (“full integration”)                                            0.773          -0.316
Openness equivalent (“size merger”)                               27.789           24.300
Openness equivalent (“full integration”)                          76.423          -32.492
'Ge (“size merger” with residual effect)                            0.294           0.265
'Gme (“full integration” with residual effect)                      0.474           0.006
'SSY (steady–state level effect of a “size merger”) (%)           25.099           21.122
'SSYm (steady–state level effect of “full integration”) (%)       57.011          -15.894




                                                     33
                                             Table 6 – Country-Specific Merger Estimates


                                    a’s Fitted                                                                             'SSY       'SSYm
     Country a       Country b                   'G        'Gm        direct    indirect    interact   'Ge      'Gme
                                     Growth                                                                                 (%)         (%)
            1              2             3                          6           7          8                        11          
Algeria          Mali                    1.124     0.103   -0.178       0.232      -0.187      0.058    0.076    -0.392       9.209    -37.268
                 Malta                   1.124     0.015    0.061       0.035      -0.028      0.008    0.011     0.026       1.330       4.839
                 Niger                   1.124     0.087   -0.170       0.198      -0.160      0.049    0.064    -0.418       7.789    -32.517
                 Tunisia                 1.124     0.101    0.219       0.228      -0.184      0.057    0.074     0.417       9.015       8.828
Argentina        Bolivia                 0.987     0.075    0.134       0.122      -0.099      0.051    0.089     0.136       6.658       0.786
                 Brazil                  0.987     0.779    1.340       1.107      -0.893      0.565    0.907     2.301      69.529      56.585
                 Chile                   0.987     0.143    0.110       0.230      -0.186      0.098    0.169     0.452      12.734      -0.268
                 Paraguay                0.987     0.044    0.011       0.073      -0.059      0.030    0.053     0.157       3.943      -5.183
                 Uruguay                 0.987     0.047   -0.008       0.077      -0.062      0.032    0.056     0.110       4.167      -1.919
Australia        Fiji                    2.291     0.021   -0.059       0.035      -0.028      0.015    0.018    -0.072       1.915      -7.981
                 Indonesia               2.291     1.232    0.531       1.613      -1.301      0.920    1.065     0.781    109.960    -128.110
                 New Zealand             2.291     0.089   -0.030       0.142      -0.115      0.061    0.074    -0.156       7.905      -2.256
                 Papua New Guinea        2.291     0.082   -0.550       0.131      -0.106      0.056    0.068    -0.449       7.279    -63.385
                 Sri Lanka               2.291     0.310   -0.587       0.473      -0.382      0.218    0.261    -0.882      27.626   -105.326
Austria          rmany, Fed. Rep.        4.128     0.403   -1.464       1.496      -1.207      0.114    0.460    -0.345      35.996   -108.690
                 Italy                   4.128     0.379   -0.535       1.436      -1.159      0.101    0.433     0.405      33.817    -58.122
                 Switzerland             4.128     0.067   -0.404       0.408      -0.329     -0.012    0.083    -0.588       6.016      -5.444
Bangladesh       India                   0.851     0.926    2.501       1.509      -1.217      0.634    1.273     0.579      82.667    204.027
Barbados         Colombia                4.310    -1.673   -2.428       3.081      -2.485     -2.268   -1.041    -1.337   -149.268    -261.782
                 Trinidad & Tobago       4.310    -0.806   -2.249       1.100      -0.887     -1.019   -0.581    -2.359     -71.976   -138.866
                 Venezuela               4.310    -1.549   -3.881       2.653      -2.140     -2.063   -1.006    -3.836   -138.287    -261.606
Belgium          France                  3.051     0.199   -0.530       1.250      -1.008     -0.043   -0.217    -0.008      17.731    -42.409
                 Germany, Fed. Rep.      3.051     0.225   -0.493       1.340      -1.081     -0.034   -0.221    -0.323      20.059    -28.483
                 Netherlands             3.051     0.056   -0.025       0.585      -0.472     -0.058   -0.139    -0.407       4.971       3.541
Benin            Niger                  -0.006     0.063   -0.012       0.661      -0.533     -0.064    0.190     0.160       5.653    -39.016
                 Togo                   -0.006     0.028    0.810       0.398      -0.321     -0.049    0.104     0.784       2.506      39.002
Bolivia          Argentina               1.951     0.578   -0.830       1.266      -1.021      0.333    0.522    -0.819      51.610      50.535
                 Brazil                  1.951     1.152    0.589       2.132      -1.720      0.739    1.057     1.719    102.778       95.070


                                                                 34
                                        a’s Fitted                                                                          'SSY     'SSYm
        Country a        Country b                   'G       'Gm        direct    indirect   interact   'Ge      'Gme
                                         Growth                                                                              (%)      (%)
           1                  2             3                          6          7          8                       11       
Bolivia             Chile                    1.951    0.320   -0.704       0.780     -0.629      0.169    0.285     0.042     28.560    8.816
                    Paraguay                 1.951    0.115   -0.230       0.314     -0.254      0.054    0.101     0.224     10.250 -19.665
                    Peru                     1.951    0.411   -0.162       0.962     -0.776      0.225    0.369    -0.640     36.723   30.274
Botswana            South Africa             1.341    0.666   -0.241       2.438     -1.967      0.195   -0.191    -3.395     59.460 117.516
                    Zimbabwe                 1.341    0.278   -0.182       1.509     -1.217     -0.014   -0.253    -4.036     24.780   39.610
Brazil              Argentina                2.488    0.149   -0.161       0.164     -0.132      0.118    0.132    -0.382     13.330   14.310
                    Bolivia                  2.488    0.041    0.052       0.045     -0.037      0.032    0.036    -0.009      3.658    3.047
                    Colombia                 2.488    0.136    0.114       0.149     -0.120      0.107    0.120     0.097     12.144    9.214
                    Guyana                   2.488    0.018    0.012       0.019     -0.016      0.014    0.015    -0.021      1.562    0.960
                    Paraguay                 2.488    0.029    0.017       0.032     -0.026      0.023    0.025     0.025      2.577    0.640
                    Peru                     2.488    0.094    0.070       0.104     -0.084      0.074    0.083    -0.161      8.404    7.790
                    Uruguay                  2.488    0.030   -0.029       0.033     -0.027      0.023    0.026    -0.027      2.664    1.431
                    Venezuela                2.488    0.081   -0.115       0.089     -0.072      0.063    0.071    -0.232      7.202   10.716
Cameroon            Central Afr. Rep.        1.371    0.056   -0.317       0.183     -0.148      0.020    0.061    -0.769      4.957 -26.023
                    Congo                    1.371    0.040   -0.230       0.132     -0.107      0.014    0.044    -0.162      3.528   -9.715
Canada              U.S.A                    1.777    1.367    1.288       1.608     -1.297      1.056    0.888    -0.738   121.956 143.482
Central Afr. Rep.   Cameroon                 0.137    0.289    0.918       1.042     -0.841      0.087    0.194     2.466     25.775   74.775
                    Congo                    0.137    0.075    0.037       0.357     -0.288      0.006    0.043     1.064      6.736   23.269
                    Zaire                    0.137    0.578    0.650       1.699     -1.370      0.249    0.423     0.151     51.575   25.503
Chile               Argentina                0.991    0.377    0.107       0.866     -0.699      0.209    0.427    -0.646     33.621   43.039
                    Bolivia                  0.991    0.103    0.257       0.273     -0.220      0.050    0.119    -0.101      9.193    2.374
                    Peru                     0.991    0.253    0.481       0.617     -0.497      0.134    0.289    -0.525     22.615   24.426
Colombia            Barbados                 1.880    0.011    0.002       0.022     -0.018      0.007    0.013    -0.001      1.021    1.057
                    Brazil                   1.880    0.740    0.723       1.178     -0.950      0.512    0.811     0.802     66.018   69.280
                    Ecuador                  1.880    0.102    0.131       0.192     -0.155      0.065    0.114     0.096      9.129    8.639
                    Panama                   1.880    0.033   -0.003       0.063     -0.051      0.021    0.036    -0.016      2.913   -0.694
                    Peru                     1.880    0.192    0.077       0.350     -0.282      0.124    0.213    -0.576     17.120   14.304
                    Venezuela                1.880    0.164   -0.466       0.302     -0.244      0.106    0.183    -0.803     14.655   21.271
Congo               Cameroon                 0.455    0.190    0.687       1.274     -1.027     -0.056   -0.223    -0.063     16.991   15.983
                    Central Afr. Rep.        0.455    0.057   -0.282       0.640     -0.516     -0.067   -0.151    -2.072      5.053 -51.830
                    Zaire                    0.455    0.423    0.330       1.962     -1.583      0.044   -0.213    -2.862     37.755 -46.654
Costa Rica          Nicaragua                1.272   -0.033   -0.561       0.562     -0.454     -0.142    0.065    -1.446     -2.981 -64.023

                                                                    35
                                        a’s Fitted                                                                           'SSY       'SSYm
       Country a         Country b                   'G       'Gm        direct    indirect    interact   'Ge      'Gme
                                         Growth                                                                               (%)         (%)
          1                    2            3                          6           7          8                       11          
Costa Rica           Panama                  1.272   -0.031   -0.001       0.445      -0.359     -0.118    0.046    -0.077     -2.807    -12.696
Cyprus               Greece                  4.934   -0.524   -1.323       1.870      -1.509     -0.886   -0.217    -0.647    -46.761   -115.560
                     Israel                  4.934   -0.423   -2.252       1.241      -1.001     -0.663   -0.219    -1.346    -37.718   -156.765
                     Turkey                  4.934   -0.533   -2.165       2.812      -2.268     -1.077   -0.073    -2.068    -47.599   -215.453
Denmark              Germany, Fed. Rep.      2.198    0.261    0.236       1.747      -1.409     -0.077    0.543     0.171     23.294      18.404
                     Iceland                 2.198    0.000   -0.267       0.029      -0.023     -0.006    0.004    -0.255     -0.040    -24.818
Dominican Rep.       Haiti                   2.074    0.018   -0.538       0.486      -0.392     -0.076    0.159    -1.368      1.615    -61.046
                     Jamaica                 2.074    0.004   -0.048       0.247      -0.199     -0.044    0.075    -0.495      0.314      10.464
Ecuador              Colombia                2.127    0.310   -0.117       1.017      -0.820      0.113    0.444     0.173     27.662       0.758
                     Peru                    2.127    0.226   -0.273       0.796      -0.642      0.072    0.331    -1.188     20.148      -1.150
El Salvador          Guatemala               0.841   -0.024   -0.168       0.646      -0.521     -0.149    0.159     0.000     -2.156      -5.590
                     Honduras                0.841   -0.025   -0.055       0.413      -0.333     -0.105    0.093    -0.056     -2.204    -17.273
Fiji                 Australia               2.621   -0.430   -0.388       2.191      -1.767     -0.853   -0.171     0.108    -38.344      93.211
                     New Zealand             2.621   -0.359   -0.653       1.256      -1.013     -0.602   -0.211    -0.848    -32.053      63.566
Finland              Norway                  2.486    0.090    0.201       0.413      -0.333      0.010    0.118    -0.140      8.018      20.619
                     Sweden                  2.486    0.165   -0.414       0.678      -0.547      0.034    0.212    -0.725     14.727    -12.821
France               Belgium                 2.374    0.063    0.147       0.118      -0.095      0.041    0.067    -0.026      5.663      12.174
                     Germany, Fed. Rep.      2.374    0.303    0.245       0.526      -0.425      0.202    0.317     0.020     27.083      28.662
                     Italy                   2.374    0.281    0.773       0.491      -0.396      0.186    0.294     0.474     25.099      57.011
                     Spain                   2.374    0.197    0.470       0.352      -0.284      0.129    0.206     0.509     17.566      21.476
                     Switzerland             2.374    0.042    0.142       0.078      -0.063      0.026    0.044    -0.072      3.706      18.897
                     United Kingdom          2.374    0.286   -0.364       0.498      -0.402      0.189    0.299    -0.140     25.496    -23.711
Germany, Fed. Rep.   Austria                 2.432    0.039    0.231       0.079      -0.064      0.023    0.038     0.099      3.438      18.175
                     Belgium                 2.432    0.049    0.125       0.101      -0.082      0.030    0.049     0.026      4.409       8.848
                     Denmark                 2.432    0.026    0.001       0.054      -0.044      0.016    0.026     0.029      2.329       0.341
                     France                  2.432    0.217    0.187       0.419      -0.338      0.136    0.213     0.387     19.352      11.411
                     Netherlands             2.432    0.066    0.180       0.135      -0.109      0.040    0.065     0.010      5.924      14.802
                     Switzerland             2.432    0.032    0.125       0.066      -0.054      0.019    0.032    -0.022      2.865      14.891
Ghana                Togo                    1.545    0.044    0.091       0.157      -0.126      0.013    0.076     0.308      3.899      -3.164
Greece               Cyprus                  3.605    0.009    0.006       0.046      -0.037      0.000    0.019    -0.009      0.760       0.345
                     Turkey                  3.605    0.324   -0.634       1.121      -0.904      0.108    0.577    -1.059     28.947    -75.536
                     Yugoslavia              3.605    0.211    0.321       0.811      -0.654      0.054    0.393    -0.416     18.797      22.824

                                                                    36
                                       a’s Fitted                                                                          'SSY       'SSYm
        Country a       Country b                   'G       'Gm        direct    indirect   interact   'Ge      'Gme
                                        Growth                                                                              (%)         (%)
         1                    2            3                          6          7          8                       11          
Guatemala           El Salvador             0.815    0.053   -0.142       0.360     -0.290     -0.017    0.155    -0.029      4.692    -18.431
                    Honduras                0.815    0.043    0.046       0.304     -0.245     -0.016    0.129     0.039      3.813      -9.188
                    Mexico                  0.815    0.436    1.022       1.629     -1.314      0.121    0.900     1.416     38.943    140.856
Guinea Bissau       Senegal                 2.243   -0.141   -2.056       1.444     -1.165     -0.420    0.472    -0.780    -12.559   -117.343
Guyana              Brazil                  1.286    0.726    1.214       3.410     -2.750      0.067   -0.846     4.220     64.789    119.398
                    Venezuela               1.286    0.150   -0.882       1.981     -1.598     -0.233   -0.764     0.851     13.365      53.913
Haiti               Dominican Rep.          1.288   -0.008    0.247       0.477     -0.385     -0.100    0.207     1.433     -0.727      34.801
                    Jamaica                 1.288   -0.010    0.156       0.237     -0.191     -0.055    0.097     0.315     -0.849      37.999
Honduras            El Salvador             1.314    0.049   -0.527       0.576     -0.465     -0.062    0.108    -0.320      4.396    -27.723
                    Guatemala               1.314    0.077   -0.452       0.753     -0.607     -0.068    0.153    -0.197      6.879      -6.797
                    Nicaragua               1.314    0.029   -0.472       0.414     -0.334     -0.051    0.071    -0.891      2.580    -20.166
Hong Kong           Singapore               5.622   -0.098   -0.251       0.282     -0.228     -0.153   -0.288    -0.878     -8.755    -32.005
Iceland             Denmark                 3.396   -0.363   -1.465       2.170     -1.750     -0.783    0.002    -1.270    -32.409   -100.837
                    Norway                  3.396   -0.367   -0.441       2.020     -1.629     -0.758   -0.027    -0.227    -32.768    -27.661
                    Sweden                  3.396   -0.340   -1.553       2.489     -2.008     -0.822    0.079    -1.189    -30.363    -96.927
India               Bangladesh              3.424    0.097   -0.072       0.092     -0.074      0.079    0.087     0.199      8.652      -3.850
                    Pakistan                3.424    0.092    0.157       0.087     -0.070      0.075    0.082     0.329      8.170      12.410
                    Sri Lanka               3.424    0.029    0.028       0.027     -0.022      0.023    0.026     0.050      2.561       3.923
Indonesia           Australia               3.392    0.052   -0.569       0.079     -0.064      0.037    0.048    -0.616      4.658      23.824
                    Malaysia                3.392    0.048    0.051       0.072     -0.058      0.034    0.044     0.055      4.259      13.995
                    Papua New Guinea        3.392    0.017   -0.046       0.026     -0.021      0.012    0.016    -0.045      1.533      -2.267
                    Philippines             3.392    0.135   -0.069       0.201     -0.162      0.096    0.125    -0.329     12.075      10.221
                    Sri Lanka               3.392    0.052   -0.049       0.078     -0.063      0.037    0.048    -0.129      4.614       4.570
Iran                Pakistan                1.219    0.448    1.015       0.801     -0.646      0.293    0.467     1.632     39.960      12.156
                    Turkey                  1.219    0.300    1.072       0.559     -0.451      0.192    0.313     1.509     26.740      65.722
Ireland             United Kingdom          2.333    0.272   -0.982       1.986     -1.602     -0.112   -0.010    -0.950     24.301    -18.009
Israel              Cyprus                  2.515   -0.017    0.168       0.137     -0.111     -0.044    0.007     0.058     -1.539       5.720
                    Jordan                  2.515   -0.037   -0.721       0.360     -0.291     -0.107    0.027    -0.357     -3.347    -99.526
                    Syria                   2.515   -0.049   -0.865       0.811     -0.654     -0.206    0.096    -0.350     -4.398   -124.013
Italy               Austria                 3.464    0.043    0.129       0.087     -0.071      0.026    0.048     0.014      3.820      13.090
                    France                  3.464    0.237   -0.316       0.451     -0.364      0.149    0.265     0.006     21.122    -15.894
                    Malta                   3.464    0.002    0.001       0.005     -0.004      0.001    0.003    -0.004      0.210      -0.389

                                                                   37
                                       a’s Fitted                                                                           'SSY       'SSYm
        Country a       Country b                   'G       'Gm        direct    indirect   interact   'Ge      'Gme
                                        Growth                                                                               (%)         (%)
            1                 2            3                          6          7          8                        11          
Italy               Switzerland             3.464    0.036    0.008       0.073     -0.059      0.022    0.040    -0.128       3.187      10.499
Jamaica             Dominican Rep.          2.698   -0.165   -0.672       0.848     -0.684     -0.329   -0.052     0.723     -14.750    -84.722
                    Haiti                   2.698   -0.165   -1.254       0.847     -0.683     -0.329   -0.052    -1.268     -14.747   -153.034
Japan               Korea                   5.361    0.108    0.119       0.185     -0.149      0.072    0.139     0.353       9.645      -4.978
                    Philippines             5.361    0.129   -0.759       0.220     -0.177      0.087    0.166    -0.934      11.530    -82.917
                    Taiwan                  5.361    0.053   -0.070       0.092     -0.074      0.035    0.069     0.156       4.740    -12.355
Jordan              Israel                  1.634    0.016    0.159       0.636     -0.513     -0.107   -0.041    -0.356       1.434      88.681
                    Syria                   1.634    0.062   -0.111       1.010     -0.814     -0.133   -0.029    -0.294       5.515      13.099
Kenya               Uganda                  1.385    0.184   -0.323       0.426     -0.343      0.102    0.121    -0.492      16.459    -33.066
Korea               Japan                   5.788    0.425   -0.308       0.990     -0.798      0.234    0.459    -0.934      37.952      75.304
                    Taiwan                  5.788    0.096   -0.344       0.265     -0.214      0.044    0.105    -0.068       8.528    -19.555
Lesotho             South Africa            2.713    0.035   -1.556       2.122     -1.712     -0.376   -0.440    -2.612       3.086      51.695
Malawi              Zambia                  1.396    0.085   -0.396       0.463     -0.374     -0.004    0.102    -1.226       7.616      19.143
Malaysia            Indonesia               3.161    0.749    0.282       1.690     -1.363      0.422    0.117    -0.427      66.863    -45.458
                    Singapore               3.161    0.037    0.215       0.126     -0.102      0.013   -0.010    -0.226       3.300      21.953
                    Thailand                3.161    0.380   -0.371       1.006     -0.812      0.185    0.004     0.103      33.894    -62.738
Mali                Algeria                 0.260    0.414    0.685       0.904     -0.729      0.239    0.422     1.202      36.942    156.763
                    Niger                   0.260    0.171    0.043       0.417     -0.336      0.091    0.175    -0.079      15.290       3.572
                    Senegal                 0.260    0.174   -0.192       0.422     -0.341      0.092    0.177    -0.025      15.501      19.067
Malta               Algeria                 6.150   -1.523   -4.965       2.614     -2.108     -2.028   -1.677    -3.673   -135.894    -421.068
                    Italy                   6.150   -1.733   -2.685       3.452     -2.784     -2.400   -1.937    -2.026   -154.651    -120.031
                    Tunisia                 6.150   -1.257   -4.330       1.942     -1.566     -1.632   -1.371    -2.282   -112.143    -406.793
Mexico              Guatemala               1.885    0.057   -0.048       0.084     -0.067      0.041    0.059    -0.038       5.075      -8.159
                    U.S.A                   1.885    0.833    1.038       1.074     -0.866      0.625    0.865    -0.041      74.304    204.256
Netherlands         Belgium                 3.094    0.051   -0.068       0.373     -0.301     -0.021   -0.020    -0.002       4.588    -10.388
                    Germany, Fed. Rep.      3.094    0.248   -0.481       1.162     -0.938      0.023    0.025     0.066      22.147    -36.458
                    United Kingdom          3.094    0.234   -1.410       1.119     -0.902      0.018    0.019    -0.191      20.893   -116.219
New Zealand         Australia               2.196    0.204    0.065       1.164     -0.939     -0.021    0.362     0.727      18.251       3.998
                    Fiji                    2.196    0.009   -0.228       0.122     -0.098     -0.014    0.026    -0.146       0.821    -31.372
Nicaragua           Costa Rica              0.631    0.019    0.080       0.426     -0.343     -0.063    0.073     0.939       1.693      19.823
                    Honduras                0.631    0.035    0.211       0.584     -0.471     -0.078    0.109     0.882       3.108      -2.783
Niger               Algeria                 0.231    0.457    0.723       1.015     -0.819      0.261    0.471     1.488      40.765    164.683

                                                                   38
                                    a’s Fitted                                                                          'SSY     'SSYm
        Country a       Country b                'G       'Gm        direct    indirect   interact   'Ge      'Gme
                                     Growth                                                                              (%)       (%)
            1                 2          3                         6          7          8                       11        
Niger               Benin                0.231    0.136   -0.249       0.351     -0.283      0.068    0.141    -0.273     12.117    12.430
                    Mali                 0.231    0.228    0.072       0.562     -0.453      0.120    0.236     0.234     20.387     6.741
Norway              Finland              3.044    0.103   -0.357       0.534     -0.430     -0.001   -0.018    -0.035      9.152 -35.034
                    Iceland              3.044    0.005   -0.089       0.036     -0.029     -0.002   -0.003    -0.090      0.470    -8.468
                    Sweden               3.044    0.162   -0.824       0.757     -0.611      0.015   -0.009    -0.783     14.442 -52.154
Pakistan            India                2.728    1.223    0.853       1.558     -1.257      0.921    1.213    -0.726   109.106     92.826
                    Iran                 2.728    0.187   -0.494       0.282     -0.228      0.132    0.185    -0.775     16.674    30.518
Panama              Colombia             1.766    0.169    0.111       1.838     -1.482     -0.187    0.155     0.324     15.050    16.157
                    Costa Rica           1.766   -0.018   -0.495       0.535     -0.431     -0.121   -0.022    -0.323     -1.594 -28.217
Papua New Guinea    Australia           -0.005    0.293    1.746       1.226     -0.989      0.056    0.099     0.981     26.192 325.630
                    Indonesia           -0.005    1.000    3.350       2.655     -2.142      0.487    0.578     2.782     89.271 234.815
Paraguay            Argentina            1.362    0.500   -0.363       1.620     -1.307      0.186    0.809    -1.370     44.581    94.667
                    Bolivia              1.362    0.159    0.359       0.718     -0.579      0.020    0.296    -0.348     14.200    30.436
                    Brazil               1.362    0.997    1.143       2.522     -2.035      0.509    1.478     1.181     88.935 142.764
Peru                Bolivia              1.660    0.102    0.129       0.210     -0.169      0.061    0.105     0.274      9.089    -0.240
                    Brazil               1.660    0.867    0.898       1.439     -1.160      0.589    0.886     2.482     77.403    69.299
                    Chile                1.660    0.186   -0.188       0.372     -0.300      0.114    0.191     0.532     16.617     0.354
                    Colombia             1.660    0.346    0.297       0.656     -0.529      0.219    0.355     1.361     30.892    15.746
                    Ecuador              1.660    0.136    0.194       0.277     -0.224      0.083    0.140     0.673     12.153     8.172
Philippines         Indonesia            2.301    0.521    1.021       0.977     -0.788      0.332    0.550     1.828     46.470    50.146
                    Japan                2.301    0.470    2.301       0.895     -0.722      0.297    0.497     2.889     41.957 286.007
Portugal            Spain                2.831    0.266    0.304       1.050     -0.847      0.063    0.317    -0.399     23.751    68.910
Rwanda              Uganda               0.890    0.043   -0.395       0.871     -0.703     -0.126    0.461    -0.862      3.815 -27.551
                    Zaire                0.890    0.113   -0.077       1.280     -1.032     -0.134    0.728    -1.226     10.092 -14.783
Senegal             Guinea Bissau        0.032    0.016    0.156       0.102     -0.082     -0.003    0.012     0.060      1.462     6.680
                    Mali                 0.032    0.112    0.036       0.550     -0.444      0.006    0.089    -0.183      9.989 -27.679
                    The Gambia           0.032    0.014    0.074       0.086     -0.070     -0.003    0.010    -0.031      1.223     2.475
Singapore           Hong Kong            5.955   -0.313   -0.584       0.761     -0.614     -0.460   -1.675    -1.049    -27.943 -31.349
                    Malaysia             5.955   -0.465   -2.579       1.291     -1.041     -0.715   -2.775    -2.661    -41.522 -242.860
                    Thailand             5.955   -0.587   -3.269       2.027     -1.635     -0.979   -4.214    -2.409    -52.401 -343.783
South Africa        Botswana             1.138    0.019   -0.038       0.035     -0.028      0.012    0.012     0.023      1.666    -5.351
                    Lesotho              1.138    0.025    0.019       0.047     -0.038      0.016    0.016     0.037      2.203    -2.360

                                                                39
                                       a’s Fitted                                                                          'SSY       'SSYm
        Country a       Country b                   'G       'Gm        direct    indirect   interact   'Ge      'Gme
                                        Growth                                                                              (%)         (%)
          1                   2            3                          6          7          8                       11          
South Africa        Swaziland               1.138    0.015   -0.008       0.028     -0.023      0.009    0.009    -0.009      1.331      -1.400
                    Zimbabwe                1.138    0.085    0.064       0.157     -0.127      0.055    0.054    -0.182      7.585      -3.887
Spain               France                  3.156    0.333   -0.312       0.617     -0.498      0.214    0.393    -0.295     29.710      13.967
                    Portugal                3.156    0.082   -0.021       0.164     -0.133      0.050    0.098     0.198      7.275    -11.475
Sri Lanka           Australia               2.270    0.092   -0.565       0.482     -0.389     -0.002    0.095    -0.312      8.182      78.756
                    India                   2.270    1.031    1.182       2.612     -2.107      0.526    1.048     0.038     91.987      57.212
                    Indonesia               2.270    0.486    1.073       1.622     -1.308      0.172    0.497     1.837     43.352      36.718
Swaziland           South Africa            1.088   -0.287    0.042       2.734     -2.205     -0.816   -1.132    -1.018    -25.599      59.321
Sweden              Finland                 1.865    0.092    0.206       0.311     -0.251      0.031    0.090     0.412      8.171       6.416
                    Iceland                 1.865    0.005   -0.023       0.018     -0.015      0.001    0.005    -0.022      0.429      -2.844
                    Norway                  1.865    0.078    0.354       0.269     -0.217      0.026    0.076     0.248      6.975      22.735
Switzerland         Austria                 3.486    0.043    0.238       0.539     -0.435     -0.061    0.092     0.529      3.856      -8.557
                    France                  3.486    0.264   -0.971       1.518     -1.224     -0.029    0.403     0.968     23.597   -128.333
                    Germany, Fed. Rep.      3.486    0.296   -0.929       1.614     -1.302     -0.016    0.443     0.651     26.413   -115.087
                    Italy                   3.486    0.276   -0.014       1.553     -1.252     -0.025    0.417     1.380     24.599    -63.826
Syria               Israel                  1.575    0.061    0.075       0.279     -0.225      0.008    0.102    -0.051      5.482      39.063
                    Jordan                  1.575    0.043   -0.052       0.202     -0.163      0.004    0.073     0.004      3.838    -12.032
                    Turkey                  1.575    0.406    1.061       1.281     -1.033      0.158    0.594    -0.220     36.215      97.229
Taiwan              Japan                   4.608    0.347    0.683       1.429     -1.153      0.071    0.339    -0.815     30.963    140.384
                    Korea                   4.608    0.145    0.836       0.798     -0.643     -0.009    0.141     0.249     12.958      52.901
Thailand            Malaysia                2.573    0.104    0.217       0.197     -0.159      0.066    0.091    -0.053      9.317      30.663
                    Singapore               2.573    0.028    0.113       0.053     -0.043      0.017    0.024    -0.130      2.454      14.431
The Gambia          Senegal                 2.044   -0.398   -1.938       1.576     -1.271     -0.703   -0.125    -0.755    -35.532   -121.751
Togo                Benin                   2.597    0.002   -1.794       0.592     -0.477     -0.112   -0.070    -1.730      0.205    -83.591
                    Ghana                   2.597    0.065   -0.960       1.145     -0.923     -0.156   -0.074    -1.887      5.827      -8.000
Trinidad & Tobago   Barbados                2.034   -0.069    0.027       0.155     -0.125     -0.099   -0.030     0.149     -6.135    -10.413
Tunisia             Algeria                 1.727    0.228   -0.385       0.916     -0.739      0.051    0.204    -1.039     20.340      -0.229
                    Malta                   1.727    0.009    0.093       0.051     -0.041     -0.001    0.007    -0.039      0.760      10.058
Turkey              Cyprus                  2.742    0.014    0.028       0.025     -0.020      0.009    0.016     0.036      1.225       2.993
                    Greece                  2.742    0.089    0.229       0.159     -0.128      0.058    0.107     0.408      7.947      27.006
                    Iran                    2.742    0.250   -0.451       0.426     -0.344      0.168    0.298    -0.759     22.355    -10.525
                    Syria                   2.742    0.073   -0.106       0.130     -0.105      0.048    0.087     0.182      6.486      -9.886

                                                                   40
                                     a’s Fitted                                                                         'SSY     'SSYm
     Country a        Country b                   'G      'Gm        direct    indirect   interact   'Ge      'Gme
                                      Growth                                                                             (%)      (%)
            1              2             3                         6          7          8                       11       
U.S.A            Canada                   2.995   0.069    0.069       0.070     -0.056      0.055    0.060     0.221      6.137    3.764
                 Mexico                   2.995   0.162   -0.072       0.163     -0.132      0.131    0.141     0.203     14.469 -19.768
Uganda           Kenya                    0.426   0.203    0.636       0.580     -0.468      0.091    0.370     0.938     18.092   62.210
                 Rwanda                   0.426   0.080    0.069       0.252     -0.203      0.031    0.153     0.498      7.145    3.105
                 Zaire                    0.426   0.298    0.379       0.803     -0.647      0.143    0.530     0.051     26.588   20.015
United Kingdom   France                   1.308   0.209    0.702       0.444     -0.358      0.123    0.211     0.509     18.670   55.590
                 Ireland                  1.308   0.016    0.042       0.038     -0.030      0.009    0.016     0.025      1.447    1.118
                 Netherlands              1.308   0.064    0.376       0.145     -0.117      0.036    0.065     0.035      5.731   31.593
Uruguay          Argentina                0.639   0.311    0.341       1.563     -1.261      0.008    0.824    -0.129     27.727   40.951
                 Brazil                   0.639   0.702    1.820       2.462     -1.986      0.226    1.511     2.417     62.674   86.575
Venezuela        Barbados                 0.393   0.013    0.036       0.042     -0.034      0.005    0.015     0.049      1.126    1.382
                 Brazil                   0.393   0.700    1.980       1.565     -1.262      0.397    0.806     3.021     62.479   70.930
                 Colombia                 0.393   0.276    1.021       0.749     -0.604      0.132    0.327     1.745     24.669   21.418
                 Guyana                   0.393   0.020    0.011       0.066     -0.053      0.007    0.025    -0.137      1.789   -4.311
Yugoslavia       Greece                   4.050   0.073   -0.124       0.247     -0.199      0.025    0.109     0.311      6.508   -8.321
Zaire            Central Afr. Rep.        0.810   0.047   -0.023       0.078     -0.063      0.032    0.043     0.004      4.162    1.888
                 Congo                    0.810   0.035   -0.025       0.059     -0.048      0.024    0.032     0.127      3.150    4.830
                 Rwanda                   0.810   0.081    0.003       0.135     -0.109      0.055    0.075     0.325      7.269    1.737
                 Uganda                   0.810   0.171   -0.005       0.277     -0.224      0.117    0.157     0.241     15.267    5.880
                 Zambia                   0.810   0.089    0.097       0.148     -0.119      0.061    0.082    -0.076      7.963   23.515
Zambia           Malawi                   1.000   0.178   -0.001       0.521     -0.420      0.077   -0.008     0.731     15.904 -38.779
                 Zaire                    1.000   0.496   -0.093       1.215     -0.980      0.261    0.063     0.273     44.304 -61.472
                 Zimbabwe                 1.000   0.197    0.175       0.567     -0.458      0.087   -0.006     0.672     17.541   16.938
Zimbabwe         Botswana                 1.316   0.028   -0.157       0.107     -0.087      0.008    0.017     0.251      2.543 -19.579
                 South Africa             1.316   0.424   -0.114       1.158     -0.934      0.200    0.298     0.687     37.870   59.791
                 Zambia                   1.316   0.127   -0.140       0.429     -0.346      0.044    0.080    -0.755     11.351 -13.648




                                                                41
  Table 7 – Pairs of countries that would both have gained from full political integration
                                 ('Gm>0 for both countries)

Argentina               Chile
Bolivia                 Brazil
Brazil                  Colombia
Brazil                  Guyana
Brazil                  Paraguay
Brazil                  Peru
Canada                  U.S.A
Colombia                Peru
Denmark                 Federal Republic of Germany
France                  Federal Republic of Germany
India                   Pakistan
India                   Sri Lanka
Indonesia               Malaysia
Mali                    Niger




                                            42
                                                                                         .4

           .4


                                                                                         .3




                                                                                         .2
           .2




Fraction
                                                                              Fraction
                                                                                         .1




           0                                                                             0
                -2     -1.5        -1       -.5      0        .5    1   1.5                    -5    -4      -3   -2        -1    0     1        2   3         4   5

                Figure 1 - Total Effect of Size Merger on Growth                              Figure 2 - Total Effect of Full Integration on Growth

           .3                                                                            .3




           .2                                                                            .2




Fraction
           .1                                                                 Fraction   .1




           0                                                                             0
                0       .5          1       1.5      2        2.5   3   3.5                    -3         -2.5         -2        -1.5       -1           -.5       0

                              Figure 3 - Direct Size Effect                                   Figure 4 - Indirect Effect via Openness Reduction
           .6                                                                                             .4




                                                                                                          .3
           .4


                                                                                                          .2




Fraction
                                                                                               Fraction
           .2
                                                                                                          .1




           0                                                                                              0
                -2.5     -2         -1.5        -1         -.5        0             .5   1                         -3            -2           -1          0           1           2      3

                        Figure 5 - Interaction Term Effect                                                      Figure 6 - Steady-State Determination Effect

           .6
                                                                                                          .3




           .4
                                                                                                          .2




Fraction
           .2                                                                                  Fraction   .1




           0                                                                                              0
                -50             0             50             100           150           200                            -100         -50         0          50         100         150   200
                              (Truncated at 200% of trade to GDP for readability)                                              (Truncated at 200% of trade to GDP for readability)
                   Figure 7 - Openness Equivalent - Size Merger                                                Figure 8 - Openness Equivalent - Full Integration
              .6
                                                                                                       .3




              .4
                                                                                                       .2




Fraction
                                                                                        Fraction
              .2                                                                                       .1




              0                                                                                         0
                     -4              -2   -1.5   -1   -.5   0    .5    1    1.5   2                         -5      -4          -3    -2    -1      0       1    2    3         4         5

             Figure 9 - Effect of Size Merger on growth - with Residual                             Figure 10 - Effect of Full Integration on growth - with Residual

              .6

                                                                                                       .4




              .4




                                                                                                       .2




Fraction
              .2                                                                        Fraction




              0                                                                                         0
                   -150    -100     -50          0          50        100         150                        -400        -300        -200    -100       0       100       200       300

           Figure 11 - Effect of Size Merger on Steady-State Income (%)                            Figure 12 - Effect of Full Integration on Steady-State Income (%)
