                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         SLAVERY AND THE INTERGENERATIONAL
                           TRANSMISSION OF HUMAN CAPITAL


                                            Bruce Sacerdote


                                          Working Paper 9227
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9227


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




I thank the National Science Foundation for generous support and I thank Amitabh Chandra, Claudia Goldin
and seminar participants at the NBER Summer Institute 2002 meeting for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the author and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

© 2002 by Bruce Sacerdote. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Slavery and the Intergenerational Transmission of Human Capital
Bruce Sacerdote
NBER Working Paper No. 9227
September 2002
JEL No. J0, N0, I2

                                       ABSTRACT

       How much do sins visited upon one generation harm that generation's future sons, daughters,
grandsons and granddaughters? I study this question by comparing outcomes for former slaves and
their children and grandchildren to outcomes for free blacks (pre-1865), and their children and
grandchildren. The outcome measures include literacy, whether a child attends school, whether a
child lives in a female headed household, and two measures of adult occupation. Using a variety of
different comparisons, (e.g. within versus across regions) I find that it took roughly two generations
for the descendants of slaves to "catch up" to the descendants of free black men and women. This
finding is consistent with modern estimates and interpretations of father-son correlations in income
and socioeconomic status. The data used are from the 1880 and 1920 1 percent (IPUMS) samples,
a 100 percent sample of the 1880 Census and a smaller data set in which I link families in the 1920
IPUMS back to the father's family in a 100% sample of the 1880 Census. These latter data sets are
derived from an electronic version of the 1880 Census recently compiled and released by the
Mormon Church with assistance from the Minnesota Population Center.


Bruce Sacerdote
Dartmouth College
6106 Rockefeller
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
bruce.sacerdote@dartmouth.edu
"In America, anybody can become somebody."
                     Jesse Owens, Four time Olympic Gold Medallist, Medal of Freedom holder,
                     Grandson of Slaves

Introduction

        In 1967 Damon Keith was appointed to the U.S. District Court in the Eastern District of Michigan.
In 1977 President Carter elevated Judge Keith to the U.S. Court of Appeals, 6th Circuit, where he still
works today. Judge Keith is remarkable in part for his decisions promoting racial integration in Detroit
schools and in part for the fact that he is the grandson of slaves.1


        Is a family's journey from slavery to professional and economic success in two generations a rare
event? More broadly, after institutional or political barriers are lifted, how many generations are needed
for outcomes for previously separated groups of people to converge? How long before the less and more
advantaged groups converge on measures of income, health and education?


        The rich existing literature on social mobility and income mobility would suggest that such
convergence may take place rather rapidly. Many authors find that within OECD countries, the elasticity
of son's earnings with respect to father's earnings is within the range of .3 to .5. (This range spans
estimates by Altonji and Dunn [1991], Solon [1992], Zimmerman [1992], Mulligan [1997], and Bjorkland
and Jantti [1997]. Solon [1999] is a detailed summary of this literature.) If income transmission follows
a simple first order autoregressive (AR1) process, then the elasticity of a grandson's income with respect
to his grandfather's income could be as little as .3^2 or .09.2


        Convergence of wealth between two previously separated groups may be similarly rapid. Charles
and Hurst [2001] find parent-child wealth correlations in the range off .23-.5 which suggests that child-
grandparent wealth correlations could be between .04 and .25.


        This simple math implies a great deal of income and wealth mobility within two generations.
Grandchildren are quite likely to fall into a different income, wealth, or education quintile than their


1
  There are of course many successful African-americans alive today who can trace their roots back to slavery. The most
famous may be L. Douglas Wilder, the former governor of Virginia who actually became governor of the state in which his
grandparents were enslaved.
2
  By AR1, I mean autoregressive with the current generation's outcomes dependent on only one lagged value of the data. In
other words, if a child's income depends upon the income of her parent's but not income from previous generations, then we
can simply square the parent-child coefficient to get the parent-grandchild relationship. Recent work by Mazumder [2001]
finds parent-child income correlations that are even higher than those of Zimmerman or Solon. However, the basic implication
of very high mobility within two generations remains.
                                                                                                                           2
grandparents. And hence, groups of people that start with very different levels of physical and human
capital could end up with similar distributions of income, education, physical and human capital two
generations down the road. Whether or not such convergence actually takes place will depend in part on
the degree to which institutional and social barriers that separate the two groups are lifted.


         This paper tests the theory of convergence (or at least high mobility) within two generations by
comparing outcomes for former U.S. slaves, their children and their grandchildren to outcomes for free
blacks born before 1865 and their children and grandchildren. The outcomes examined include literacy,
whether or not children ages 7-18 are in school, months spent in school, whether children live in a female
headed household and two measures of occupation and occupational socioeconomic status. (I examine
median income by occupation and I use a dummy for manual versus non-manual occupation.)


         The paper uses Census data from 1880 and 1920. I group people into three generations and
examine outcomes for householders born before 1865 and their children and grandchildren.3 I also
present summary statistics by birth cohort. For one set of results, I have linked fathers in the 1920
IPUMS sample back to their families in 1880. This linked data set allows me to measure the coefficient
transmission of socioeconomic status from grandfathers to grandsons (holding father's socioeconomic
status constant).


         I find that in 1880 there is a huge literacy gap between former slaves and free blacks, and that this
gap narrows considerably over the next two generations. Similarly, the children of former slaves are less
likely to be enrolled in school than the children of blacks born free, but this gap disappears when we
examine the grandchildren of blacks born into slavery and the grandchildren of blacks born free. Former
slaves do work in occupations with lower median income than blacks born free. However, once I control
for current region, this gap is small and relatively constant between 1880 and 1920.


         I use data on whites to test whether the "effect of slavery" that I measure is merely the effect of
being born (or having an ancestor) in the South. I find that the slavery effect and its disappearance over
time is a separate phenomenon from the effect of being born in the South.


Relation to the literatures on slavery, intergenerational transmission, black-white wage gaps, and North-
South wage gaps

3
  Throughout the paper, I use the word householder to refer to the head of household and his or her spouse if any. I use the
term “free blacks” to refer to blacks who were free prior to 1865. I use year and place of birth to classify blacks as being born
into slavery or not. The assumptions behind this classification are defended in the data section that follows.
                                                                                                                                    3
       The paper's topic is related to at least four enormous literatures within economics and economic
history. As discussed above, the hypothesis being tested is whether or not large gaps in income and
human capital between two groups can be closed within two generations.               This hypothesis is an
implication from the literature on intergenerational transmission of income.


       This logic regarding high mobility or convergence between groups within two generations has not
been widely tested empirically, perhaps because there are not many longitudinal data sets that contain
detailed income data on more than two generations of family members.


       The current paper closely follows Margo [1990] in terms of the data used and the outcomes
considered. Margo uses Census data to examine black-white differences in literacy, school attendance,
years of schooling, occupation and wages and provides a detailed discussion of these Census variables.
Because I am only using the 1880 and 1920 Censuses, I can not look at years of schooling or wages.


       The literature on the 20th Century black-white gap (eg Smith and Welch [1979], Welch [1989] and
Margo[1990]) has found strong convergence of wages between the 1940s and 1970s, which is consistent
with my simple interpretation of parent-child income transmission coefficients.           The more recent
additions to this literature including Chandra [2001], Johnson and Neal [1996], and Heckman, Lyons and
Todd [2000] do not find a narrowing of the black-white wage gap during the 1980-1990 period.


       While this contrasts with my findings regarding nearly complete convergence within blacks during
1865-1920, it is certainly possible to reconcile the two results. It is likely that institutional or cultural
barriers between two groups of blacks were lower than barriers between blacks and whites. This fact
could explain the rapid intra-black convergence that I find and the slower black-white convergence that
others find. The persistence of black-white differences could be explained if a new set of discriminatory
institutions rose up after emancipation (as in Wright [1986]), and these institutions were not dismantled
until the 1960s and 1970s as argued by Donohue and Heckman [1991], Darity, Dietrich and Guilkey
[2001] and Almond, Chay and Greenstone [2001]. It is of course more difficult to understand why the
black-white convergence process would get under way and then stop.


       Margo [2001, 1995] and Wright [1986] show that controlling for occupation, black-white wage
gaps in the post-Bellum South were small. This suggests the importance of understanding the degree to




                                                                                                           4
which freed slaves and their descendants sorted into lower paying occupations (relative to free blacks and
their descendants or relative to whites) which is one of the questions I examine.4


        Atack [1994] concludes that freed slaves in the South experienced at least a 34 percent gain in
income from emancipation, if one considers the value of increased leisure time.                         This is Atack's
compilation of estimates provided by Ransom and Sutch [1977] and Fogel and Engerman [1974]. If this
estimate is correct, then such a large jump in income would mechanically imply some convergence in
income levels between slaves and free blacks as a result of emancipation. I address the period after
emancipation and ask whether such convergence continued.


        Fogel and Engerman [1974] show that many slaves were skilled craftsmen with high levels of
human capital. It is likely that such human capital owned by freed slaves benefited themselves and their
descendants and would have facilitated convergence in socioeconomic status between descendants of
slaves and descendants of free blacks.5


        Does my claim of within black convergence, based on Census data, agree with the experience of
intellectuals who lived during the late nineteenth and early twentieth century?                    This is not an easy
question to answer since most writers of the day focussed on black-white differences or absolute measures
of black poverty and lack of education, without regard to differences in ancestry. W.E.B. DuBois [1899]
made a detailed study of black families in Philadelphia and in his text he makes several references to the
idea that opportunities for jobs and education were similar for northern black families and recently arrived
black emigrants from the South.


        However, DuBois is very clear in his belief that slavery had a deleterious effect on the stability of
the black family, introducing what he called tendencies towards loose cohabitation, marriage at too young
an age, and family dissolution. My evidence is consistent with DuBois' claim in that I do find a large
effect of slavery on the probability that a child lives in a female headed household. And the size of this
effect only declines moderately from 1880 to 1920.


        The writings of Booker T. Washington indicate a strong willingness to learn to read on the part of
freed slaves and their children. This supports the claim that the descendants of freedmen had the potential

4
  The existing work on post-Civil War wages and income is far more detailed and comprehensive than what I can provide using
Census data. My interest is really in following families over time using the crude outcome measures in the Census.
5
  I am heavily indebted to the work of Fogel and Engerman [1976] and Atack [1994] who provide a wealth of detail on the
occupations, living conditions, human capital, and geographic location of slaves and free blacks.
                                                                                                                          5
to converge towards the literacy and schooling levels of descendants of free blacks. At the same time,
Washington's personal childhood stories indicate that his freed family's extreme poverty was an enormous
obstacle to his learning to read and his ability to attend the Hampton Normal and Agricultural Institute in
Virginia. Overall, the primary source material written by black intellectuals and by ordinary black
citizens during the post-Bellum period expresses hope that freed slaves could improve their economic
situation, but also acknowledges large obstacles along the way.


         The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section II outlines the empirical approach and
three separate estimators of the differences in outcomes between former slaves and their progeny and free
blacks and their progeny. Section III discusses the data and how I classify people as being born slaves
versus born free and Section IV presents the empirical results. Section V explains the merged sample of
families in both the 1880 and 1920 Censuses and presents results for this sample. Section VI concludes.


II. Empirical Approach
         All of the estimates of the difference in outcomes between former slaves and free blacks (and their
children and grandchildren) are presented either as a difference in means or as a coefficient from an
ordinary least squares regression. In the simplest analysis, one could estimate the difference in outcomes
between former slaves and free blacks (and their progeny) as the raw difference between the two groups,
without controlling for a given family’s current location. For example, I estimate the difference in
literacy between the groups as β1 in the following regression:


(1) literacy = α + β1*former slave + γX.


     Here X is a vector of controls including a dummy for male, the number of children in the household,
and birth year dummies.           When I measure the effect of slavery on the first generation born after
emancipation, the right hand side variable of interest becomes whether or not a person’s mother was born
into slavery. And for the second generation after emancipation, the dummy is for whether or not the
person’s mother’s mother (maternal grandmother) was born a slave.6


     In this simple analysis, β1 is obviously picking up more than just the negative impacts of slavery
itself. Most former slaves and their families continued to live in the South and hence were affected by
schooling conditions, labor market conditions and social interactions that were different than those

6
  Most of the dependent variables are binary and I report coefficients from linear probability models. The marginal effects
from probits are not reported here, but are extremely similar.
                                                                                                                              6
experienced by blacks outside the South.7               For this reason I also attempt to identify the effect of former
slavery status on own and children’s outcomes by using families that move—both families of former
slaves that move out of the South and families of free blacks that move into the South. I do this in two
ways: First, I run equation (1) for the subsample of people currently outside (inside) the South. Second, I
run equation (1) for the whole sample and include region dummies.


         For the purposes of this paper, my dummy for South is actually a dummy for former slave state
and hence includes Missouri as well as Delaware, West Virginia, Virginia, Maryland, North Carolina,
South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, Mississippi, Tennessee, Kentucky, Louisiana, Arkansas, and
Texas.8 I am not attempting to use any distinctions between the Old and New South or border versus non-
border states or Confederate versus not for identification.


         The above approach estimates the effect of slavery as the difference in outcomes between black
families that move out of the South and black families that were already outside of the South. This
estimate assumes that families that leave the South are similar to families that do not move. If the
families that move have unobservably higher SES or human capital (as argued by Margo [1986 and
1990]), then my estimate will understate the effects of slavery and will implicitly overstate the speed of
convergence.9


         My third estimator of the difference in outcomes for former slaves (and their families) and free
blacks (and their families) uses outcomes for whites to estimate the effects of being born in the South
separately from the effects of slavery. For the first generation following emancipation, I run the following
regression for black and white families:


(2) literacy = α + β0*black + β2*mother born in slave state+ β1*black and mother born in slave state +
      dummies for current region + γX.


      I then interpret β1 as the effect on child’s literacy from having a mother born into slavery. β1 is the
interaction effect of being black and having a mother born in the South, over and above the main effects
of being black, having a mother born in the South, and current region. The principal objection to this

7
  Margo [1986, 1990] and Donohue, Heckman, and Todd [1995] are among the many papers document the poor state of black
public schools during this time period.
8
  West Virginia was not a separate state until 1863, but I list it here for clarity as to which geographic areas I am labeling slave
states.
9
  Clearly families that move are different than ones that stay and so I offer the various estimates of the effect of slavery not as
perfect estimates, but rather as the best estimates that I can devise.
                                                                                                                                    7
approach is that I attribute all of the interaction effects of being born black and in the South to slavery,
when in fact there is good reason to believe that post-slavery institutions in the South were also
differentially worse for blacks.


        After presenting the above results, I test whether or not intergenerational transmission of
socioeconomic status (SES) depends solely on parent's SES or also depends on grandparent's SES.


        To test this I run regressions of the following form10:


(3) son's income score = α + β5*father's income score + β6*grandfather's income score + dummies for
        current region + γX.


        I interpret the coefficient β6 as a measure of the degree to which grandparent's SES matters over and
above the transmission through parent's SES.                    This test must be taken with a pound of salt since
measurement error in income scores could yield a significant coefficient on grandfather's income score
even if the effect works strictly through father's income score. I also test whether the elasticity of
grandson’s SES with respect to grandfather’s SES simply the square of the father-son elasticity.




10
     The income score in equation (3) is described in the next section.
                                                                                                                 8
III. Data Description


          The data come from the 1880 and 1920 U.S. Censuses. (I have also run but in the interest of
space, do not report results from the 1870 and 1900 Censuses.) The first set of results use the 1 percent
IPUMS (Integrated Public Use Micro Samples) created by the Minnesota Population Center at the
University of Minnesota. These data sets provide basic demographic variables for a large number of
households and the individuals within those households.


          I also have some data items from a 100 percent sample of the 1880 Census. These data were
compiled by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (The Mormon Church) for genealogical
research. The Minnesota Population Center assisted the Mormon Church in cleaning and preparing the
data for a release on a set of 35 CDs. This project took 20 years and thousands of volunteers to complete.
The main disadvantage of the 100 percent sample is that the Mormons pulled a limited subset of variables
including names, places of birth, age, race, and occupation. I present results based on a 100 percent
sample of black families living in New England and in the New York City area, which consists of New
York City plus Westchester, Suffolk, and Nassau Counties.


          Table I contains descriptive statistics for both the 1880 and 1920 1 percent samples. The 1880
sample contains 12,342 black children and 55,570 white children. In the 1880 sample I drop children
who are older than 15 because they were born before the Civil War ended. I also drop children who are
younger than 7 because they have missing values for both the schooling measure and the literacy measure.
I drop any heads of household or their spouses who were born after 1865. (There were very few such
cases.)


          Within the 1880 sample, 97 percent of black children had a mother born in a slave state and 93
percent of black children live in a slave state now. On average, the black children come from a family of
four children and the white children come from a family of 3.7 children.


          Thirty-five percent of the black children and 88 percent of the white children are reported as being
literate. Census enumerators asked separately about ability to read and ability to write for each individual
in the household. The questions are only asked for persons age 10 or older. I coded the literacy variable
as a dummy variable which equals 1 if the person is able to read and write.




                                                                                                            9
           A separate census question asked whether or not each person was enrolled in school any time
during the previous year. I created an "in-school" dummy for all children who were aged 7-18. The
dummy equals 1 if the child was enrolled in school in the past year and 0 if the child was not enrolled.
Table I shows that 32 percent of black children and 73 percent of white children (ages 7-18) in the 1880
sample were reported as enrolled.


           One criticism of this variable is that it does not capture the number of days of schooling during the
year, but rather asks for any school attendance at all. To mitigate this problem, I also report one table of
results from the 1900 Census, because the 1900 Census collected the number of months that each child
was in school during the past year.


           The Censuses also asked for the occupation of each person in the household. This was written
down as a text field by the enumerator. Children who do not have an occupation are frequently listed as
being "At Home." I use the occupation variable in several ways. First IPUMS researchers have linked
each occupation to the median occupational income from the 1950 census.11 This number is reported as
annual median income by occupation in hundreds of 1950 dollars. Table I shows that the black male
heads of household in the 1880 sample have an occupational income score of 15.24 versus 19.88 for the
white male heads of household. These figures exclude men with occupations that have a score of 0 (for
example, "retired") and men with no occupation listed.


           The occupational score is obviously a highly imperfect measure of income. The biggest problem
is the fact that relative incomes among occupations undoubtedly shifted between 1880 and 1950, when
median incomes are calculated. Furthermore, it is likely that some 1880 occupations are misclassified
because the nature or name of the occupation changed greatly during 1880-1950. The one positive thing
to be said for occupation scores is that median incomes by occupation may be a less noisy measure of
permanent income than a single year of self reported income. Despite the limitations of the occupational
income score, papers such as Angrist [2001] and Darity, Dietrich, and Guilkey [2001] do use the measure
because it is available for long periods of time and is not subject to the same measurement error as self
reports of income.


           While the occupation score is probably a bad measure of actual income, it may be a reasonable
index of "socioeconomic status." Occupations that paid a lot in 1950 were probably also high paying,
high human capital, desirable jobs in 1880. Appendix Table III shows the 1880 occupations and income

11
     Details are available at www.ipums.org. The 1880 Census did not collect individual income.
                                                                                                             10
scores for blacks heads of household who were born free. These data are from the 100 percent sample of
black families in New England and the New York metropolitan area. Physicians have the highest score in
the table (at 80). Craftsmen have scores that range from 24-29 (not shown) and unskilled laborers have
income scores of 9.      One glaring problem is that preachers and clergy receive a relatively low
occupational income score of 24 despite the fact that these preachers were among the most educated and
influential members of the black community during the time period in question. Figures VIII and IX
show the full distribution of scores for male household heads by race in 1880 and 1920.


        In addition to using the occupational income score as the dependent variable, I also use reported
occupation to classify men as having manual or non-manual jobs. This classification has some intuitive
appeal and classification mistakes are less likely than with the occupational income score. However,
there is only a modest amount of variation in the manual job dummy. Table I shows that 84 percent of
white male heads of household were manual workers and the equivalent figure for blacks is 96 percent.


        Panel B of Table I gives the means for the 1920 sample. By 1920, 83 percent of the black children
are literate and 99 percent of white children are literate. Sixty-seven percent of black children are in
school versus 81 percent for whites. The average child age is much higher for the 1920 sample because I
include children in the household who are age 35 or younger. (In the 1880 sample, I excluded any child
born before 1865.) The occupational income scores for the male householders in 1920 are modestly
higher than in 1880, and the percent who are manual workers is modestly lower.


Classification of Slavery versus Non-Slavery Status for Blacks


        I classify blacks as being born into slavery if they are born in a slave state before 1865. While this
appears to be a bold assumption, it turns out to be a reasonable approximation to the truth. Fogel and
Engerman estimate that in 1860, 94 percent of blacks in the South were slaves. This approximation can
be confirmed by examining the 1860 Census IPUMS data by state, by race (not shown in the interest of
space). These counts include only the free population in a 1 percent sample and show only 2,485 free
blacks in the 16 slave states. In 1880, the 1 percent sample contains 51,618 blacks living in the former
slave states. Thus the ratio of free blacks in 1860 to total blacks in 1880 is roughly 248,500 / 5,161,800 or
4.8%.    Fogel and Engerman estimate that the slave population in 1860 was roughly 4 million, which
implies that the ratio of free blacks to total in the South in 1860 was roughly 5.8 percent.




                                                                                                           11
        In truth many of the 248,500 free blacks in the South in 1860 were born as slaves, but were
manumitted.12 So 94 percent is an underestimate of the percentage of Southern blacks who were born into
slavery. Olwell [1996] documents that many free blacks in the South purchased their own freedom using
extra income earned working on their "own time." We know from Phillips [1997] and Gould [1998] that
many of the free blacks in the South lived in Baltimore, New Orleans and Charleston and the other major
cities. I could further improve my approximation by dropping blacks in these cities.


        If free blacks in the South were primarily manumitted slaves, who were the free blacks in the
North? Work by McManus [1966], Hodges [1997], and other historians suggests that many of the blacks
in the ante-bellum North were the descendants of colonial era slaves. My examination of the 100 percent
sample of the 1880 Census is consistent with this claim. In Appendix Table II, I list the birthplace of the
mother of the female householder (ie the 1880 children's mother's mother) for free black households in
New York and New England. Fully 36 percent of the mothers in my sample had mothers born in New
York and 16 percent had mothers born in Connecticut. This does not demonstrate that free black families
have northern roots that extend back to the American Revolution, but it does show that the vast majority
are not recent migrants to the region. This fact is important for interpretation of my results, because in
essence I am comparing the descendants of slaves from one era to the descendants of slaves from a more
recent era.


        Appendix Table III gives a breakdown of the occupations held by male heads of household among
free black families in New England and the New York metro area in 1880. These are from the 100
percent sample. Not surprisingly, the most common occupations include laborers, farm laborers, and
farmers. "Waiter" is the third most common occupation, but this is only because a large part the sample is
from New York City.


        Figures I through V present mean outcomes by race, place of birth, and by birth cohort. Figure I
shows average literacy rates by 10 year birth cohort for slaves and their descendants and for free blacks
and their descendants.


        Unsurprisingly, there is a huge literacy gap between blacks born as slaves and blacks born free.
Free blacks born in 1850-1860 have about a 65 percent literacy rate as measured in the 1880 Census.
Blacks born into slavery during 1850-1860 have about a 22 percent literacy rate. Several economic


12
  Fogel and Engerman use census data to estimate numbers of manumissions. Olwell [1996] contains a wealth of detail
regarding the circumstances surrounding individual manumissions.
                                                                                                                      12
historians have represented to me that the 22 percent literacy rate for former slaves appears to be vastly
overstated given that slaves had very limited opportunities for education under the plantation system. It is
certainly conceivable that some former slaves learned to read as adults after emancipation. Indeed, the
literacy rate among the 1850-1860 birth cohort of former slaves as measured in the 1870 Census is a
modestly lower 17 percent. This is consistent with the idea of blacks learning to read after Emancipation.
But another likely explanation is that respondents to the 1880 Census had some tendency to overstate
their own degree of literacy.


         Looking at the first generation born after slavery, children of former slaves and children of free
blacks born pre-1865, both have a huge gain in literacy. There is a fair amount of upward convergence in
which the children of slaves begin to achieve literacy rates closer to rates for children of free blacks. By
the third generation, the grandchildren of free blacks have literacy rates approaching 100 percent and the
grandchildren of free blacks have further narrowed the gap.


         Figure II shows literacy rates by birth cohort, race, and place of birth (South versus non-South.)
There is a negative effect on literacy from being black, and a negative effect from being born in the South.
But the interaction effect of being black and in the South is much bigger than the black or South effects
alone. By the 1895 birth cohort (1890-1900), all whites and blacks born outside the South have literacy
rates approaching 100 percent. Blacks born in the South during 1890-1900 have about an 82 percent
literacy rate.


         Figure III shows the percent of children who are living in a female headed household, by race,
birth cohort, and slave state parentage. I define a female headed household as one in which a woman is
the head of household as listed by the Census enumerator. Invariably, such households do not contain a
person listed as that woman's spouse.13 The first group of data points are for children born during 1870-
1880 in the 1880 Census and the data are stratified by race and mother's birth in a slave state. The other
two cohorts are the 0-10 year old children in the 1900 and 1920 Censuses. Here I stratify by race and
maternal grandmother's birth in a slave state. I limit these households to ones with the mother born
between 1865 and 1885 which implies that the mother's mother was likely born before 1865.


         Black children are uniformly more likely to live in a female headed household than white children.
In 1880, black children of free mothers are about 5 percent less likely to live in a female headed

13
  There remains the possibility that the spouse was living in a nearby dwelling or had left to seek work to support the family.
Female headed households in 1880 may be very different than female headed households in 1980 and I discuss this in the
results section.
                                                                                                                               13
household than children of slaves. This effect does not diminish with the data from 1900 and 1920
Censuses.      Grandchildren of slaves are more likely to live in a female headed household than
grandchildren of free blacks.


        Figure IV shows occupational income scores for free blacks and their progeny and former slaves
and their progeny. There appears to be roughly a 3-5 point gap between the two groups that does not
close over time. However, once I control for current region (as in the next section) this gap is not
statistically significant, even for the first generation.14


        Figure V shows occupational income scores by birth cohort, race, and born in South (0-1). The
rank ordering from highest to lowest is non-Southern born whites, Southern born whites, non-Southern
blacks, and Southern blacks. This pattern appears to persist across the sample period and does not show
much convergence or divergence. (Recall that the income score does not allow incomes to vary within an
occupation over time.)


        Figures VI and VII look at coefficients of transmission of literacy and occupational income score.
Figure VI shows the OLS coefficient of child literacy on mother's literacy by birth cohort.                              This
coefficient falls steadily over birth cohorts. This happens during a period of greatly increasing literacy.
However, falling transmission coefficients are not automatically (algebraically) implied by increasing
literacy rates or rates that asymptote to 100 percent. Interestingly, the rate of transmission of literacy is
higher for blacks than whites for every single birth cohort.


        Figure VII calculates transmission coefficients for occupational income score by birth cohort. The
transmission coefficients in Figure V appear to be much noisier than those for literacy and no obvious
time trend is apparent.


IV. Results

        Results are presented in Tables II through XIV. Tables II through V estimate the effects of slavery
on outcomes by comparing free blacks and their descendants to former slaves and their descendants.
Tables VI through X use data on blacks and whites and estimate the effect of slavery as the interaction
between being black and being born in a slave state. Tables XI through XIV estimate transmission
coefficients of literacy and occupational income score using data on grandparents, parents, and children.

14
 Controlling for current region, there is never a gap between free blacks and slaves in terms of occupational income score.
Hence it doesn’t make much sense to think about convergence along this measure.
                                                                                                                              14
Effects on Literacy
         Table II examines the difference in literacy rates between former slaves and free blacks and the
descendants of each group. The table is organized as follows: Column (1) describes the sample (e.g. men
versus women).        Column (2) states which controls are in the regression. Columns (3)-(5) are the OLS
coefficient on the slave status dummy and the means, standard deviations, and sample sizes for the
dependent variable categorized by former slave or free.                        Column (6) provides a comparison by
estimating the analogous OLS coefficient (on birth in a slave state) for whites.


         The first panel is for householders in the 1880 1% sample.15                           The sample is limited to
householders born before 1865. Rows (1) and (2) show the raw (uncontrolled) effect of slavery status on
literacy for men and women. Slave status is associated with roughly a 47 percent decrease in the
probability of being literate for both men and women. For women (men) this effect drops to -26 percent
(-21 percent) when I include dummies for current region and birth year [results shown in rows (3) and (4)
]. Almost all of this decrease in the coefficient is attributable to the inclusion of the region dummies. By
including current region dummies, the coefficient on slave status is identified from blacks that move
(either into the South or out of the South) between birth and 1880.16


         The whole sample in the first panel of Table II only contains 542 free blacks. This is basically an
issue of precision of the estimates and the standard errors in the tables reflect this small sample.


         The next panel of Table II shows analogous regressions for the children of these same
householders in 1880. The children here are ages 10-15 ; I limit the sample to children born post-1865
and literacy is only measured for persons 10 or older. Without controls, the free vs. former slave literacy
gap is even larger for the children in 1880 than for the householders. For the children, the uncontrolled
effect on the slavery status dummy is 55 percent and the effect controlling for current region is 10 percent.
Rows (3) and (4) show results when the sample is limited to households currently outside or inside the
South.


         The third panel of Table II takes another look at literacy in the first generation after slavery, but
this time using the 1920 IPUMS sample. The sample consists of black householders ages 35-55. These
adults are too young to have been born into slavery, but old enough that their parents most likely were

15
  I use the term "householder" to refer to the head of household and his or her spouse if any.
16
  Unsurprisingly the effect of birth in a slave state for whites is much smaller. The raw effect is only 16 percent and the effect
falls to 8 percent when I include regional dummies.
                                                                                                                                15
born before 1865.17 In this sample, the effect of mother's former slavery status on literacy is much
smaller than for the children in the 1880 sample. The uncontrolled effect of mother's slavery status on
own literacy is -28 percent. When I add dummies for current region, the effect falls to -10 percent, and
when I limit the sample to blacks currently outside the South, the effect falls to -6 percent.


        Given the figures in Table II, one could make the case that much of the effect of slavery status on
literacy disappears after one generation, if we control for current region. The importance of the current
region dummies could imply that families that move are inherently different from families that stay in the
South. Or it may imply that the families that move benefit from the different labor market and schooling
conditions outside the South. This second interpretation is needed to make the case that controlling for
region yields the best estimates of the effect of slavery status.


        The final panel of Table II examines literacy for the second generation after slavery, using the
children of the 1920 householders.          The sample is constructed such that these are children with a mother
is age 35-55, and I assume (as above) that the mother's mother was born prior to 1865. I examine the
effect of grandmother's slave status on grandchild's literacy. The raw effect of grandmother's slavery
status on the probability of being literate is -16 percent. When I control for current region, or look only at
children outside the South, the effect falls to -3 percent and 0 percent. Therefore, controlling for current
region, the effect of slavery status on literacy disappears completely by the second generation after
emancipation. One of the disadvantages of the literacy measure is that literacy rates are fast approaching
100 percent, which is why I consider additional outcomes.


Effects on Schooling


        In addition to effects of slavery status on literacy, I am also interested in examining effects on
schooling. Unfortunately during this time period the Census did not collect years of schooling. But we
can examine whether or not children in the household were enrolled in school during the past year. As
mentioned above, I create a binary variable for enrollment and measure this for all children aged 7-18.
Table III examines the effect of mother's slave status on child's school enrollment. The sample in the first
panel consists of black children ages 7-15 in 1880 households, where the upper age limit of 15 is to limit
the sample to children born after the Civil War.


17
  This is a big assumption, but probably an accurate one for the majority of householders. The youngest householders in the
sample were born in 1885, and some of them might have been born to parents who were born after 1865, but this would be a
small fraction of my total sample.
                                                                                                                              16
           Without controls (ie the difference in means), children of former slaves are 36 percent less likely
to be enrolled in school. Controlling for current region, children of former slaves are 8 percent less likely
to be enrolled in school.


           The second panel uses the 1920 data to look at the effect of grandmother's (mother's mother's)
slavery status on grandchild's probability of being enrolled. Grandchildren of slaves are 9 percent less
likely to be enrolled than grandchildren of free blacks. But, controlling for current region, this effect is
not significantly different from zero.


           Table IIIa uses data from the 1900 Census to examine the effect of grandmother's slavery status on
the child's number of months spent in school. On average, grandchildren of slaves spent 4 months in
school, versus 7 months for the grandchildren of free blacks. However, controlling for current region
reduces this gap to a statistically insignificant .3 months.


Effects on Female Headed Household Status


           Many social scientists (including Frederic Bancroft and W.E.B.DuBois) have argued that slavery
caused a breakdown of the traditional family structure among blacks and that this problem persisted long
after emancipation. I investigate this hypothesis in Table IV by comparing the prevalence of female
headed households for children of free blacks and children of slaves. The first panel of Table IV is for the
children ages 0-15 in the 1880 1 percent sample.18 My dependent variable is a dummy for whether or not
the child was living in a female headed household at the time of the Census. The raw (uncontrolled)
difference in the female headed household rate between the children of slaves and children of free blacks
is 4.1 percent and is statistically significant. The means are 13.5 percent for the children of slaves and 9.4
percent for the children of free blacks. The effect of mother's slave status is quite large relative to the
mean female headed household rate.


           Controlling for region (the second row) actually increases the coefficient on the dummy for
"mother born slave" to 8.9 percent. We can see from the final two rows in the panel that this large effect
is from those few free black families that move back to the South; such families are very unlikely to be
female headed households. Given how rare such movers are, I am inclined to use either the raw
difference of 4.1 percent (the first row) or the difference among families outside the South of 6.8 percent
as the best point estimate of the effect of mother's slavery on female headed household status.

18
     Figure III shows data for children 0-10 because the figure is for 10 year birth cohorts.
                                                                                                           17
           Additional estimates are shown in panel 2 of Table IV. I am able to look at female headed
household status for children within the 100 percent sample of the 1880 Census. Here I show estimates
for all black children in New England and all black children in New York City. Within New England
there is no difference in female headed household status between children of free blacks and children of
slaves. Within New York City there is a very large effect from mother's slave status.


           The third panel of Table IV is for the children in the 1920 1 percent sample. These children are
the grandchildren of former slaves and free blacks. This panel also shows large point estimates for the
effect of grandmother's slavery status on the probability of a child's living in a female headed household.
Grandchildren of slaves are 6.5 percent more likely to live in a female headed household than
grandchildren of free blacks, though this difference is not statistically significant at conventional levels.


           Unlike the results for literacy and school attendance, the effects of slavery on family structure
appear to have persisted well into the twentieth century. This provides one possible channel through
which slavery could have long lasting effects on successive generations of black Americans. Two caveats
are worth mentioning. First, we know that in more modern data, female headed households are strongly
associated with poverty, criminal victimization, low employment, and lower educational attainment.
However, the female headed households of 1920 may have been less damaging, and the reason for the
father's absence may have been very different then versus now. For example, the fathers may have been
living elsewhere in order to secure work and income for the family.


           Second, the prevalence of black female headed households in 1880 was much less than in 2000.
While 13 percent of black children in 1880 were in female headed households, 42 percent of black
children in 2000 lived in female headed households19. Thus the effects of slavery would have to be both
severe and increasing over 150 years in order to explain a substantial fraction of the present day
prevalence of black female headed households.


Effects on Occupation
           Now I turn to the effect of slavery status on male household head's occupation, as measured by the
occupational income score and a dummy for manual occupation. The first panel in Table V uses the 1880
1 percent sample and compares black heads of household born into slavery to those born free. Controlling



19
     Calculated from the 2000 Census STF2 using American FactFinder on www.census.gov.
                                                                                                                18
for current region, being born a slave lowers the occupational income score by only .13 , though it makes
heads 3 percent more likely to be manual workers. (The mean of "manual" for free blacks is 82 percent.)


          The second panel of Table V computes the same coefficients, but for a portion of the 100 percent
of the 1880 Census. Within both New England and New York, former slavery status is not associated
with statistically different occupational income scores. Furthermore, there is no effect on manual worker
status.


          The third panel looks at the analogous effects for male heads of household in the 1920 sample.
These are the children of former slaves and free (pre-1865) blacks. Controlling for region, the effect of
father's mother's slave status on the occupational income score is a small and statistically insignificant-
.77. The effect of mother's slave status on likelihood of being a manual worker is 6 percent and is
statistically significant at the 10 percent level.


          Thus the estimated effect of slavery status on manual worker status is somewhat larger for the
children of slaves (panel 3) than for the former slaves themselves. This is plausible and consistent with
Margo's [1990] discussion of the transition of labor from the farm to the nonfarm sector. In 1880, nearly
everyone was a manual worker, and slavery status had little effect on manual status. During the next 40
years, those workers with high levels of human capital were the most likely to exit the farm sector. If
children of slaves received less education than children of free blacks (as shown in Tables II and III), then
children of free blacks were differentially more likely to exit the agricultural sector.


Effects on Home Ownership
          Ideally one would also look at wealth differences between the descendants of slaves and
descendants of free blacks. The Census data do contain an indicator variable for homeownership. In
1920, 34 percent of the householders who are children of slaves own their own home. The comparable
number for householders descended from free blacks is 32 percent. If we thought that home ownership
was a measure of wealth, we might conclude (almost surely incorrectly) that slavery increased family
wealth. However, we have no measure of the quality or value of the home and we do know that home
ownership in 1920 is highly correlated with work in agriculture. Many of the black homeowners may be
sharecroppers and might own as little as a shack, so the homeownership measure is not particularly
informative about wealth.




                                                                                                          19
Using Data on Whites To Control For the Effect of Being Born in the South


         The above results use data on movers to separate the effects of slavery from the effects of growing
up or living in the South. An alternative method for separating these two effects is to use whites to
estimate the baseline effect from being born in the South (but not being born a slave).                        I estimate the
baseline of effects of "born South" and black and the interaction effect of being both black and born in the
South. I label this interaction effect the effect of slavery20


         This analysis obviously relies on the assumption that the level effect of "born South" is identical
for blacks and whites, and that one can attribute remaining differences in outcomes between blacks and
whites to slavery. This is clearly an aggressive assumption.                 It is less clear whether this assumption is
better or worse than the previous analyses which assumed that black movers and stayers in the non-South
were similar except for slavery status.


         Table VI presents mean outcomes for blacks and whites segmented by race and by birth in a
former slave state. In Panel A, I show mean literacy by race and born in a slave state for female
householders in 1880. All are born pre-1865. The slave state - free state difference in literacy rates for
blacks is -46.3 percent while the same difference for whites is -15.7. Therefore the "effect" of own
slavery status on literacy is -30.6 percent.


         Panel B measures this difference in difference for children in the 1880 Census. The table shows
literacy rates by black versus white and mother born inside or outside of a slave state. The slavery effect
is 30.0 percent, which is the same as the effect for the mother's in Panel A. This is consistent with the
earlier comparisons which showed no decrease in the slavery effect on literacy for the 10-15 year olds in
1880, i.e. one generation after slavery.


         Panels C and D also look at literacy one generation after slavery, but this time using householders
in 1920. By this time, the effect of mother's slavery has dropped to -24.6 percent for women and -12.7
percent for men. Panel E calculates the effect of grandmother's slavery status for children in the 1920
Census. Two generations after emancipation, the effect of grandmother's slavery status on the probability
of being literate is -13.1 percent. Therefore, using the difference in difference estimator, the effect of
slavery does not disappear within two generations, but the effect does greatly diminish in two generations.


20
 Before adding controls, I am just taking the black-white difference for people born in the South and subtracting off the black-
white difference for people born outside of the South.
                                                                                                                              20
       Panels F and G use the in-school dummy as the dependent variable. In 1880, children of slaves
are 12.5 percent less likely to be enrolled in school than children of free blacks, again differencing out the
whites as a control. In 1920, grandchildren of slaves are 7.2 percent less likely to be enrolled in school
than grandchildren of free blacks.


       These difference in difference estimates show substantial convergence between the descendants of
free blacks and slaves over two generations, at least for literacy and schooling status. Unlike the earlier
movers versus stayers analysis, the estimates do not show complete convergence.


       Tables VII through X perform the same analysis using OLS and add dummies for current region.
In all columns, the outcome of interest is regressed on a dummy for born in a former slave state, a dummy
for black, and the interaction of the two; the interaction is the coefficient of immediate interest.


       Columns (1)-(4) in Table VII examine literacy for male and female householders in 1880. All of
the people in the sample were born prior to emancipation. The interaction of being black and being born
in slave state depresses the probability of being literate by roughly 30-33 percent. Interestingly, the
coefficients change little when I control for current region.


       Table VIII examines the effect of mother's slave status for children in the 1880 Census.
Controlling for current region, having a mother who was born a slave decreases the probability of literacy
by 29 percent and the probability of being enrolled in school by 12 percent. Table IX runs the literacy
regression for male and female householders in the 1920 Census. Controlling for current region, the
effect of mother's slave status is -.25 for the women and -.16 for the men.


       Table X calculates the effects of grandmother's slavery status on literacy and in-school status for
children in households in the 1920 Census. Controlling for current region (and using whites to control for
the effect of being born inside the South), the effect of having a grandmother born into slavery reduces the
probability of being literate by 13 percent and the probability of being in school by 9 percent.


       Overall, the effects of slave status on literacy and schooling are somewhat different when I use
whites as a control than when I simply compare blacks inside and outside the South. When I use whites
as a control, I still find substantial upward convergence between the grandchildren of slaves and the


                                                                                                           21
grandchildren of free blacks, but not complete convergence. Which estimate to believe, if any, is open to
debate. But however I calculate these estimates, I find substantial convergence within two generations.


Transmission Coefficients
       The convergence observed in the previous section implies that within family transmission rates of
literacy and schooling are substantially less than one and that considerable regression to the mean occurs
within two generations. I turn now to measuring these transmission rates and asking whether an AR1
transmission process fits the data. Tables XI and XII calculate various transmission rates (of literacy and
occupational income score) from parents and grandparents to children. In all cases I am simply regressing
child’s outcome (literacy or occupational income score) on parent’s outcome and in some cases on
grandparent’s outcome.


       An important caveat to this set of results is that I can only calculate the transmission rates from
parents or grandparents when the children still live in the same household as the parents or grandparents.
This is not necessarily a problem for estimating the transmission of literacy from parents to children,
given that many children learn to read before leaving their parents' home. This caveat is more of a
problem for transmission of occupational income score since occupations and hence occupational scores
continue to change after children leave their parents' household.


       Table XI shows the coefficients of transmission for literacy and occupational income score for the
1880 households.     The coefficient of transmission for literacy from mothers to children is .32 for the
white children and .45 for the black children. When I limit the sample to households where the mother's
mother is present, the coefficient on mother's literacy is .29 and the coefficient on grandmother's literacy
is .17. While this result implies that grandmother's outcome is extremely important in determining the
child's outcome, it is possible that the impact of grandmother's literacy is particularly high in this selected
sample of households where the grandmother is actually present.


       The results for transmission of occupational income score are shown in columns (5)-(8). Since I
examine only children born after 1865, most of the children in the sample are too young to have an
occupation listed. In this sample, the coefficient of transmission for income score is .38 for the white
households and .45 for the black households. These magnitudes are consistent with the existing literature
on transmission of income from father's to sons. My transmission rates are on the higher end of existing
estimates. This seems plausible given that my income score is constant within occupation. Income itself


                                                                                                            22
includes both individual income shocks within occupation and occupation level shocks over time and I am
forced to exclude both sources of variation.


       Column (8) of Table XI regresses the child’s income score on father’s income score and
grandfather’s income score. Within this small subset of households, the effect of the grandfather’s
income score is small (at .07) and insignificant. This provides some weak evidence in favor of the
hypothesis that transmission of income or socioeconomic status can be modeled as an AR1 process.


       Table XII examines transmission of literacy and income scores within the 1920 households.
Columns (1) –(4) shows that the literacy coefficient of transmission from mothers to children is
dramatically lower in the 1920 households than in the 1880 households. Figure V shows transmission
rates of literacy by birth cohort of the child. The transmission rate falls dramatically with each cohort
both for black and for white households. This drop in the transmission rate is almost surely related to the
fact that literacy rates are approaching 100 percent for all whites and for non-Southern blacks. However,
the drop in the transmission rate need not be an algebraic consequence of the rise in literacy. With each
successive cohort the children who are not literate look more and more like a random sample of the
population rather than simply the set of children with illiterate parents.


       The transmission coefficients for income score in columns (5)-(8) echo the results from the 1880
data. Transmission coefficients are higher for blacks than whites and grandfather’s income score does not
matter controlling for father’s income score.


V. Results for the Merged Sample of 1880 and 1920 Households

       One of the obstacles to studying transmission of income or SES over multiple generations is that it
is unusual to have data for three (or more) generations of adults in the same data set. To attempt to
mitigate this problem I have merged some of the data for the 1920 IPUMs households back into the 1880
Census.


       I merge the data sets by taking male heads of household (fathers) in the 1920 1 percent sample and
locating them in the 1880 100 percent sample. I did not attempt to trace any of the women in the 1920
sample due to the high likelihood of name changes at time of marriage. I merge the data for the fathers
based on first name, last name, year of birth, place of birth, mother’s place of birth and father’s place of
birth. This is a surprisingly unique combination of variables; it is rare for any two individuals to have

                                                                                                         23
exactly the same data for all six fields above. This happens in at most 1 percent of cases in the 1920 data
and when it does occur I drop the data point.


         The objective is to take men who are heads of household in 1920 and locate them in their 1880
household record, when most of them were children. I limit the potential sample for the merge to fathers
who have a reported occupation, are U.S. born, are ages 40-60 in 1920 (0-20 in 1880) and have at least
once male son 18 or older in their 1920 household. This last limitation is so that I can obtain some
measure of the income score for the children in the 1920 households (the grandchildren of the 1880
householders).


         The 1880 100 percent sample includes a National Index which allows me to search for the fathers
not just in their 1920 state, but in all US states. The search software on the CDs also allows me to check
for various possible spellings of the first names, e.g. Charlie and Charles. Permitting the first names to
vary in this way did help create additional matches and did not often create multiple 1880 matches for the
same 1920 observation.


         There were 16,238 fathers (black and white) in the 1920 data for the potential match. As shown in
Table XIII, I successfully matched 1,854 of these fathers for an 11 percent success rate.21 While this
match rate is low, Table XIII shows that the matched and unmatched observations have similar levels of
literacy and occupational income scores.


         The key piece of data that I pull from the 1880 household is the head’s occupation. This is the
occupation of the grandfather of the children in the 1920 households. The occupation is a text field in the
1880 data, but I coded it to match the occupation codes created in the IPUMs data. I then merged in
occupational income scores and my 0-1 variable for manual occupation.


         In Table XIV I examine transmission of SES from grandparents to grandchildren holding father’s
SES constant.22 The first three columns are for black families. In column (1), I regress child’s income
score on father’s and grandfather's income scores. The coefficient on father's score is .55 with a t-statistic
of 4.3, while the coefficient on the grandfather's score is .06 and is not statistically significant. In the
absence of measurement error, and under the null of the AR1 model of SES transmission, we would

21
   An additional 3 percent of the fathers were matched, but were not living with their parents in 1880. Most of these had either
formed their own households already or were working as laborers while living with a different family.
22
   Unfortunately the sample is to small to allow me to compare grandchildren of slaves to grandchildren of free blacks within
the merged sample.
                                                                                                                              24
expect the coefficient on grandfather’s SES to be 0.        Column (4) for the whites yields very similar
coefficients. I interpret the regressions as evidence that the AR1 model of SES transmission is roughly
correct.


       Columns (2) and (5) include only the grandfather's score. Here I wish to test whether the
coefficient on the grandfather's score is equal to the square of the coefficient on the father's score. For
black children, the coefficient on grandfather's score is negative and insignificant and for the white
children the coefficient is .13. In both cases, the coefficient on grandfather's score is actually smaller than
the square of the coefficient on the father's income score. Taken at face value, these estimates would
suggest that transmission of SES over two generations actually degrades even faster than a simple AR1
process. However, given the large standard errors and the measurement error inherent in the occupational
income score this finding is at most suggestive.


       In columns (3) and (6) I drop all observations for which the 1920 head of household is working as
a farmer or farm laborer. Given that a large fraction of people work in agriculture, some of whom pass on
the "family farm" to their children, it may be important to consider transmission outside of the farm
sector. Predictably, transmission coefficients are much lower among the non-farmers. The transmission
coefficient is .20 for blacks and .23 for whites.


Conclusion

       This paper has demonstrated that on certain basic outcome measures, namely literacy, schooling,
and occupation, the descendants of slaves "caught-up" to the descendants of free blacks within two
generations. This statement is particularly true when we identify the effects of slave status by comparing
descendants of free blacks and slaves who reside outside of the South. If we instead measure the progress
of free blacks and slaves (and their descendants) relative to whites born in the same regions, then we find
partial but not complete convergence.

       This convergence is consistent with the high degree of social mobility implied by modern
estimates of parent-child income and education correlations. When I regress son's SES on father's and
grandfather's SES, I find that father's SES has a coefficient of .20 to .55 but grandfather’s SES only
matters a small amount controlling for the father's outcome. This is evidence of strong father-son
correlations which decay rapidly with each successive generation.



                                                                                                            25
       The one outcome that shows only modest intra-black convergence is female headed household
status for children. The large 1880 gap in female headed household rates between free black families and
former slave families supports the hypothesis that the plantation system hurt the stability of black
families.     The persistence (into 1920) of the slavery effect on female headed households is more
surprising.


       If there is convergence, what is the cause? For literacy, one natural explanation would be the rise
of public schools and the passage of mandatory schooling laws. Today's high mobility of income and
wealth may also be driven in part by public schools and the availability of high quality public universities,
and in part by other "great equalizers" like cable television or the internet. High social mobility in post-
Bellum America or in the modern OECD need not be an inevitable outcome that is independent of
government institutions. Social activism could be just as important or more important than other market
forces in creating convergence.


       A major topic for future research is whether or not convergence within two generations is a
common phenomenon observed after social barriers between groups are removed. This has particular
relevance for the U.S. given the 20th Century's dismantling of racial barriers in access to schooling and
jobs. A natural extension of this paper would be to attempt to tie these results to the modern literature on
black-white wage and education differentials. If political changes in the 1960s and 1970s freed black
workers from institutionalized discrimination, then perhaps black-white convergence might occur within
one or two generations from today.




                                                                                                          26
References


Almond, Douglas V., Kenneth Y. Chay, and Michael Greenstone, "Civil Rights, the War on Poverty, and
Black-White Convergence in Mississippi," mimeo, 2001.


Altonji, Joseph G. and Thomas A. Dunn, “Relationships Among the Family Incomes and Labor Market
Outcomes of Relatives,” Research in Labor Economics, 12 (1991), 269-310.


Angrist, Joshua D., "How Do Sex Ratios Affect Marriage and Labor Markets? Evidence from America's
Second Generation," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117 (August 2002), 997 - 1038.


Atack, Jeremy and Peter Passell, A New Economic View of American History 2nd Edition, New York:
W.W. Norton and Company, 1994.


Bancroft, Frederic, Slave Trading in the Old South. Baltimore: J.H. Furst Company, 1931.


Bjorklund Anders and Markus Jantii, “Intergenerational Mobility in Sweden Compared to the United
States,” American Economic Review, 87 (1997), 377-386.


Brown, Charles C., 1984 “Black-White Earnings Ratios Since the Civil Rights Act of 1964: The
Importance of Labor Market Dropouts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 95(1), 31-44.


Chandra, Amitabh “Is Convergence in The Racial Wage Gap Illusory?,” mimeo, Dartmouth College,
2001.


Charles, Kerwin and Erik Hurst, “The Correlation of Wealth Across Generations,” 2001.


Darity, William, Dietrich J., and Guilkey D.K., "Persistent Advantage or Disadvantage?: Evidence in
Support of the Intergenerational Drag Hypothesis," American Journal of Economics and Sociology, 60
(April 2001).


Donohue, John J. and James J. Heckman, "Continuous versus Episodic Change: The Impact of
Affirmative Action and Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks," Journal of Economic
Literature, December 1991, 29 (4), pp. 1603-44.
                                                                                                 27
DuBois, W.E.B., The Philadelphia Negro: A Social Study, New York: Benjamin Blom, 1899.


DuBois, W.E.B., The Souls of Black Folk. 1903.


Fogel, Robert W. and Stanley L. Engerman, Time on the Cross: The Economics of American Negro
Slavery. Boston: Little, Brown, 1974.


Gould, Virginia Meacham, Chained to the Rock of Adversity: To Be Free, Black, and Female in the Old
South, Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1998.


Heckman, James J., Thomas Lyons and Petra Todd, “Understanding Black-White Wage Differentials
1960-90,” American Economic Review 90(2), 344-49.


Hodges, Graham Russell, Slavery and Freedom in the Rural North. Madison: Madison House Publishers,
1997.


Margo, Robert A., “Educational Achievement in Segregated School Systems: The Effect of Separate But
Equal,” American Economic Review, 76 (September 1986), 794-801.


Margo, Robert A., Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An Economic History. Chicago:
University of Chicago Press, 1990.


Margo, Robert A., “The South as an Economic Problem: Fact or Fiction?,” in L. Griffin and D. Doyle,
eds, The South as an American Problem. Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1995.


Margo, Robert A., “The North-South Wage Gap, Before and After the Civil War,” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper Series, Number 8778, 2002.


McManus, Edgar J., A History of Negro Slavery in New York. Syracuse: Syracuse University Press,
1966.


Mulligan, Casey B., Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
1997.
                                                                                                   28
Neal, Derek and William Johnson, “The Role of Premarket Factors in Black-White Wage Differences,”
Journal of Political Economy, 104(5), 869-95.


Olwell, Robert, Becoming Free: Manumission and the Genesis of a Free Black Community in South
Carolina, 1740-90 in Jane G. Landers ed., Against the Odds: Free Blacks in the Slave Societies of the
Americas. London: Frank Cass, 1996.


Phillips, Christopher, Freedom's Port: The African American Community of Baltimore 1790-1860.
Chicago: University of Illinois Press, 1997.


Ransom, Roger and Richard Sutch, One Kind of Freedom: The Economics of Emancipation. New York:
Cambridge University Press, 1977.


Smith, James P. "Race and Human Capital," American Economic Review, 74 (September 1984), 685-98.


Smith, James P. and Finis R. Welch, “Black Economic Progress After Myrdal,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 27(2) (June, 1989), 519-564.


Solon, Gary, “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States,” American Economic Review, 82
(1992), 393-408.


Solon, Gary, “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David Card eds.,
Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol 3. Elsevier Science B.V., 1999.


Washinton, Booker T., Up From Slavery. New York: Doubleday, 1901.


Wright, Gavin, Old South, New South. New York: Basic Books, 1986.


Zilervirsmit, Arthur, The First Emancipation: The Abolition of Slavery in the North. Chicago: University
of Chicago Press, 1967.
Zimmerman, David J., “Regression Toward Mediocrity in Economic Stature,” American Economic
Review, 82(1992), 409-429.


                                                                                                     29
                                              Table I
                             Panel A: Means For Children in 1880 Census
                                                      Black Households                     White Households
                                                  N         Mean Std. Dev.            N         Mean Std. Dev.
Child's literacy                              7,442          0.35      0.48      34,752          0.85       0.36
Child is in school                           12,342          0.32      0.47      55,570          0.73       0.44
Mother was born a slave                      12,342          0.97      0.16      55,570          0.42       0.49
Child Age                                    12,342         10.52      2.53      55,570         10.66       2.52
Mother's age                                 11,868         36.57      8.69      53,798         38.47       7.66
Number of siblings                           12,342          4.00      2.17      55,570          3.68       2.04
Child is Male                                12,342          0.51      0.50      55,570          0.51       0.50
Current region is South                      12,342          0.94      0.26      55,570          0.40       0.48
Curent region is Northeast                   12,342          0.03      0.14      55,570          0.25       0.43
Current region is Central                    12,342          0.03      0.22      55,570          0.31       0.48
Current region is West                       12,342          0.00      0.04      55,570          0.03       0.17


Mother's literacy                            11,868         0.17         0.38     53,798         0.87          0.34
Father's literacy                            10,550         0.22         0.41     51,660         0.89          0.31
Father has manual job                        11,859         0.96         0.20     53,323         0.84          0.37
Father's occupational income score           10,396        15.24         5.15     50,881        19.88         10.90




                               Panel B: Means For Children 1920 Census
                                                      Black Households                     White Households
Child's literacy                             13,799          0.83        0.37    84,713          0.98          0.13
Child is in school                           13,119          0.67        0.47    77,822          0.81          0.40
Grandmother was born a slave                 16,647          0.98        0.14   101,204          0.49          0.50
Child Age                                    16,647         14.69        5.19   101,204         14.93          5.28
Mother's age                                 16,647         42.57        5.45   101,204         43.37          5.50
Number of siblings                           16,647          4.10        2.52   101,204          3.28          2.21
Child is Male                                16,647          0.51        0.50   101,204          0.53          0.50
Current region is South                      16,647          0.91        0.29   101,204          0.43          0.50
Curent region is Northeast                   16,647          0.04        0.19   101,204          0.19          0.39
Current region is Central                    16,647          0.05        0.21   101,204          0.31          0.46
Current region is West                       16,647          0.00        0.07   101,204          0.07          0.26


Mother's literacy                            16,647         0.67         0.47   101,204          0.96          0.19
Father's literacy                            13,300         0.66         0.47    92,315          0.95          0.22
Father has manual job                        13,103         0.95         0.21    89,748          0.79          0.41
Father's occupational income score           13,155        16.17         5.82    90,526         22.65         11.57


Notes: All data are from 1880 and 1920 IPUMS 1 percent samples of the Census of Population. 1880 sample includes children
ages 7-15. (Observations for children under age 7 have neither literacy measure nor the schooling measure. Children over 15
were born before the end of the Civil War. ) Means for mothers and fathers are taken at the child level, ie the means are
weighted by the number of children in the family.

1920 sample includes any children ages 7-35 within households. South dummy is defined as all former slave states.



                                                                                                                         30
                                                Table II
                                 Effect of Own Slave Status, Mother's or
                                 Grandmother's Slave Status on Literacy

This table shows various OLS estimates of the effect of being born into slavery (or having an ancestor born into slavery) on
literacy. The samples are limited to blacks in the 1880 and 1920 Censuses. Means and standard deviations of the dependent
variables for former slaves and free (pre-1865) blacks or their descendants are shown in columns (4) and (5). "Effects" of slave
status are calculated by using an OLS regression of literacy on own, mother's or grandmother's slave status. The final column
shows the analogous effect of born in a slave state for whites.

                                                                                                           For Whites
                                 Controls                    Effect of          Mean            Mean         Effect of
                                                                 Born     (dependent |    (dependent |           Born
                                                                Slave           slave)           free)        in Slave
                                                                                  sd(.)         Sd(.)            State
                                                                                  N(.)            N(.)

        Householders in
        1880
         all women heads HH      None                            -.466            .193             .656           -.156
        or spouses of HH                                        (.023)          (.395)           (.475)          (.003)
                                                                                8,622               317

        all male heads of HH     None                            -.466            .237             .703           -.128
                                                                (.028)          (.425)           (.458)          (.003)
                                                                                7,352               232

        all women heads HH       region, birth year              -.259            .193             .656           -.077
        or spouses of HH         effects                        (.030)          (.395)           (.475)          (.005)
                                                                                8,622               317

        all male heads of HH     region, birth year              -.207            .237             .703           -.068
                                 effects                        (.035)          (.425)           (.458)          (.005)
                                                                                7,352               232


        Children in 1880                                                                                   For Whites
        Dependent Variable       Controls                   Effect of        Mean if          Mean if        Effect of
        and sample                                       Mother Born       Mom slave         Mom free          Mother
                                                                Slave           sd(.)            sd(.)           Born
                                                           (std error)          N(.)             N(.)           South
        all black children in    none                           -.548           .339             .888            -.250
        sample                                                 (.028)         (.474)           (.316)           (.005)
                                                                              7,237               205

        all black children in    birth year, region,             -.100            .339             .888           -.086
        sample                   male, number sibs              (.037)          (.474)           (.316)          (.008)
                                                                                7,237               205

        black children outside   birth year, male,               -.043            .867             .913           -.022
        of South                 number of siblings             (.035)          (.340)           (.283)          (.009)
                                                                                   241              183

        black children in        birth year, male,               -.350            .321             .682           -.199
        South                    number of siblings             (.128)          (.467)           (.477)          (.013)
                                                                                6,996                22




                                                                                                                             31
                                       Table II (continued)
                                Effect of Slave Status on Literacy

Householders in          Controls                 Effect of        Mean if      Mean if     For Whites
1920                                           Mother Born       Mom slave     Mom free       Effect of
                                                      Slave           sd(.)       sd(.)         Mother
                                                 (std error)          N(.)         N(.)           Born
                                                                                                 South

all black householders   none                          -.275            .656        .931           -.050
in sample (ages 35-                                   (.013)          (.475)      (.253)          (.002)
55)                                                                  13,694          495

all black householders   birth year, region,           -.099            .656        .931           -.020
in sample (ages 35-      male, number                 (.015)          (.475)      (.253)          (.002)
55)                      children                                    13,694          495

black householders       birth year, male,             -.062            .889        .945            .001
outside of South (ages   number of children           (.015)          (.315)      (.227)          (.002)
35-55)                                                                1,877          403
black householders in    birth year, male,             -.235            .619        .870           -.058
South (ages 35-55)       number of children           (.035)          (.486)      (.339)          (.003)
                                                                     11,817           92


Children in 1920         Controls                  Effect of        Mean if     Mean if     For Whites
                                               Grandmother      Grandmother    Mom free        Effect of
                                                        Born          slave       sd(.)    Grandmother
                                                       Slave           sd(.)       N(.)            Born
                                                  (std error)          N(.)                       South

all black children in    none                          -.155            .831        .986           -.024
sample ages 10-25                                     (.010)          (.375)      (.120)          (.001)
                                                                     13,509          276

all black children in    birth year, region,           -.030            .831        .986           -.008
sample ages 10-25        male, number sibs            (.011)          (.375)      (.120)          (.001)
                                                                     13,509          276

black children outside   birth year, male,             -.005            .990        .995            .002
of South ages 10-25      number of siblings           (.006)          (.099)      (.067)          (.001)
                                                                      1,005          221
black children in        birth year, male,             -.121            .817        .945           -.023
South ages 10-25         number of siblings           (.036)          (.386)      (.229)          (.002)
                                                                     12,504           55




                                                                                                           32
                                       Table III
    Effect of Mother's or Grandmother's Slave Status on Probability of Being in School
            For Children in Black Households in 1880 and 1920 Census IPUMS
   This table compares outcomes for black children with mothers (grandmothers) who were former slaves versus outcomes for
   black children with mothers (grandmothers) born free. These children are born one (two) generations after slavery. "Effects"
   of mother's (grandmother's) slave status are calculated by using an OLS regression of "in-school" on mother's (grandmother's)
   former slave status.

           Children in 1880                                    Effect of        Mean if         Mean if      For Whites
                                                            Mother Born       Mom slave        Mom free         Effect of
                                                                   Slave           sd(.)          sd(.)     Grandmother
                                                              (std error)          N(.)            N(.)             Born
                                                                                                                   South
           all black children in    none                            -.360            .309            .669          -.235
           sample, ages 7-15                                       (.036)          (.462)          (.471)         (.005)
                                                                                  12,025              317

           all black children in    birth year, region,             -.084            .309            .669           -.067
           sample, ages 7-15        male, number sibs              (.042)          (.462)          (.471)          (.009)
                                                                                  12,025              317

           black children outside   birth year, male,               -.048          0.642           0.691            -.037
           of South, ages 7-15      number of siblings             (.046)          (.480)          (.463)          (.011)
                                                                                      408             285

           black children in        birth year, male,               -.157            .297            .469           -.141
           South, ages 7-15         number of siblings             (.122)          (.457)          (.507)          (.016)
                                                                                  11,617               32


           Children in 1920                                    Effect of         Mean if        Mean if      For Whites
                                                           Grandmother          Grandma        Mom free         Effect of
                                                                    Born           slave          sd(.)     Grandmother
                                                                   Slave            sd(.)          N(.)             Born
                                                              (std error)           N(.)                           South

           all black children in    none                            -.088            .664            .752           -.022
           sample ages 7-18                                        (.037)          (.472)          (.433)          (.003)
                                                                                  12,862              242
           all black children in    birth year, region,             -.019            .664            .752           -.011
           sample ages 7-18         male, number sibs              (.036)          (.472)          (.433)          (.005)
                                                                                  12,862              242
           black children outside   birth year, male,               -.003            .765            .768            .013
           of South ages 7-18       number of siblings             (.037)          (.424)          (.423)          (.006)
                                                                                      800             194
           black children in        birth year, male,               -.067            .658            .688           -.027
           South ages 7-18          number of siblings             (.096)          (.475)          (.468)          (.008)
                                                                                  12,062               48

Notes: 1880 sample includes black children in households in IPUMS. Mother's former slave status is imputed from year and state of birth.
All of the mothers are born before 1865 and all of the children are born after 1865. (Children older than 15 and households with mothers
younger than 15 are dropped .) 1920 sample includes children ages 7-18 in IPUMS sample.

"In-school" status is determined from the Census question which asked whether or not a person "attended school within the past year."




                                                                                                                               33
                                    Table IIIa
 Effect of Grandmother's Slave Status on Number of Months in School For Children
                   in Black Households in 1900 Census IPUMS
This table compares outcomes for black children with mothers who were former slaves versus outcomes for black children with
mothers born free. These children are born two generations after slavery. "Effects" of grandmother's slave status are
calculated by using an OLS regression of "in-school" on grandmother's former slave status.

                Children in 1900                                   Effect of        Mean if        Mean if
                                                               Grandmother      Grandmother    Grandmother
                                                                        Born          slave            free
                                                                       Slave           sd(.)          sd(.)
                                                                  (std error)          N(.)           N(.)

                all black children in    none                         -3.229           4.104          7.333
                sample, ages 7-15                                     (.468)         (6.176)        (2.426)
                                                                                       1,821             60

                all black children in    birth year, region,           -.307           4.104          7.333
                sample, ages 7-15        male, number sibs            (.538)         (6.176)        (2.426)
                                                                                       1,821             60

                black children outside   birth year, male,              .636           8.080          7.327
                of South, ages 7-15      number of siblings           (.542)         (2.152)        (2.593)
                                                                                          87             49

                black children in        birth year, male,            -2.940           3.905          7.364
                South, ages 7-15         number of siblings           (.692)         (6.245)        (1.567)
                                                                                       1,734             11




                                                                                                                        34
                                     Table IV
 Effect of Mother's or Grandmother's Slave Status on Probability of Being in Female
              Headed Household For Black Children in 1880 and 1920

This table compares female headed household status for black children with mothers (grandmothers) who were former slaves
versus female HH status for black children with mothers (grandmothers) born free. These children are born one (two)
generations after slavery. "Effects" of mother's (grandmother's) slave status are calculated by using an OLS regression of
female headed household on mother's (grandmother's) former slave status.

               Children in 1880         IPUMS SAMPLE             Effect of       Mean if         Mean if
                                                              Mother Born      Mom slave        Mom free
                                                                     Slave          sd(.)          sd(.)
                                                                (std error)         N(.)            N(.)
                                        controls
               all black children in    none                           .041            .135           .094
               sample, ages 0-15                                     (.018)          (.341)         (.291)
                                                                                    24,911             652

               all black children in    birth year, region,            .089            .135           .094
               sample, ages 0-15        male, number sibs            (.026)          (.341)         (.291)
                                                                                    24,911             652

               black children outside   birth year, male,              .068           .158            .096
               of South, ages 0-15      number of siblings           (.028)         (.365)          (.295)
                                                                                       780             591

               black children in        birth year, male,              .079            .134           .066
               South, ages 0-15         number of siblings           (.051)          (.341)         (.250)
                                                                                    24,131              61




               Children in 1880         100% SAMPLE              Effect of       Mean if         Mean if
                                                              Mother Born      Mom slave        Mom free
                                                                     Slave          sd(.)          sd(.)
                                                                (std error)         N(.)            N(.)
                                        controls
               all black children in    none                         .0004            .125            .124
               New England,                                          (.015)         (.330)          (.330)
               ages 0-15                                                             1293            2401

               all black children in    none                           .082           .188            .107
               New York City Area,                                   (.021)         (.391)          (.309)
               ages 0-15                                                               786           2139




                                                                                                                       35
                                              Table IV (continued)
                                    Effect of Grandmother Slave Status on
                                   Child Living in Female Headed Household
                   Children in 1920         IPUMS SAMPLE               Effect of        Mean if        Mean if
                                                                   Grandmother         Grandma        Mom free
                                                                            Born          slave          sd(.)
                                                                           Slave           sd(.)          N(.)
                                            controls                  (std error)          N(.)

                   all black children in    none                            .065            .154            .089
                   sample ages 0-15                                       (.032)          (.361)          (.286)
                                                                                         13,860              258

                   all black children in    birth year, region,             .084            .154            .089
                   sample ages 0-15         male, number sibs             (.035)          (.361)          (.286)
                                                                                         13,860              258

                   black children outside   birth year, male,               .055            .159            .098
                   of South ages 0-15       number of siblings            (.043)          (.366)          (.297)
                                                                                             828             205

                   black children in        birth year, male,               .128            .153            .057
                   South ages 0-15          number of siblings            (.054)          (.361)          (.233)
                                                                                         13,032               53


Notes: 1880 sample includes black children ages 0-15 in IPUMS sample and in 100 percent sample. Mother's former slave status is imputed
from year and state of birth. All of the mothers are born before 1865 and all of the children are born after 1865. 1920 sample includes
children ages 0-15 in IPUMS sample.

Female headed household are those with a woman listed as the head of household (and no spouse of the head listed within the
household.)




                                                                                                                              36
                                       Table V
  Effect of Self or Mother Born Slave on Occupational Income Score, Probability of
                              Being a Manual Laborer
                      (Male Household Heads in 1880 and 1920)
This table compares occupational outcomes for black male heads of household who were former slaves (or whose mothers
were former slaves) to outcomes for black male heads of household born free (or with mothers born free). "Effects" of slave
status are calculated by using an OLS regression of the outcomes on former slave status.

                1880 Householders       IPUMS Sample               Effect of         Mean            Mean
                                                                       Born    (dependent |    (dependent |
                                                                      Slave          slave)           free)
                                                                                       sd(.)         Sd(.)
                                        Controls                                       N(.)            N(.)
                Occupational income
                score is Dependent

                all male heads of HH    none                         -2.867          15.300         18.167
                                                                     (.361)         (5.316)        (6.517)
                                                                                      7,218            227

                all male heads of HH    region, birth year             .133          15.300         18.167
                                                                     (.447)         (5.316)        (6.517)
                                                                                      7,218            227
                Dummy for Manual
                Occupation
                all male heads of HH    none                          0.154          0.973           0.819
                                                                    (0.012)          (.164)          (.386)
                                                                                     7,200              226

                all male heads of HH    region, birth year            0.028          0.973           0.819
                                                                    (0.015)          (.164)          (.386)
                                                                                     7,200              226


                1880 Householders       100% Sample                Effect of         Mean            Mean
                                                                       Born    (dependent |    (dependent |
                                                                      Slave          slave)           free)
                                        Controls                                       sd(.)         Sd(.)
                                                                                       N(.)            N(.)
                Occupational income
                score is Dependent
                all black male heads    none                           .566          17.954         17.388
                of HH in New                                         (.191)         (6.537)        (7.097)
                England                                                               2170           2982

                all black male heads    none                          -.497          15.967         16.464
                of HH in NYC                                         (.217)         (6.984)        (6.915)
                                                                                      1709           2616

                Dummy for Manual
                Occupation
                all black male heads    none                           .003            .961            .959
                of HH in New                                         (.006)          (.193)          (.199)
                England                                                               2050            2742

                all black male heads    none                          -.013            .952            .965
                of HH in NYC                                         (.006)          (.214)          (.184)
                                                                                      1670            2605

                                                                                                                        37
                                    Table V (continued)
         Effect of Mother Born Slave on Occupational Income Score, Manual Worker
                   1920 Householders                                    Effect of        Mean if         Mean if
                                                                     Mother Born       Mom slave        Mom free
                                                                            Slave           sd(.)          sd(.)
                                                                       (std error)          N(.)            N(.)

                   Occupational income
                   score
                   black male heads of       birth year, region,            -.768          17.119           21.709
                   household, ages 35-55     number children               (.619)         (6.517)          (7.774)
                                                                                            5,936              172
                   Manual Laborer
                    (0-1)
                   black male heads of       birth year, region,             .063             .931            .762
                   household, ages 35-55     number children               (.034)           (.253)          (.427)
                                                                                            5,896              172


Notes: Samples include all black male heads of household. In the 1920 sample, the householders are ages 35-55 in 1920 (ie born
1865-1885) which makes them old enough to have parents who were born as slaves, but young enough to be born post-1865. In
the 1880 sample, the householders are all born before 1865.


Former slave status is imputed from year and state of birth. Those blacks born in one of 16 slave states prior to 1865 are coded as
former slaves. (The count of 16 states includes West Virginia.) . For the 1920 data, if the householder's mother was born in one
of 16 slave states, the mothers are coded as former slaves. There are four regional dummies coded such that the "South" dummy
is really a slave states dummy. Missouri is coded as "South" and Washington, DC is not.

The occupational income score is the median 1950 annual income in hundreds of dollars for a given occupation Manual versus
non-manual status is designated by the author based on job title.




                                                                                                                                38
                                             Table VI
                      Means of Literacy, In School, Manual Occupation (0-1)
                               By Race and Slave-State Versus Not
These panels are series of two by two matrices used to generate a simple estimate of the effect of being born into slavery on
literacy, “in school” status, and occupation. The lower right hand cell of each panel is the black-white difference in means for
individuals born outside the South minus the black white difference in means for individuals born in the South.

Panel A: Effect of Own Slavery Status on Own Literacy for Female Householders in 1880

                           Mother's Literacy 1880
                                                                     Black                  Black/
                           Born in slave state                           0            1   white diff

                                                              0      0.942        0.656       -0.286
                                                                    30,531          317

                                                              1      0.785        0.193       -0.592
                                                                    18,214        8,622

                                   Slave state - Free State diff    -0.157       -0.463       -0.306


Panel B: Effect of Mother's Slavery Status on Child's Literacy Status in 1880

                           Child's Literacy 1880
                                                                     Black                  Black/
                           Mother born in slave state                    0            1   white diff

                                                              0      0.951        0.888       -0.063
                                                                    20,332          205

                                                              1      0.702        0.339       -0.363
                                                                    14,420        7,237

                                   Slave state - Free State diff    -0.249       -0.549       -0.300


Panel C: Effect of Mother's Slavery Status on Literacy for Female Householders in 1920

                           Female Household's
                           Literacy 1920
                                                                     Black                  Black/
                           mother born in slave state                    0            1   white diff

                                                              0      0.988        0.948       -0.040
                                                                    31,311          326

                                                              1      0.945        0.659       -0.286
                                                                    21,183        8,475

                                   Slave state - Free State diff    -0.043        -.289       -0.246




                                                                                                                             39
                                                  Table VI (cont.)
Panel D: Effect of Mother's Slavery Status on Literacy for Male Householders in 1920

                         Male Householders literacy
                         1920
                                                                 Black                  Black/
                         mother born in slave state                  0           1    white diff


                                                            0     0.986     0.851        -0.135
                                                                 26,745       289

                                                            1     0.929     0.667        -0.262
                                                                 18,075     6,270

                                 Slave state - Free State diff   -0.057     -0.184       -0.127


Panel E: Effect of Grandmother's Slavery Status on Literacy for Children in 1920
                         Child's Literacy 1920
                                                                 Black                  Black/
                                                                     0           1    white diff
                         Grandmother born in slave state
                                                            0     0.994     0.986        -0.008
                                                                 43,301       282

                                                            1     0.970     0.831        -0.139
                                                                 41,412    13,517

                                 Slave state - Free State diff   -0.024     -0.155       -0.131



Panel F: Effect of mother's Slavery Status on Schooling Status for Children in 1880




                         Child is In School 1880
                                                                 Black                  Black/
                         Mother born in slave state                  0           1    white diff

                                                            0     0.832     0.669        -0.163
                                                                 32,213       317

                                                            1     0.597     0.309        -0.288
                                                                 23,357    12,025

                                 Slave state - Free State diff   -0.235     -0.360       -0.125




                                                                                                   40
Panel G: Effect of Grandmother's Slavery Status on Schooling Status for Children in 1920
                        Child is In School 1920
                                                                Black                  Black/
                        Grandmother born in slave state             0           1    white diff

                                                           0     0.817     0.758        -0.059
                                                                38,682       248

                                                           1     0.795     0.664        -0.131
                                                                39,140    12,871

                                Slave state - Free State diff   -0.022    -0.094        -0.072


Panel H: Effect of Own Slavery Status on Manual for Male Householders in 1880


                        Father is Manual Worker
                        1880
                                                                Black                  Black/
                        Father born in slave state                  0           1    white diff

                                                           0     0.818     0.819         0.001
                                                                26,306       226

                                                           1     0.892     0.973         0.081
                                                                15,970     7,200

                                Slave state - Free State diff    0.074     0.154         0.080


Panel I: Effect of Mother’s Slavery Status on Manual for Male Householders in 1920

                        Father Has Manual
                        Occupation 1920
                                                                Black                  Black/
                        Father's mother born in slave state         0           1    white diff


                                                           0     0.684     0.814         0.130
                                                                25,650       279

                                                           1     0.772     0.931         0.159
                                                                17,507     6,137

                                Slave state - Free State diff    0.088     0.117         0.029




                                                                                                  41
                                           Table VII
                   Outcomes for Heads of Household and Spouses in 1880 Census
                                 By Own Race and Birth Place
This table uses OLS to estimate the "effect" on adult outcomes of being born a slave. The estimated effect is simply the
interaction between being black and being born in a slave state. The regressions include whites and blacks born pre-1865 in
slave and non-slave states. The regressions include the main effects of being black, being born in the South (slave states), and
the interaction between the two.


                            (1)         (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)         (8)

                      Literacy     Literacy    Literacy    Literacy    Occupati    Occupati      Manual      Manual
                      Women        Women           Men         Men         onal        onal      worker      worker
                                                                        income      income        (0-1)       (0-1)
                                                                          score       score
Black*                   -0.307      -0.302      -0.338      -0.334       0.669       1.062        0.080        0.072
born slave state        (0.019)     (0.019)     (0.021)     (0.021)     (0.711)     (0.705)      (0.023)      (0.023)

Born in slave state      -0.156      -0.063      -0.128      -0.048       -3.536      -1.465       0.074        0.021
(self)                  (0.003)     (0.005)     (0.003)     (0.005)      (0.104)     (0.180)     (0.003)      (0.006)

Black                    -0.285      -0.283      -0.250      -0.243       -3.584      -3.839       0.001        0.002
                        (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.021)     (0.020)      (0.695)     (0.690)     (0.023)      (0.023)

Number of own                         0.012                   0.018                    0.722                   -0.020
Children in house                   (0.006)                 (0.006)                  (0.202)                  (0.007)

South is                             -0.002                  -0.017                   -2.054                    0.059
Current region                      (0.010)                 (0.010)                  (0.333)                  (0.011)

Central is                            0.104                   0.069                   -1.281                    0.026
Current region                      (0.009)                 (0.009)                  (0.313)                  (0.010)

Northeast is                          0.120                   0.089                    1.593                   -0.023
current region                      (0.009)                 (0.009)                  (0.315)                  (0.010)

Constant                 0.942       0.838      0.953        0.879      21.751     21.599    0.818        0.816
                       (0.002)     (0.009)    (0.002)      (0.009)     (0.064)    (0.303)  (0.002)      (0.010)
Observations            57684       57684      51104        51104       49952      49952    49702        49702
R-squared                 0.38        0.39       0.38         0.38        0.05       0.07     0.03         0.04
Men refers to a male head of household. "Women" refers to a spouse of a male head of household or a female head of
household. All are born pre-1865. Standard errors in parentheses. All columns use OLS. Columns (5)-(8) are for male heads
of household only.        Literacy and manual worker are (0-1) dummies.




                                                                                                                             42
                                                Table VIII
                                   Outcomes for Children in 1880 Census
                                    By Race and Birthplace of Mother
This table uses OLS to estimate the "effect" on child outcomes of having a mother who was born a slave. The estimated effect
is simply the interaction between being black and mother born in a slave state. The regressions include whites and blacks born
pre-1865 in slave and non-slave states. The regressions include the main effects of being black, mother born in the South
(slave states), and the interaction between the two.


                                                (1)                   (2)                    (3)                   (4)

                                           Literate               Literate            In School             In School

         Black*Mother                        -0.299                -0.290                -0.125                 -0.119
         born in slave state                (0.029)               (0.027)               (0.036)                (0.034)

         Mother born                         -0.250                -0.060                -0.235                 -0.054
         in slave state                     (0.005)               (0.008)               (0.005)                (0.009)

         Black                               -0.064                -0.058                -0.163                 -0.152
                                            (0.028)               (0.026)               (0.035)                (0.033)

         Male                                                      -0.026                                       -0.009
                                                                  (0.004)                                      (0.003)

         Number of own                                             -0.012                                        0.000
         siblings in                                              (0.001)                                      (0.001)
         household
         South is                                                  -0.113                                       -0.054
         current region                                           (0.016)                                      (0.018)

         Central is                                                 0.102                                        0.162
         current region                                           (0.016)                                      (0.017)

         Northeast                                                  0.111                                        0.172
         is current region                                        (0.016)                                      (0.017)
         Constant                             0.951                 0.915                 0.832                  0.687
                                            (0.002)               (0.016)               (0.003)                (0.017)
         Observations                        42,194                42,194                67,912                 67,912
         R-squared                             0.27                  0.30                  0.17                   0.20


Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered at the household level. Literacy is measured for children 9
or older. "In school" is measured for children 7-18. All children are born after 1865. All parents are born before 1865.




                                                                                                                             43
                                            Table IX
                    Outcomes for Heads of Household and Spouses in 1920 Census
                             By Race and Birth Place of Their Mother
This table uses OLS to estimate the "effect" on adult outcomes of having a mother who was born a slave. The estimated effect
is simply the interaction between being black and mother born in a slave state. The regressions include whites and blacks born
pre-1865 in slave and non-slave states. The regressions include the main effects of being black, mother born in the South
(slave states), and the interaction between the two.

                            (1)         (2)         (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)         (8)

                       Literate    Literate    Literate    Literate   Occupati    Occupati     Manual       Manual
                       Women       Women          Men         Men         onal        onal     worker       worker
                                                                       income      income       (0-1)        (0-1)
                                                                         score       score

Black*mother             -0.246     -0.245      -0.127      -0.161        0.786      -0.385       0.029       0.074
born slave state        (0.013)    (0.013)     (0.015)     (0.015)      (0.720)     (0.731)     (0.027)     (0.027)

Mother born              -0.043      0.013      -0.057      -0.002       -3.954      -1.462       0.088       0.041
in slave state          (0.002)    (0.003)     (0.002)     (0.003)      (0.114)     (0.169)     (0.004)     (0.006)

Black                    -0.040     -0.039      -0.135      -0.096       -5.996      -4.776       0.130       0.083
                        (0.013)    (0.013)     (0.014)     (0.015)      (0.699)     (0.711)     (0.026)     (0.026)

Number of own                        0.008                   0.015                    1.187                  -0.031
siblings in house                  (0.004)                 (0.008)                  (0.373)                 (0.014)

South is                            -0.039                  -0.052                   -2.520                   0.072
current region                     (0.004)                 (0.005)                  (0.234)                 (0.009)

Central is                           0.035                   0.018                   -0.787                   0.042
current region                     (0.004)                 (0.004)                  (0.219)                 (0.008)

Northeast is                         0.042                   0.022                    2.233                  -0.019
current region                     (0.004)                 (0.005)                  (0.224)                 (0.008)

Constant                  0.988      0.960       0.986       0.972       26.315      25.925       0.684       0.668
                        (0.001)    (0.003)     (0.001)     (0.004)      (0.072)     (0.197)     (0.003)     (0.007)
Observations             61295      61295       51379       51379        50068       50068       49573       49573
R-squared                  0.18       0.19        0.15        0.17         0.07        0.08        0.03        0.04
Standard errors in parentheses.




                                                                                                                           44
                                                 Table X
                                   Outcomes for Children in 1920 Census
                                  By Race and BirthPlace of Grandmother
This table uses OLS to estimate the effect on grandchild outcomes of having a grandmother who is born a slave. The estimated
effect is simply the interaction between being black and grandmother born in a slave state. The regressions include whites and
blacks born pre-1865 in slave and non-slave states. The regressions include the main effects of being black, grandmother born
in the South (slave states), and the interaction between the two.

                                                 (1)                    (2)                   (3)                (4)

                                            Literate               Literate             In School          In School
          Black*Grandma                      -0.131                 -0.131                 -0.072             -0.090
          born in slave state               (0.010)                (0.010)                (0.037)            (0.033)

          Grandmother born                    -0.024                 0.006                 -0.022             -0.002
          in slave state                     (0.001)               (0.001)                (0.003)            (0.005)

          Black                               -0.009                -0.007                 -0.059             -0.034
                                             (0.009)               (0.008)                (0.036)            (0.033)

          Male                                                      -0.015                                    -0.031
                                                                   (0.001)                                   (0.002)

          Number of own                                             -0.003                                    -0.008
          siblings in                                              (0.000)                                   (0.001)
          household
          South is                                                  -0.021                                    -0.048
          current region                                           (0.002)                                   (0.006)

          Central is                                                 0.014                                    -0.017
          current region                                           (0.002)                                   (0.006)

          Northeast                                                  0.015                                    -0.045
          is current region                                        (0.002)                                   (0.006)


          Constant                           0.994                  1.000                   0.817              0.886
                                           (0.000)                (0.003)                 (0.002)            (0.006)
         Observations                       98512                  98512                   90941              90941
         R-squared                            0.08                   0.09                    0.02               0.25
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Standard errors are corrected for clustering at the family level.




                                                                                                                           45
                                                        Table XI
                                 Transmission of Literacy and Occupational Income Score
                                        From Parents to Children: 1880 Census
            This table shows the connection between child literacy (income score) and parent literacy and income score. The transmission
            rates for both outcomes are stronger for blacks than for whites. All children are born post-1865 and parents are born pre-1865.
            Children in households are ages 0-35. Transmission rate is estimated by regression child outcome on parent outcome.
                                      (1)            (2)            (3)           (4)            (5)           (6)            (7)           (8)
                                 Child is       Child is       Child is      Child is Occupation Occupation Occupation Occupation
                                 Literate       Literate       Literate      Literate        income        income        income        income
                                                                                               score         score         score         score

          sample                  White          Black     Blacks not       All with        White          Black     Blacks not       All with
                              households    Household        in South    grandma in     households    households       in South     grandpa in
                                                     s                    household                                                 household

          Mother is                 0.320         0.450          0.189         0.285
          literate                (0.007)       (0.018)        (0.043)       (0.042)

          Grandmother is                                                       0.170
          literate                                                           (0.035)

          Father's                                                                            0.377         0.454          0.223         0.215
          occupational                                                                      (0.022)       (0.046)        (0.137)       (0.153)
          income score

          Grandfather's                                                                                                                  0.070
          occupational                                                                                                                 (0.114)
          income score

          Male                     -0.021        -0.014         -0.019        -0.004         -0.524         0.632          3.846         0.154
                                  (0.003)       (0.010)        (0.040)       (0.015)        (0.242)       (0.134)        (2.552)       (1.457)

          Age                       0.012        -0.003         -0.002         0.003          0.199        -0.025          0.865        -0.216
                                  (0.001)       (0.003)        (0.010)       (0.004)        (0.037)       (0.040)        (0.449)       (0.371)

          Number of own              -0.005       -0.015        -0.021          -0.007       -0.038        -0.130        -0.263        -0.121
          siblings in house         (0.001)      (0.003)       (0.010)         (0.004)      (0.032)       (0.038)       (0.475)       (0.345)
          South                      -0.173       -0.130         0.000          -0.219       -2.806        -6.468         0.000        -2.564
                                    (0.010)      (0.144)       (0.000)         (0.064)      (0.750)       (0.321)       (0.000)       (2.250)
           Northeast                  0.064        0.225         0.343           0.012        2.594        -5.722        -6.386         0.000
                                    (0.009)      (0.147)       (0.157)         (0.058)      (0.762)       (2.091)       (2.234)       (0.000)
           Central                    0.035        0.150         0.190          -0.024       -1.826        -6.448        -7.311        -3.835
                                    (0.009)      (0.147)       (0.157)         (0.058)      (0.750)       (0.938)       (1.154)       (2.044)
           Constant                   0.504        0.498         0.549           0.541        5.796        11.134         1.505        12.524
                                    (0.014)      (0.148)       (0.194)         (0.085)      (1.003)       (1.077)       (8.095)       (5.527)
           Observations              48552         7140             524          1617         6963          2927             51            55
           R-squared                   0.25         0.19           0.12           0.40         0.44          0.25          0.25          0.27
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Literacy is defined as ability to read and write. Occupational income score is 1950 median income by occupation
in hundreds of 1950 dollars. (This variable is created by the IPUMS researchers.) Grandmother's literacy is mother's mother's literacy. It is only
available in cases where the grandmother lives in the household. Grandfather's occupational score is that of father's father. It is only available if the
father's father lives in the household AND has an occupation listed.




                                                                                                                                          46
                                                        Table XII
                                 Transmission of Literacy and Occupational Income Score
                                        From Parents to Children: 1920 Census
            This table shows the connection between child literacy (income score) and parent literacy and income score. The transmission
            coefficients for both outcomes are stronger for blacks than for whites. Children in households are ages 7-35.

                                       (1)            (2)           (3)           (4)            (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)
                                  Child is       Child is      Child is      Literate     Occupation Occupation Occupation Occupation
                                  Literate       Literate      Literate                 income score income score income score income score


        sample                     White          Black Blacks not in        All with        White          Black Blacks not in       All with
                               households    households        South      grandma in     households    households        South      grandpa in
                                                                           household                                                household

        Mother is literate           0.090         0.239          0.030         0.177
                                   (0.004)       (0.011)        (0.024)       (0.037)

        Grandmother is                                                          0.043
        literate                                                              (0.013)

        Father's                                                                               0.403         0.550         0.190         0.425
        occupational                                                                         (0.005)       (0.031)       (0.067)       (0.111)
        income score

        Grandfather's                                                                                                                    0.073
        occupational                                                                                                                   (0.104)
        income score

        Male                        -0.005        -0.051         -0.008        -0.016         -0.215         2.772         7.247        -1.041
                                   (0.001)       (0.006)        (0.007)       (0.005)        (0.075)       (0.191)       (0.856)       (1.525)

        Age                         -0.000         0.005          0.000         0.001          0.354         0.349         0.127         0.746
                                   (0.000)       (0.001)        (0.001)       (0.001)        (0.009)       (0.023)       (0.089)       (0.347)

        Number of own                  -0.000      -0.009         -0.001         -0.000       -0.239        -0.199         0.124         0.899
        Siblings in house             (0.000)     (0.002)        (0.001)        (0.002)      (0.019)       (0.044)       (0.177)       (0.392)
        South                          -0.022      -0.091          0.000         -0.047       -2.911        -3.457         0.000         0.000
                                      (0.002)     (0.011)        (0.000)        (0.010)      (0.195)       (2.337)       (0.000)       (0.000)
          Northeast                     0.012       0.006         -0.008         -0.007        2.631         2.538         1.780         1.954
                                      (0.001)     (0.012)        (0.005)        (0.008)      (0.178)       (2.420)       (1.850)       (2.275)
          Central                       0.006       0.014         -0.007         -0.013       -0.082         0.916         0.152         4.009
                                      (0.001)     (0.013)        (0.005)        (0.008)      (0.184)       (2.384)       (1.825)       (2.285)
          Constant                      0.908       0.739          0.972          0.793        3.647        -3.520         5.078       -11.328
                                      (0.004)     (0.021)        (0.026)        (0.036)      (0.294)       (2.459)       (3.108)       (6.602)
          Observations               171973        13697            1278           3769       56522           5306           423            63
          R-squared                      0.05        0.11           0.01           0.15         0.33          0.38          0.25          0.47
Robust standard errors in parentheses. Literacy is defined as ability to read and write. Occupational income score is 1950 median income by occupation
in hundreds of 1950 dollars. (This variable is created by the IPUMS researchers.) Granmother's literacy is mother's mother's literacy. It is only
available in cases where the grandmother lives in the household. Grandfather's occupational score is that of father's father. It is only available if the
father's father lives in the household AND has an occupation listed.




                                                                                                                                         47
                                      Table XIII
           Means from Sample of Families in Both 1880 Census and 1920 IPUMS
                      Means By Matched and Unmatched Samples

The data are from a sample that matches father's ages 40-60in the 1920 IPUMS back into the 1880 Census (when the fathers
were ages 0-20). The match is done on first name, last name, year of birth, race, place of birth and mother and father's place of
birth. The objective of the merge is to get some information on father's father's occupation and to create a sample with three
generations of adults within each family.

                                                    Matched                                   Unmatched
Variable                             Obs            Mean         Std. Dev.     Obs            Mean      Std. Dev.        t-stat for
                                                                                                                         diff in
                                                                                                                         means
             Children
Literacy                                    5,789         0.98          0.15         42,397         0.97       0.17              2.79
Occupational income score                   3,261        18.51         10.47         25,214        18.21      10.84              1.50
Manual worker                               3,209         0.74          0.44         24,951         0.74       0.44              0.30
Age                                         7,126        15.97          6.96         50,033        17.42       7.49             -15.4
Male                                        7,126         0.62          0.49         50,033         0.63       0.48             -2.05
Black                                       7,126         0.14          0.35         50,033         0.10       0.30              9.24
Region=northeast                            7,126         0.27          0.45         50,033         0.19       0.40             15.94
Region=south                                7,126         0.37          0.48         50,033         0.44       0.50            -10.20
Region=central                              7,126         0.32          0.47         50,033         0.31       0.46              1.64
Region=west                                 7,126         0.04          0.19         50,033         0.06       0.24             -8.98

             Fathers
Literacy                                    1,854         0.94          0.23         14,384         0.92       0.26                 2.77
Occupational income score                   1,854        22.57         10.28         14,382        22.43      11.02                 0.51
Manual worker                               1,854         0.82          0.38         14,383         0.80       0.40                 2.24

Pre-merge sample is limited to father's in 1920 IPUMs who were born after the Civil War but prior to the 1880 Census. I
further limit the sample to families that have at least one male child in the household who is 18 or more years of age.




                                                                                                                               48
                                         Table XIV
                 Intergenerational Transmission of Occupational Income Score

The data are from the merged sample of families described in the previous table. Families in the 1880 Census are merged with
families in the 1920s IPUMs. Transmission coefficients are obtained by regressing child's income score on father's and
grandfather's income score. Columns (3) and (6) show the transmission coefficients when we exclude households in which the
father (1920 Head of Household) is a farmer or farm laborer.

                                                        Blacks                                       Whites
                                            (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)            (5)             (6)
                                           Son/           Son/           Son/            Son/           Son/           Son/
                                    daughter's     daughter's     daughter's      daughter's     daughter's     daughter's
                                   occupation     occupation     occupation      occupation     occupation     occupation
                                     al income      al income      al income       al income      al income      al income
                                          score          score          score           score          score          score
                                                                         non-                                          non-
                                                                      farmers                                       farmers
Father's occupational income              0.554                         0.198          0.525                          0.230
score                                   (0.128)                       (0.122)        (0.025)                        (0.030)

Grandfather's occupational                0.057        -0.042          0.015           0.036          0.134          0.008
income score                            (0.073)       (0.070)        (0.061)         (0.026)        (0.028)        (0.024)

male                                      3.380         3.624          7.179          -0.397         -1.510          2.323
                                        (0.860)       (0.855)        (1.814)         (0.504)        (0.507)        (0.422)

age                                       0.389         0.448          0.176           0.290          0.327          0.355
                                        (0.110)       (0.112)        (0.129)         (0.051)        (0.062)        (0.060)

Number children in household             -0.290        -0.479         -0.235          -0.348         -0.612         -0.362
1920                                    (0.200)       (0.210)        (0.305)         (0.096)        (0.116)        (0.096)

Current region = south                   -3.343        -6.366         -0.899          -1.503         -2.400         -0.773
                                        (1.892)       (2.108)        (1.928)         (1.052)        (1.315)        (1.317)

Current region = north                    1.325         2.158          1.019           1.243          2.107          0.474
                                        (2.438)       (2.162)        (2.206)         (1.020)        (1.239)        (1.204)

Current region = central                                                              -1.995         -2.669         -0.898
                                                                                     (1.018)        (1.265)        (1.228)

Constant                                 -5.216         7.472          4.925           2.545         13.911          9.640
                                        (4.046)       (3.435)        (4.267)         (1.715)        (1.865)        (1.962)
Observations                                298           298             99           2167           2167           1371
R-squared                                  0.45          0.34           0.34            0.36           0.13           0.17

Standard errors are clustered at the family level. Families are in both the 1880 Census and 1920 IPUMs and merged based on
data for the male head of household in 1920 (the "fathers" in the 1920 data). Match is on first name, last name, year of birth,
race, place of birth, mother's place of birth, father's place of birth. Father's are ages 0-15 in 1880.




                                                                                                                               49
                                Appendix Table I
The Location of Black Households in New York Metro Area and New England in the
                               1880 100% Sample
                            New York, New York, New York                           1404
                            Brooklyn, Kings, New York                               790
                            Flushing, Queens, New York                               90
                            Jamaica, Queens, New York                                56
                            Oyster Bay, Queens, New York                             56
                            North Hempstead, Queens, New York                        55
                            Huntington, Suffolk, New York                            50
                            Babylon, Suffolk, New York                               41
                            Flatbush, Kings, New York                                31

                            Providence, Providence, Rhode Island                    282
                            Boston, Suffolk, Massachusetts                          265
                            New Haven, New Haven, Connecticut                       262
                            Hartford, Hartford, Connecticut                         178
                            Cambridgeport, Cambridge, Middlesex, Ma                  83
                            Worcester, Worcester, Massachusetts                      83
                            Springfield, Hampden, Massachusetts                      82
                            Newport, Newport, Rhode Island                           74
                            New Bedford, Bristol, Massachusetts                      70
                            Bridgeport, Fairfield, Connecticut                       58
                            South Kingstown, Washington, Rhode Isla                  47
                            Stonington, New London, Connecticut                      43
                            Norwich, New London, Connecticut                         41
                            Chelsea, Suffolk, Massachusetts                          40
                            Norwalk, Fairfield, Connecticut                          39
                            Pittsfield, Berkshire, Massachusetts                     35
                            Greenwich, Fairfield, Connecticut                        32
                            Danbury, Fairfield, Connecticut                          31
                            Lynn, Essex, Massachusetts                               30
                            Walpole, Norfolk, Massachusetts                           1
                            Total Households in Above Location                     4349

                            Total in Sample                                        6777

Notes: Data are from 100% sample of 1880 Census data for New England and for New York Metro Area.




                                                                                                    50
                                  Appendix Table II
        Birthplace of Female Householder's Mother for Free Black Households in
                           NY Metro Area and New England
                           Frequency      Percent                                Frequency      Percent

            AL                      6      0.07%               Africa                      9      0.10%
            AR                      1      0.01%               Bermuda                     1      0.01%
            CA                      1      0.01%               Brazil                      3      0.03%
            CT                   1389     15.84%               Canada                     92      1.05%
            DC                    151      1.72%               Cuba                        2      0.02%
            DE                     37      0.42%               England                     2      0.02%
            FL                     23      0.26%               France                      3      0.03%
            GA                      3      0.03%               Germany                    35      0.40%
            IA                      1      0.01%               Haiti                       2      0.02%
            IL                      4      0.05%               Ireland                    20      0.23%
            IN                      7      0.08%               Italy                       2      0.02%
            KS                      1      0.01%               Jamaica                     2      0.02%
            KY                      1      0.01%               Nova Scotia               611      6.97%
            LA                      3      0.03%               Prussia                     2      0.02%
            MA                    962     10.97%               Spain                      41      0.47%
            MD                     21      0.24%               Turkey                      3      0.03%
            ME                    182      2.08%
            MI                    155      1.77%               Illegible                 340      3.88%
            MO                      3      0.03%
            MS                      1      0.01%               Total                    8770         100
            NC                      3      0.03%
            NH                     50      0.57%
            NJ                     89      1.01%
            NY                   3151     35.93%
            OH                      3      0.03%
            PA                    394      4.49%
            RI                      2      0.02%
            SC                    513      5.85%
            TN                      7      0.08%
            TX                      1      0.01%
            VA                      2      0.02%
            VT                    344      3.92%
            WA                     62      0.71%
            WI                      7      0.08%
            WV                     12      0.14%
            US                      8      0.09%

            subtotal US          7600     86.66%
Notes: Data are from 100% sample of 1880 Census data for New England and for New York Metro Area. (There are more
female householders Table II than male householders in Table I and I have not yet fully solved this discrepancy.)


                                                                                                                    51
                                              Appendix Table III
                      Occupations of Free Blacks Male Heads of Household
                            in NYC Metro Area and New England

               Ten highest Occupational Income Scores and Ten most common
                                                           Frequency          Occupational                Manual
                                                                             Income Score                  (0-1)

     Physicians and surgeons                                        13                    80                      0
     Dentists                                                        6                    63                      0
     Lawyers and judges                                              4                    62                      0
     Locomotive engineers                                           10                    46                      1
     Managers, officials, and proprietors,                           2                    42                      0
     n.e.c.
     Engineering                                                    18                    41                      0
     Pharmacists                                                     3                    40                      0
     Pressmen and plate printers--printing                           9                    38                      1
     Brakemen--railroad                                             10                    36                      1
     Mail carriers                                                   1                    34                      0

     Laborers, n.e.c.                                           1,696                     20                      1
     Farm laborers, wage workers                                  687                      9                      1
     Waiters and waitresses                                       520                     11                      1
     Barbers, beauticians, and manicurists                        336                     19                      1
     Porters                                                      293                     18                      1
     Private household workers, n.e.c.                            292                      6                      1
     Farmers--owners and tenants                                  270                     14                      1
     Cooks, except private household                              198                     16                      1
     Janitors and sextons                                         126                     19                      1
     Teamsters                                                    101                     15                      1

Notes: Data are from 100% Sample of 1880 Census. Data are for black male heads of household. Occupational income score
is the median income for the occupation in 1950 and is expressed in hundreds of 1950 dollars per year. This variable was
calculated by the Minnesota Population Center and the author mapped occupation titles in the 100% Census sample to the
scores.




                                                                                                                      52
                                                                             Figure I
                                                    Literacy Rates By Birth Cohort for Free Blacks and Slaves
                                                             and Their Children And Grandchildren
                        1.00
                                                                                                                        Grandchild of Free

                                                                                   Child of Free

                        0.80
                                                                                                                            Grandchild of Slave
                                                       Born Free

                                                                                                    Child of Slave
Average Literacy Rate




                        0.60




                        0.40

                                                                  Born Slave

                        0.20




                        0.00
                                   1815      1825      1835      1845      1855      1865      1875      1885        1895      1905    1915
                                                                          Birth Cohort (mid-point)


                               This figure is intended to show the literacy gap between free and slave blacks pre-1865 and how that gap eroded over time and
                               across two generations. Means are taken by generation, by ten year cohort.

                               Notes: Data are from 1880 and 1920 Census IPUMS. Slavery status of self, mothers, and grandmothers is imputed from birth
                               year and place of birth. Mother and mother's mother are used to assign slavery status of parents or grandparents.. Literacy
                               rates in the first generation are calculated from the 1880 data and the next two generations are taken from the 1920 data. Data
                               from cohorts from 1865+ are taken from the 1920 Census. This switch partially explains the discrete jump shown in the
                               graph. Literacy is measured for persons age 10 or older.




                                                                                                                                                            53
                                                              Figure II
                                        Literacy Rates By Birth Cohort for Whites and Blacks
                                                Born Inside and Outside of the South


                1.00

                                    Whites born outside South

                0.80
                             Whites born in South

                                                Blacks born outside South
                0.60
Literacy Rate




                0.40


                                   Blacks born in South
                0.20




                0.00
                        1815       1825       1835      1845       1855       1865      1875       1885       1895       1905
                                                               Birth Cohort (mid-point)




                  This figure shows average literacy by birth cohort, race, and region of birth (South and non-South).   Means are taken by
                  generation, by ten year cohort.

                  Notes: Data are from 1880 and 1920 Census IPUMS. Data from cohorts from 1865+ are taken from the 1920 Census. This
                  switch partially explains the discrete jump shown in the graph. Literacy is measured for persons age 10 or older.




                                                                                                                                        54
                                  Figure III
Female Headed Household Rates By Birth Cohort for White and Black Children with
                               Grandmothers
                      Born Inside and Outside of South
0.140




0.120



                                                          Blacks, mother or grandmother born slave
0.100




0.080




0.060
                                                  Blacks , mother or grandmother born free

0.040


                                                Whites, mother or grandmother born slave state
0.020
                              Whites, mother or grandmother born free state


0.000
    1870   1875    1880    1885     1890       1895         1900    1905      1910     1915      1920
                                       Birth Cohort Mid-Point




This figure measures whether children ages 0-10 are living in a female headed household. Data are from
1880, 1900, 1920 Census IPUMS. In 1880, data are stratified by race and mother born in slave state
versus free. In 1900 and 1920, children are stratified by race and grandmother born in slave state versus
free. In both 1900 and 1920, households are limited to those with mother born between 1865 and 1885, in
order to increase the likelihood that the mother's mother was born before the end of the Civil War. This
selection rule implies that I am selecting older mothers in 1920 and is a potential reason for the increase in
female headed households shown in 1920. Female headed household is assumed when head of household
is a woman (and her husband is not present in household).




                                                                                                           55
                                                                        Figure IV
                                                    Occupational Income Scores for Former Slaves and
                                                    Free Blacks and Their Children and Grandchildren
                             30.00



                             25.00
                                                                            Child of Free              Grandchild of Free
Average Occupational Score




                             20.00
                                                Born Free

                                                                                    Child of Slave
                             15.00
                                               Born Slave


                             10.00
                                                                                                 Grandchild of Slave

                              5.00



                              0.00
                                     1815    1825    1835    1845    1855    1865      1875     1885    1895    1905    1915
                                                                    Birth Cohort (mid-point)




                                This figure shows average occupational income scores by birth cohort for free black men and former male
                                slaves and their sons and grandsons. The occupational income score is calculated by IPUMS as the
                                median annual income by occupation in 1950 and is reported in hundreds of 1950 dollars. Data for the
                                later two generations come from the 1920 Census. The 1895 and 1905 cohorts have lower scores
                                primarily because younger people are more likely to work in lower wage occupations.




                                                                                                                                    56
                                                                       Figure V
                                               Occupational Scores for Whites and Blacks By Birth Cohort
                                                                And Born in South

                            30.00



                            25.00
                                               Whites born outside South
Occupational Income Score




                            20.00
                                           Whites born in South

                                    Blacks born outside South
                            15.00
                                              Blacks born in South


                            10.00



                             5.00



                             0.00
                                    1815      1825      1835      1845     1855    1865     1875    1885     1895     1905
                                                                     Birth Cohort (mid-point)




                               The figure shows average occupational score by birth cohort, race and born in South. The occupational
                               income score is calculated by IPUMS as the median annual income by occupation in 1950 and is reported
                               in hundreds of 1950 dollars. Data for the later two generations come from the 1920 Census. The 1895
                               and 1905 cohorts have lower scores primarily because younger people are more likely to work in lower
                               wage occupations.




                                                                                                                                 57
                                                                           Figure VI
                                                       Transmission of Literacy From Parents to Children
                                                                     By Cohort and Race



                                1.00




                                0.80
Coefficient of Child Literacy




                                                            Blacks 1880 Census
     on Mom's Literacy




                                0.60




                                0.40
                                                                                                              Blacks 1920 Census

                                                                 Whites 1880 Census
                                0.20


                                                                                                   Whites 1920 Census

                                0.00
                                        1835        1845        1855        1865        1875        1885        1895         1905
                                                                        Birth Cohort (mid-point)


                                 The transmission rate is defined as the child's literacy status (0-1) regressed on mother's literacy status (0-
                                 1) by cohort of child's birth. This is calculated for 1880 and 1920 households in which there were
                                 children of the householder present.




                                                                                                                                              58
                                                                         Figure VII
                                               Transmission of Occupational Income Score From Fathers to Sons
                                   1.00
                                                                                                               Blacks 1920 Census


                                   0.80
Coefficient of Sons Income Score
   on Father's Income Score




                                                               Blacks 1880 Census

                                   0.60


                                                                                                        Whites 1920 Census
                                   0.40             Whites 1880 Census




                                   0.20




                                   0.00
                                            1845        1855        1865        1875        1885        1895        1905        1915
                                                                            Birth Cohort (mid-point)


                                    The transmission rate is the coefficient obtains from regressing son's occupational score on the father's
                                    occupational score. Data are from 1880 and 1920 IPUMS. Sample includes those households with sons
                                    of household head present.




                                                                                                                                           59
                                      Figure VIII
               Probability of Living With One's Parents By Age and Race
                                      1920 Census




     .9

     .8

     .7                                               Whites

     .6
                                      Blacks
     .5

     .4

     .3

     .2

     .1

      0
          0         5         10        15           20        25      30
                                               age




This show the fraction of children who live with one or both parents (and the parents are the
householders). Data are from 1920 households. The transmission coefficients elsewhere in the paper are
calculated for households with both parents and children.




                                                                                                   60
                                                 Figure IX
                    Distributions of Occupational Score in 1880 For Heads of Household
Black Heads of Household

                      .8




                      .6
    Fraction




                      .4




                      .2




                       0
                               0       20               40                60    80
                                             Occupational income score

White Heads of Household

                       .8




                       .6
         Fraction




                       .4




                       .2




                           0
                                   0    20               40                60    80
                                              Occupational income score




                                                                                         61
                                                 Figure X
                    Distributions of Occupational Score in 1920 For Heads of Household


Occscore for black HH 1920


                       .8




                       .6
         Fraction




                       .4




                       .2




                           0
                                   0    20               40                60    80
                                              occupational income score


White HH

                      .8




                      .6
    Fraction




                      .4




                      .2




                       0
                               0       20               40                60    80
                                             occupational income score


                                                                                         62
