                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




        FINANCIAL AID PACKAGES AND COLLEGE ENROLLMENT DECISIONS:
                        AN ECONOMETRIC CASE STUDY


                                         David M. Linsenmeier
                                           Harvey S. Rosen
                                          Cecilia Elena Rouse


                                          Working Paper 9228
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9228


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     September 2002




We have received useful suggestions from Orley Ashenfelter, Don Betterton, C. Anthony Broh, Melissa
Clark, Susan Dynarski, Fred Hargadon, Bo Honoré, Jeffrey Kling, Nancy Malkiel, Robin Moscato, Miriam
Platten, Mark Votruba, Till von Wachter, Diane Whitmore, and members of the Princeton University Labor
Lunch, Princeton University Public Finance Working Group, and the NBER Higher Education Workshop.
We are grateful to Princeton’s Center for Economic Policy Studies and Industrial Relations Section for
financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by David M. Linsenmeier, Harvey S. Rosen, and Cecilia Elena Rouse. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Financial Aid Packages and College Enrollment Decisions: An Econometric Case Study
David M. Linsenmeier, Harvey S. Rosen, and Cecilia Elena Rouse
NBER Working Paper No. 9228
September 2002
JEL No. I20

                                        ABSTRACT

       We study the effects of a change in financial aid policy introduced by a Northeastern
university in 1998. Prior to that time, the university’s financial aid packages for low-income students
consisted of grants, loans, and campus jobs. After the change, the entire loan portion of the package

for low-income students was replaced with grants. We find the program increased the likelihood of
matriculation by low-income students by about 3 percentage points, although the effect is not

statistically significant. The effect among low-income minority students was between 8 and 10
percentage points and statistically significant at the 10 percent level.




David M. Linsenmeier                                           Harvey S. Rosen
Department of Economics                                        Department of Economics
Princeton University                                           Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544                                            Princeton, NJ 08544
davel@princeton.edu                                            and NBER
                                                               hsr@princeton.edu


Cecilia Elena Rouse
Education Research Section
Firestone Library
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
rouse@princeton.edu
I.      Introduction

        In recent decades, the average cost of attending a four-year college has risen

substantially, from $9,539 in 1988 to $12,282 in 1998 (in 1999 constant dollars) [Digest

of Education Statistics, 2000]1. This increase has engendered concerns that attending

college is beyond the financial reach of many students. The public policy response has

been to introduce or expand a variety of government grant and scholarship programs.2 At

the same time, a number of colleges and universities have improved their own financial

aid programs in order to attract low-income students. This can be done in two non-

mutually exclusive ways. The first is to increase the amount of aid; the second is to alter

the composition of the aid package, changing the mix of grants, loans, and jobs.

        Although there is a substantial academic literature on the impact of tuition levels

on enrollment decisions (see, e.g., Manski and Wise [1973], McPherson and Schapiro

[1991a,b], Kane [1994], and Rouse [1994]), not much research has been done on the

effects of different types of financial aid on student enrollment. The key result in the

literature is that enrollment decisions are, in fact, sensitive to the amount of tuition.

Further, Kane [1994] finds that the decision to enroll in college is sensitive to both tuition

and the level of Pell Grants. The effects are roughly of equal magnitude and opposite

sign, suggesting that net college cost (as opposed to “sticker price”) is the relevant

variable in the matriculation decision.3 A smaller literature has attempted to estimate the

effect of college costs on enrollment at a particular institution.               Hoenack [1971],

Ehrenberg and Sherman [1984], and Moore, Studenmund and Slobko [1991] each

1
  All dollar values in this paper are in 1999 dollars unless otherwise specified.
2
  For example, during the 1990s Congress increased the level of Pell grants, made student loans more
generous, and introduced college tax credits (Kane [1999]). In addition, there is growing interest in
reducing the loan burden of low-income students by such measures as front-loading Pell grants.
                                                                                                      2


estimate the probability that a student accepts an offer at a particular school; they find

that higher net college costs make students less likely to enroll at a particular institution.

Additionally, Ehrenberg and Sherman find that the response is largest for minority

students, middle to upper income students, and more scholastically able students (as

measured by SAT scores).

        A potential problem with many of these papers is that the data lack a source of

variation in college costs or financial aid composition that is exogenous to student

characteristics. College financial aid offers often depend on the characteristics of the

student; students who are considered more desirable by the college administration may

receive more generous offers. Hence, college costs and financial aid packages are likely

correlated with student characteristics. As a result, in a regression of the attendance

decision on net college cost, it is difficult to identify the independent effect of college

cost. In particular, the coefficient on college cost may partially reflect the impact of

unobserved characteristics of the student. In an attempt to address the selection problem,

van der Klaauw [1996] uses a regression discontinuity approach to estimate that the

financial aid offer has a significant effect on college enrollment. Dynarski [1999, 2000]

uses the end of the Social Security Student Benefits program and the creation of the Hope

Scholarship in Georgia as exogenous sources of variation and finds, in both cases,

positive effects of grant aid on student enrollment in college. 4

        In this paper, we analyze the effect of grant aid on student matriculation at a

major Northeastern university (hereinafter referred to as “NEU”). Like most selective

3
 See also Schwartz [1985] and Savoca [1991].
4
 Under the Social Security Student Benefits program, which ended in 1982, 18- to 22-year-old children of
deceased, disabled or retired Social Security beneficiaries received substantial monthly payments while
                                                                                                         3


colleges, NEU administers its own financial aid program, and in this analysis we study a

change in NEU’s financial aid policy. Prior to 1998, NEU’s financial aid package to

low-income students included loans, scholarships, and jobs.5 Beginning with the class of

2002 (which entered NEU in September, 1998), the loan component for these students

was entirely eliminated and replaced with grants. Because this change in the financial aid

policy induced systematic variation in the financial aid packages of low-income students

that is likely uncorrelated with other student characteristics, this exogenous policy

variation allows more meaningful estimates of the effect of the form of financial aid on

college enrollment. We implement a “difference-in-differences” estimator to study the

impact of this policy change on the probability that admitted low-income students enroll

at NEU.      Our main finding is that converting loans to grants had no statistically

discernible effect on the matriculation rate of low-income admits. However, there was a

marginally significant positive impact on the likelihood of enrollment among low-income

minority students.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II provides a description of

the financial aid program at NEU, both before and after the 1998 change. Section III

provides a theoretical framework for understanding the program’s effect on

matriculation. Section IV describes the primary data for our analysis. Some descriptive

statistics and the econometric results are presented in Section V, along with a discussion

of the interpretation and robustness of our results. Section VI concludes.




enrolled full-time in college. Under the Hope Scholarship program, all Georgia residents with at least a B
average in high school can attend a public college in Georgia for free.
5
  Not all students who qualify for financial aid are considered low-income. The detailed definition of low-
income status is discussed below, in Section II.
                                                                                          4


II.     Institutional Background

        In 1998 NEU announced that the loan component of the financial aid package of

every low-income student would be replaced by grants. University officials identified

two major reasons for this change. The first was to reduce the importance of financial

barriers in the decision to apply to or attend the school, and the second was to ensure that

a recent drop in the number of low-income students matriculating did not become a trend.

Officials emphasized that this policy was not undertaken to lure students away from other

institutions, but rather to fulfill NEU’s commitment to provide adequate financial aid to

all students.

        When a student applies for aid, NEU first computes his or her “demonstrated

need,” which is the difference between the cost of college and NEU’s estimate of the

student’s ability to pay based on his or her family’s financial position. The student

receives this amount of support in the form of a package that potentially consists of three

components: grants, loans, and jobs. Grant aid includes funds from any source (federal

Pell grants, university endowment funds, etc.) that are provided without expectation of

repayment or any work done by the student. Loans must be repaid with interest, although

the payments and accrual of interest may be deferred until some time after the student’s

graduation, and interest is charged at less than market rates. Job aid consists of a paid

position at the university, usually made available through the financial aid or a related

office. At NEU, such jobs usually require nine hours of work each week during the

academic year.

        These three forms of aid have different costs and values to both the college and

the student. Jobs are relatively inexpensive for the university because the student
                                                                                                          5


performs services of value in return for the funds. Some student jobs are also subsidized

by the federal work-study program, which pays part of a qualified student’s wages.

Loans are less expensive than grants for the loan provider, as they are repaid (even

though the interest rate is usually low and the payments are often deferred for several

years). To a student, grants are the most valuable, being essentially “free money.” In

contrast, the present discounted value of a dollar of loan aid is only about fifty cents.6

         Financial aid offers for students admitted to NEU are calculated according to the

following process. The financial aid staff begins by determining the student’s family

contribution (a function of the family’s financial resources). If the family’s calculated

ability to pay is less than the cost of attending NEU, then the student qualifies for

financial aid. In composing the financial aid package, the financial aid staff begins with a

standard amount of job aid and a base loan amount; grants fill the remaining gap between

the student’s ability to pay and the cost of NEU. The final financial aid package is then

adjusted by the financial aid staff where deemed appropriate. Because of this final

adjustment, there is no straightforward algorithm that exactly determines each student’s

financial aid package.

         The cost of attending NEU rose from $27,729 in 1988 to $34,171 in 2000, and

NEU’s financial aid packages grew along with it. (All dollar figures in this paper are

expressed in 1999 dollars unless otherwise specified.) In 1988, the standard financial aid

package included $2,028 in job aid, rising slightly to $2,109 in 2000. Over the same




6
 The precise value, of course, depends on factors such as the particular terms of the loan and the student’s
discount rate (McPherson and Schapiro [1991b], Feldstein [1992]).
                                                                                                          6


period, the base loan amount increased from $3,731 to $4,063, and the remaining grant

component increased from a median of $11,865 to $14,842.7

        The new policy announced in January 1998 made NEU more attractive to low-

income students by giving them grants in place of the loans they would have received

under the old regime. Under the new policy, the loan component of these students’

packages was completely eliminated and replaced with grants. That is, a low-income

student who would have been expected to borrow $4,000 per year was instead given an

additional $4,000 in grants for 1998-1999.8 The total amount of financial aid was not

affected, only the composition.

        Clearly, an important aspect of the process is how the financial aid office

classifies students as “low-income.” Before 1998, the financial aid office defined low-

income status based on expected parental contribution.9                     If the student’s parental

contribution was less than $2,000, he or she would likely be classified as low-income.

Low-income students were asked to take smaller loans than other students – $500 to

$2000 less for the poorest students in 1997, less than that in earlier years. Under the new

policy, students are classified as low-income if their family income is less than the

national median family income – $41,955 for the class entering in 1998.10



7
  The median is calculated among students receiving grant aid.
8
   NEU made other changes to its financial aid policy for the class of 2002. For students whose family
incomes are just above the low-income range, loans were reduced by smaller, graduated, amounts. In
addition, for low- and middle-income students, family assets were redefined to include only a portion of
housing equity. Because we lack adequate information on housing assets, we cannot fully incorporate these
changes into our analysis. However, we do account for the effect of the middle-income change in Tables 4
and 6.
9
   The student’s ability to pay is composed of two parts: the expected parental contribution and the
contribution from the student’s own resources (e.g., from summer jobs and external scholarships).
10
   This figure is the median among families with children under age 18 in 1996, the latest year for which
data were available when the cutoff was set in late 1997 for students entering NEU in the fall of 1998. This
is reported in nominal currency because the Financial Aid Office based its low-income classification on
nominal dollars.
                                                                                         7


       NEU officials estimated that this new program would cost approximately $1.7

million per year by the time it was fully phased-in, in fiscal year 2002. The goal of this

paper is to determine whether this expenditure has increased the yield (percentage of

admitted students enrolling) among low-income students, and if so, by how much.

       A key question is whether NEU instituted other innovations that might affect

yield rates at the same time that it replaced the loan component of financial aid packages

with grants. In particular, were there any changes in outreach programs to high school

students to encourage them to apply, or changes in strategies to convince accepted

students to matriculate? We posed this question to the director of the admissions office

and learned that no strikingly different recruitment strategies were used in recruiting the

graduating classes of ’02, ’03, and ’04 (the first three years of the new financial aid

policy). Some new approaches to recruiting low-income students were introduced for the

class of ’05, but members of this and subsequent classes are not included in our analysis

(see below). In short, we do not believe there were any concurrent changes in the

activities undertaken by NEU’s admissions office that would confound our efforts to

isolate the impact of the change in financial aid policy.



III.   Theoretical Framework

       In this section we develop a simple two-period model of how NEU’s change in

financial aid policy might affect matriculation decisions. Suppose that a student admitted

to NEU has the utility function U=U(Y), where Y represents income after graduation.

The student is risk averse, with U'(Y)>0 and U''(Y) < 0. In the first period, the student

decides whether or not to enroll at NEU. In the second period, with probability p the
                                                                                           8


student will receive a good job and earn income G, and with probability (1-p) she will get

a bad job and earn B. For simplicity, assume that if the student enrolls at NEU then she

must take out loans which require a payment of L in the second period. Before the policy

change L is positive, and after the policy change L is zero for low-income students. If the

student attends an alternative college, her expected utility is A, which is unaffected by the

policy change at NEU (an assumption we assess, below).

        The student chooses to attend NEU if the expected utility from attending NEU is

greater than the expected utility from attending her alternative college. The expect utility

of attending NEU is

                             E(UNEU) = p U(G-L) + (1-p) U(B-L).                          (1)

The expected utility of the alternative, by assumption, is E(UA) = A.

She attends NEU if

                                   θ = E(UNEU) – E(UA) > 0                               (2)

                           θ = p U(G-L) + (1-p) U(B-L) – A > 0                           (3)

where θ is the net benefit, in expected utility terms, of choosing NEU over the

alternative.

        To find the impact when loans are reduced by the policy change at NEU, we

compute

                           δθ/δL = -p U'(G-L) – (1-p) U'(B-L).                           (4)

Since U'(Y) > 0 for all Y, δθ/δL < 0. The policy change, which decreases L, increases θ,

making NEU relatively more attractive than the alternative.
                                                                                          9


       An interesting question is whether some students would be more responsive to the

loan-reduction program than others. In this model, the extent to which NEU becomes

more attractive depends on p:

                                δ2θ/δLδp = U'(B-L) – U'(G-L)                            (5)

which is positive, since U'' < 0 (decreasing marginal utility of income) implies that U'(B-

L) > U'(G-L). If a student has a low p, δθ/δL is more negative, the student has a larger

loss of utility from an increase in loans, and a given loan reduction has a larger effect on

the relative attractiveness of NEU over an alternative. Thus, the model predicts that the

program will have a relatively greater effect on matriculation at NEU for those students

with relatively low a priori expectations of getting a good job. Equation (5) will prove

useful in interpreting some of our results below.



IV.    Data and Econometric Model

A.     Data

       1.      Admissions Data

       Our primary data come from the administrative archives of NEU’s Financial Aid

Office. The database contains detailed financial aid and admissions information on each

year’s admitted students, including financial information such as family income and

assets and the composition of their financial aid packages. We analyze data from the

classes of 1992 through 2004 (who entered in 1988 through 2000).             The data are

proprietary and sensitive, as they contain detailed individual financial information on

NEU’s undergraduates and alumni. The archiving is done after the admissions process is

complete but before the students actually begin classes.
                                                                                                   10


        We begin with 25,958 individual students’ records and drop 1,433 observations

with missing or ambiguous information.11               Additionally, because the program is

particularly targeted at American students and because international students’ financial

indicators are relatively difficult to interpret, for most of the analysis we focus our

attention on U.S. citizens, reducing the sample by an additional 2,465 records. Another

8,359 admitted students are excluded from the primary analysis because they applied for

early decision or early action.12 These students choose to commit to, or at least focus on,

NEU before they receive financial aid offers. Their enrollment decisions, therefore, are

likely less sensitive to financial aid, and it is not appropriate to analyze them along with

regular admission applicants. More importantly, early decision application binds the

student to attend if accepted, so there is no choice to model conditional on admission.



        2.      SAT Test-taker Data

        As a secondary source of information, we also analyze data on SAT test-takers

from the College Board. The idea is to assess whether NEU’s change in financial aid

policy affected the applicant pool, because if the applicant pool changed in such a way as

to affect yield rates, it would cloud the interpretation of our results. We have data on

students projected by the College Board to have graduated from high school between

1994 and 2001. The sample includes all African-American and Hispanic SAT takers, all

test takers from California and Texas, and a 25 percent sample of non-Black, non-

Hispanic test takers residing outside of California and Texas. These data contain limited



11
  In most of these cases, there was a problem in the coding of the student’s enrollment decision.
12
  NEU switched from a non-binding “early action” policy to a binding “early decision” policy beginning
with the class of 2000.
                                                                                                         11


information on personal characteristics, including crude measures of family income,13

parental education, and participation in extracurricular activities, and academic

achievement (as measured by the student’s math and verbal SAT scores).                                Most

importantly, the data contain information on up to 20 (for the years 1994-1998) and 30

(for the years following 1998) institutions to which the student requested the SAT scores

be sent.14 We characterize a student as having interest in applying to NEU if she

indicates that her SAT scores should be sent to NEU. While this indicator is not a perfect

measure of who eventually applies to NEU, we believe that it is highly correlated. We

assume that test-takers who took the SAT after January, 1998 (when the policy change

was announced) were “exposed” to the change in financial aid policy and constitute the

treatment group; students who took the test before January 1998 form the comparison

group.15

         Using these data we created a sample analogous to the admissions data from

NEU. The sample includes only U.S. citizens who were attending a domestic school at

the time of registration for the SAT and who were not missing information on their race

or ethnicity. In addition, we dropped students who were missing test scores (these

students registered for the test but did not actually take it), and those who did not indicate




13
   Family income is reported in ranges. We use midpoints of these ranges to code students as low-income
following the same definition as in the NEU admissions data: family income below the national median.
14
   We include a dummy variable indicating whether the student had the option to request 30 institutions
(i.e., that the student took the SAT in 1999 or later). The inclusion of this dummy variable does not change
the results since most students list fewer than 20 institutions.
15
   There are other possible criteria for identifying students potentially affected by the change in financial
aid policy. The first is whether the student was likely to have graduated from high school after the 1998
policy change (i.e., graduated from high school in 1999 or afterwards) or using the date that the student
submitted his or her questionnaire to the College Board. The results using these alternative measures are
quite similar. In addition, we drop 66,160 students who took the SAT in 2001 since there are only data for
the first few months of that year.
                                                                                            12


any school to receive their scores.           Our final analysis sample includes 3,031,573

individuals; Appendix Table 1 provides descriptive statistics on these data.



B.     Econometric Model

       We estimate the impact of the change in financial aid policy on admitted low-

income students’ likelihood of enrolling at NEU by modeling the individual student’s

decision to accept NEU’s admissions offer as a conventional probit model:

                       E it = F[α + Ptβ1 + LIit β2 + (Pt * LI it) β3 + X it γ ]            (6)

where Eit is the probability that student i chooses to enroll at NEU in year t, F[ ] is the

cumulative normal distribution, Xit is a vector of student characteristics (described in the

next section), Pt is a binary variable that equals 1 if the student applied after the 1998

change in financial aid (i.e., it equals one for all students in the classes of 2002, 2003, and

2004), LIit is a binary variable that equals 1 if the student is classified as low-income, and

β1, β2, β3, γ and α are parameters to be estimated. To allow comparisons between low-

income students before and after the policy change, we reclassify students from all

classes as low-income according to the definition adopted by the financial aid office at

the time of the policy change. That is, we classify students as low-income if their family

income was below the national median for families with children under 18 in the year

before they applied.

       The coefficient β1 reflects the change in probability that non low-income students

in the classes of 2002, 2003, and 2004 (those that applied after the change in financial

aid) enrolled at NEU relative to those who applied earlier. As such, it measures the

impact of all aspects of the post-program environment that might have affected the
                                                                                           13


probability of accepting an offer of admission. The coefficient β2 reflects the difference

in probability of enrolling at NEU between students who were classified as low-income

and those who were not, for all classes. The coefficient β3, on the interaction between Pt

and LIit, reflects the incremental effect on the probability of accepting admission at NEU

for low-income students after the change in financial aid took effect. It is, therefore, our

coefficient of interest -- the difference-in-differences estimator for this program. The

identifying assumption is that the change in financial aid policy did not affect the

enrollment rates of non-low-income students.

       The specification in equation (6) implicitly assumes that the effect of the new

program was the same for each class. We also estimate an alternative specification in

which we allow the effect of the program to vary by class:

                     E it = F[α´ + Ctβ1t + LIitβ2´+ (Ct*LI it) β3t + X it γ´]             (7)

where Ct is a set of binary variables that take a value of one if a student is in a particular

class, and zero otherwise (the omitted class is 1999), and Ct * LI it is a set of interactions

between the class effects and a dichotomous variable indicating whether the student was

low-income, and the other notation is as defined above. Each of these interactions shows,

for the respective class, the difference in the probability of acceptance between low-

income students in that class and the other students, ceteris paribus. This specification

contains no single regression coefficient that summarizes the effect of the program. We

therefore estimate the effect of the program by computing the average of the coefficients

of the interaction terms (β3t) during the program period (i.e., for the classes of 2002,
                                                                                                     14


2003, and 2004), and compare it to the average for the classes in the years before the

program.16 The difference between the averages is the net program effect.



V.         Results

A.         Descriptive Statistics

           Table 1 exhibits mean student characteristics over the entire sample period.

These statistics apply to admitted U.S. citizens who applied regular decision, not early

action or early decision. We present statistics on income status, financial aid status, sex,

census division of residence, ethnicity, whether the student was a recruited athlete, and

the student’s academic and non-academic ratings as assigned by the admissions office.

The academic rating was based on factors such as high school grades, SAT scores, prior

experience with graduates of the same high school, and teacher recommendations. An

academic rating of A was given to students who were best-prepared academically (e.g.,

with high grades and high SAT scores); an academic rating of E was given to the least

prepared students. The non-academic rating was determined by a variety of attributes

such as leadership, athletic or artistic ability, and volunteer work. The non-academic

ratings also ranged from A to E. We report means of the various student characteristics

broken down by whether the student was low-income (again retroactively applying the

post-change definition) and by whether the student enrolled.

           Ninety-eight percent of the admitted low-income students in our analysis sample

were awarded financial aid,17 compared to only 43 percent of non-low-income students.

Further, relative to high-income students, low-income students had on average lower


16
     Weighting this average by sample sizes in each year has no substantial effect on the results.
17
     The remaining two percent of students had substantial assets despite low income.
                                                                                                         15


admissions ratings (both academic and non-academic), were less likely to be athletes and

alumni children, and were more likely to be minorities. (Throughout our analysis, we

classify students as minority if they identified themselves as African-American, Hispanic,

or Native American. We do not classify Asian students as minority.) The fraction of

minority students in our sample is quite high, approximately one-fourth of the overall

sample and increasing to nearly one-third by the end of the analysis period, as shown in

Table 2. This is higher than the overall fraction of minority students at NEU, as minority

students were relatively more likely to apply regular decision, and hence to be included in

our analysis sample.

         Table 2 contains time series data on key characteristics of NEU students in our

analysis sample. Since the early 1990s, the percentage of admitted students who were

low-income has ranged from about 8 to 12 percent; the percentage of enrolled students

who were low-income has ranged from 7 to 14 percent.18 The fraction of admitted and

enrolled students receiving financial aid has ranged between 45 and 58 percent. Over

time, the percentages of females and minorities have increased. Both the academic and

nonacademic ratings of the classes have improved.19 Further, smaller proportions of the

class have been recruited athletes.

         Aggregate yield rate data from the classes of 1992 through 2004 are summarized

in Table 3. The first column indicates that yield rates at NEU increased over time,

starting at about 55 percent in the early 1990s and ending at 72 percent for the class of

2004. As noted in Section IV, we focus on students who went through the regular

admission process. Since early decision students were committed to enroll, and early

18
  These calculations use the national-median based low-income definition to all classes, retroactively for
those earlier than the class of 2002.
                                                                                                  16


action students were very likely to do so, the yield rates for students admitted under

regular admission were lower than those for all admitted students, and although they also

increased, the trend was been at a substantially slower rate (from 47 percent in the class

of 1992 to 53 percent in the class of 2004).

           The next two columns show the yield rates by income status, again imposing the

1998 definition of “low-income” on all classes. For convenience, these rates are graphed

in the upper panel of Figure 1. At the beginning of the period, the yield rate for low-

income students was below that for students who were not, but by the end of the sample

period, the situation was reversed. Enrollments of African-American, Hispanic, and

Native American (“minority”) students have been a matter of special concern at NEU and

a number of other institutions, so in the last two columns (and the lower panel of Figure

1) we show yield rates among minorities.

           Figure 1 suggests that the difference in yield rates between low-income and not-

low-income students has widened since the change in the financial aid program,

suggesting that the change in financial aid composition had a sizeable impact on the

matriculation of low-income students.                   However, the figure also highlights some

difficulties with this conclusion. First, note that the yield rates for classes in the early

1990s were quite a bit lower than those for the last three classes, the “treatment” group.

Hence, if we visually compare the last three classes with their predecessors as a group, it

appears that the yield rates increased during the program period. On the other hand,

suppose that we choose to make the comparison group only the four classes before the

program was introduced. In this case, the answer from visual inspection is no longer

quite so clear.

19
     The nonacademic ratings for the class of 1992 are on a different scale than other classes.
                                                                                           17


       In the same way, we cannot know whether the unusually low yield among low-

income students for the class of 2001 reflected a permanent change in the yield rates that

would have continued had NEU not changed its financial aid policy, or whether it was a

transitory change. If the yield for the class of 2001 reflected a permanent change, then it

makes sense to use it as a base from which to evaluate the financial aid program. In

contrast, if the yield for the class of 2001 reflected a transitory change, then its inclusion

in the analysis will artificially inflate the estimated impact of the program.

       One possibility is that the patterns in Figure 1 are driven by changes in student

characteristics over time. To investigate this issue, in Figure 2 we show the time series in

yield rates adjusted for student characteristics. (The adjustments are based on a probit

regression that controls for race, gender, total size of financial aid award, alumni child,

region of permanent residence, recruited athlete, and both academic and nonacademic

rankings for admission.)20     While the regression-adjusted variation in yield rates is

somewhat smaller than the unadjusted, the patterns do not change enough to resolve the

ambiguities just discussed. In short, the time series pattern of yield rates raises the

possibility that our substantive results may be sensitive to the choice of comparison

classes. Our statistical analysis explicitly takes this possibility into account.

       Another concern is that the yield rates among different income groups may have

moved differently over time for reasons that have nothing to do with the financial aid

practices of NEU. Of course, we cannot know what would have happened at NEU if it

had not changed its policy. However, we can compare the time series on yield rates at

NEU to the pattern at several similar universities in the Northeast. The Consortium on

Financing Higher Education (COFHE) provided us with data on overall yield rates and
                                                                                           18


yield rates among minorities at a group of similar universities; the COFHE data do not

allow us to disaggregate other schools’ yield rates by students’ incomes.21 The yield rate

data for these schools are summarized in Figure 3. Note that the yield data for NEU in

this figure differ from those in previous figures. In order to make the two panels of

Figure 3 fully comparable, we use the COFHE data for NEU as well, re-introducing the

early admissions and international students to the sample. Figure 3 suggests that NEU’s

peer institutions did not experience the dip in the yield rate that occurred in NEU’s class

of 2001. This is consistent with the notion that the dip at NEU was, in fact, transitory, for

if more fundamental forces were at work, NEU’s peer institutions would likely have

experienced a similar phenomenon.



B.         Multivariate Analysis

           1.       Overall Results

           Column (1) of Table 4 shows the results from estimating equation (6) without

individual covariates (Xit). The coefficient on the program variable indicates that during

the period it has been in effect, the yield rate for non-low-income students was 6.6

percentage points higher than previously, an increase that is statistically significant at the

5 percent level. The coefficient on the interaction term indicates that the probability of a

low-income student accepting the offer was 4.7 percentage points higher than that,

although the difference is not statistically significant. Hence, in this basic model, we

cannot detect a statistically discernible effect of the program on the yield of low-income

students.


20
     This regression is reported as column (4) of Table 4.
21
     For consistency we have again excluded Asians from our definition of minority.
                                                                                                        19


        As shown in Table 2, the composition of the admitted students changed

substantially during the program period. Thus, in column (2) of Table 4 we control for a

variety of individual characteristics. All of the variables are dichotomous and familiar

from Table 1 except for the student’s financial aid award, which reflects the value (in

1999 dollars) of the student’s total financial aid from all sources. Controlling for the size

of the package allows us to focus on the effect of the composition of the package.22

Women were 2.6 percentage points less likely to accept an offer than men; alumni

children were 15.5 percentage points more likely than their non-alumni counterparts to do

so. As both academic and nonacademic ratings increased, the probability of accepting an

offer fell.     Recruited athletes were 8.4 percentage points more likely to accept an

admissions offer; minority students were less likely to accept an offer than were non-

minorities.23     The difference-in-differences estimate of the program effect, β3 from

equation (6), is smaller when the covariates are taken into account, 0.020 versus 0.047

from column (1), and is still not statistically different from zero.

        An important assumption in equation (6) is that the non-low-income group was

essentially homogeneous with respect to this program.                      However, students whose

family’s incomes fell within a small range above the national median income also had

their loans reduced, but not to zero. It might be inappropriate to include these students in

the comparison group. Hence, we re-estimated equation (6) including on the right-hand

side an indicator variable and an interaction with the program years for students whose




22
   If we use expected family contribution to control for family financial resources, we obtain substantially
similar results.
23
    We have also estimated specifications in which we interact academic rating with other characteristics
(such as race, whether athlete or child of alumni) with substantively similar results.
                                                                                                  20


incomes were greater than the national median but less than $57,000 (in 1996 dollars).24

As shown in column (3) of Table 4, the net program effect is essentially unchanged.

Thus, our results appear robust to whether or not middle-income students are included in

the comparison group.

            As noted above, the specification in equation (6) also implicitly assumes that the

effect of the new program was exactly the same for each class. In column (4) of Table 4

we allow the effect for low-income students to vary by class as described in equation (7).

The second figure in the column, the net program effect, is 0.023 with a standard error of

0.039. Again, this is essentially the same as the estimate of the program effect in column

(2). Hence, allowing for separate class effects has little impact on our assessment of the

impact of the program. We also note that the coefficients on the other covariates are

barely affected.

            Beginning with the class of 2000, two years before the financial aid policy

change, NEU switched from a non-binding early action program to a binding early-

decision program. If this change affected the composition of the regular-decision body of

students, one might be concerned that the exclusion of early admission students from our

analysis biases our results. In column (5) of Table 4 we reintroduce the early applicants

from all classes into our analysis and add controls for whether the student applied early

action/decision and whether the university followed an early action or early decision

policy in that year. The coefficient of interest becomes somewhat smaller, and remains

insignificantly different from zero (as well as insignificantly different from the previous

estimates). The estimated program effect falls because the indicator for early decision



24
     $57,000 is the cutoff that the financial aid office used in the first year of the program.
                                                                                            21


years (the classes of 2000-2004) captures some of the recent rise in yields. We conclude

that the change in early admission policy does not significantly affect our results.



       2.      Alternative Comparison Classes

       The models of Table 4 are estimated using the data for every class available to us.

However, as noted above, including all previous classes in the comparison group may be

inappropriate. In particular, the decision-making process of students admitted in the early

years of our sample might have been quite different from those of the students admitted

since 1998, perhaps because of differences in unobservable characteristics. An additional

concern mentioned earlier is that the yield rate among low-income students in the year

just prior to the adoption of the program may have been transitorily low.

       Because we have no compelling a priori reasons to view some years as more

suitable for inclusion in the comparison group than others, we estimate the model with

several different comparison groups. Table 5 shows the outcomes when we exclude the

class of 2001 (column (1)), the classes of 2000 and 2001 (column (2)), all classes before

1997 (column (3)), and all classes before 1997 as well as 2000 and 2001 (column (4)).

       As before, we focus on the coefficient on the interaction of the program and low-

income dichotomous variables. The overall results are insensitive to the choice of years

to include. The point estimates of the program effect range from 1.1 to 3.4 percentage

points, in the same ballpark as those in Table 4, and also are not statistically significant.



       3.      Comparisons with Peer Institutions
                                                                                                            22


         Another way to gauge the impact of NEU’s financial policy is to make some

comparisons with yield rates at its peer institutions. If there were no changes in NEU’s

yield rates relative to those of its peers, it would be consistent with our finding that the

program had a small effect (although other explanations, discussed in Section 5 below,

are also possible). To implement this idea, we did the following calculations. We

computed the change in yield rates at the peer institutions before and after the

introduction of NEU’s program. We then subtracted this figure from the comparable

change in NEU’s yield rate. This difference-in-differences was 3.9 percentage points

with a standard error of 3.2 percentage points.                      The estimate is not statistically

significant, suggesting that the program had only a small effect at NEU.

         In short, the finding that the program has no significant effect is robust to

alternative specifications of the comparison group and alternative data sources.



         4.       Effects by Race and Ethnicity

         Much of the discussion of financial aid packages for low-income students has

focused on recruiting minorities.             In this context, an important question is whether

minorities are similar to the sample as a whole with respect to their responsiveness to

changes in financial aid packages. Thus, we estimate the models from Table 4 with the

sample restricted to minority students. This analysis compares the change in yield among

low-income minorities to the change in yield among non-low-income minorities – we

look for an effect of the program by low-income status within the minority population,

not for an effect of the program on minorities as a group.25


25
  Twenty-three percent of minority students were low-income, higher than the 10 percent of the overall
sample, but still a relatively small fraction. As a result, the program did not have any significant effect on
                                                                                                           23


         The results are presented in Table 6. The key finding is that the program effect

was between 8 and 10 percentage points, and that this effect is significant at about the 10

percent level. This is a large effect relative to the base yield of 40 percent for minorities

before the class of 2002. In the specification that does not control for ethnic differences

within the minority sample (column (2)), the significance level is 0.079; when we include

dichotomous variables for Hispanic and Native American origins, the significance level is

0.106. As in column (3) of Table 4, column (4) shows that excluding middle-income

students from the control group does not affect our coefficient of interest. Including the

early admissions students, as in column (5) of Table 4, the significance level improves to

better than 5%.

         As noted above, we have COFHE data on minority yield rates from several of

NEU’s peer institutions. As a second approach, we used these data to investigate how the

minority yield rate changed at NEU relative to its peers. The difference-in-differences

estimate is 5.5 percentage points with a standard error of 2.0 percentage points, an

estimate that is significant at the 10% level. Thus, yield rates among minorities increased

at NEU relative to its peer institutions after the program was introduced. This result is

consistent with our findings based on NEU data alone.

         We conclude that, on average, the program had a larger impact on low-income

minorities – the point estimate is more than twice that for the entire sample, while its

standard error is not much bigger.26 This is consistent with Jackson [1990], who, using

an approach rather different from ours, found that in the decision to attend a college


the matriculation of minorities as a group relative to non-minorities (since over three-fourths of minorities
were unaffected by the policy change).
                                                                                                         24


African-Americans respond positively to grants but not significantly to loans, and that

African-Americans are about twice as responsive to grants as whites.27



         5.       Discussion

         Why didn’t NEU’s change from loans to grants have a statistically discernable

impact on the overall yield rate among low-income applicants, as we would have

expected given equation (4)? One possibility is that admitted students were not fully

aware of the program. However, the program did have a significant (at the 10 percent

level) effect among minorities, and we have no reason to believe that minorities were

better informed about the program. Additionally, even if students were not aware of the

program when they decided to apply, they usually received financial aid details at the

same time as the admission offer, so they should have known how the program affected

them at the time they made their enrollment decisions.

         Second, in our theoretical framework and interpretation of the results, we

implicitly assume that NEU’s peer institutions did not also change their financial aid

policies in response to NEU’s policy change. However, it is possible that we do not find

an overall effect of the financial aid change on NEU’s yield rate because peer institutions

effectively mimicked NEU’s new financial aid policy. We can say definitively that no

peer institution officially announced a change in its policy in response to NEU. While

26
   Along the lines of Table 5, we checked the robustness of this finding to the inclusion of various classes.
The effect is not very sensitive to these changes. To the extent there is a change, the impact becomes larger
when we exclude the earlier classes.
27
   There are substantial differences between Jackson’s study and our own. His estimates are based on a
sample of applicants to all colleges (High School and Beyond) as opposed to applicants to a single college.
Further, Jackson models the probability of attending college as a function of the presence of loans or grants
as opposed to examining a change in regime from loans to grants. Also, Jackson estimates separate effects
for blacks and Hispanics. We do not attempt to estimate separate effects because the number of Hispanics
                                                                                                        25


there is some anecdotal evidence that some institutions responded in an ad hoc manner, it

is not clear whether or not these responses amounted to a systematic change in their

programs.

        Additional data provided by COFHE allow us to approach this issue more

systematically. Figure 4 shows the average grant aid received by grant recipients at the

same set of other Northeastern universities used in Figure 3.28                        Had these other

universities responded to NEU’s financial aid policy change, their grant aid would have

increased for the classes of 2002 and 2003. However, average grant aid at the peer

institutions continued to follow its existing trend through this period.29 In addition, it is

evident that NEU provided slightly less grant aid than its peers until the class of 2001, but

provided more grant aid for all subsequent classes (thereby surpassing its peer institutions

at exactly the time it introduced its low-income loan reduction program). These data

provide further support for the assumption that NEU’s peer institutions did not

unofficially adopt NEU’s financial aid policy. We also note that the fact that we estimate

an effect for minority students suggests, at a minimum, that peer institutions did not fully

respond.

        Third, the change in financial aid (loan replacements of approximately $4,000 per

year) was fairly small relative to the average financial aid package of low-income

students – $25,734, of which an average of about $20,000 would have been grants in the


is low. However, the estimates computed using only the sample of African-Americans are not substantially
different from those that include Hispanics and Native Americans as well.
28
   We would have preferred to analyze average grant aid among low-income grant recipients.
Unfortunately, no such data are available. Unlike the administrative data from NEU, these data show the
actual award made, rather than the initial offer.
29
   An examination of the data institution by institution shows that this pattern holds for most of them
individually as well as in aggregate. To maintain confidentiality, we do not display these results. There is
one school which may have increased its grant aid for the class of 2003. However, this is the year in which
                                                                                                         26


absence of the loan-replacement program (the remainder being jobs).                        Perhaps this

incremental change was too small to have had a detectable effect on enrollment decisions.

Additionally, the underlying elasticity may be small.                 The combination of a small

treatment and a small elasticity may have made the program effect too small to estimate

precisely, particularly given the inherent noisiness of the process.

        In this context, it is useful to compare our results to other estimates of the effect

of financial aid on college attendance. Analyzing enrollment patterns at another “east

coast college,” van der Klaauw (2001) estimates that low-income students have an

enrollment elasticity with respect to college grants of 0.86. Table 7, below, shows the

predicted effect of NEU’s financial aid policy change using van der Klaauw’s estimate of

the behavioral parameter. The perceived equivalent increase in total aid corresponding to

a shift from loans to grants is hard to calculate, so we report a range of values: loans

valued at one-half, one-third, and one-quarter of the face value. For example, consider

the implications of van der Klaauw’s estimated elasticity of 0.86 assuming (a) NEU’s

base yield among pre-program low-income admits is 50%, (b) the pre-program base grant

is $20,000, and (c) the $4,000 shift from loans to grants is valued by students at $2,000

(on the high side of the previous literature). In this case, the predicted effect on yield

rates is an increase of 4.3 percentage points.30 This is not significantly different from our

estimated effect, from Table 4, column (3), of 2.3 percentage points with a standard error

of 3.8 percentage points.




NEU’s low-income yield showed the largest increase. If, in fact, a competitor increased its low-income
grant aid in that year, it does not seem to have greatly impacted NEU's yield.
                                                                                                            27


                                            Table 7
         Predicted Effect of NEU’s Policy Change Using van der Klaauw’s Estimated
                    Effects of Financial Aid on College Attendance

                             Predicted Percentage Point Change in NEU’s Low-Income Yield
Student values $1.00
                                                           Rate
     of loans at
                                                    [elasticity = 0.86]
          0.50                                              4.3
          0.33                                              5.7
          0.25                                              8.6


In short, while it is possible that NEU’s program had no effect on overall matriculation,

we cannot reject the possibility that it had an impact similar to that found in previous

analyses of enrollment decisions.

         A question remains, however, why the program appears to have had a larger

effect on the matriculation of minority applicants. One possibility is that the result is

attributable to economic resource differences, since family financial status is so highly

correlated with race and ethnicity. For three reasons, however, we do not believe that

family resources are the primary explanation for the differences by minority status. First,

our model controls for the total size of the financial aid package, which, as observed

above, is a one-dimensional index of a family’s overall financial position. Second, the

minorities affected by the loan-replacement program are not actually much poorer than

the whites so affected. Among low-income minority admits, the mean family income

was $24,177, only ten percent less than the mean among low-income whites of $26,836.

Plotting the income densities (not shown) reveals that the distributions are similar as well.

Third, recall that the basis of our estimates is a difference-in-differences comparison

between non-low-income and low-income students, within racial/ethnic groups. Among

30
  The calculation is as follows. By definition, if Y is the yield and A is the value of the aid package to the
student, the elasticity is (∆Y / Y) * (A / ∆A). Substituting into this expression, 0.86 = (∆Y / 0.5) *
                                                                                        28


the non-low-income students in our analysis sample who reported family income, the

mean income was $95,321 for minorities and $109,514 for non-minorities.31 Thus, the

difference in average incomes between low-income and non-low-income whites and

Asians is greater than the corresponding figure for minorities. If anything, this would

tend to bias our estimates towards finding a smaller effect among minorities. As a result,

we do not believe that a difference in resources explains the larger effect among

minorities.

        A second explanation for why the policy change had a larger impact on minority

students is that the pool of applicants from which NEU admitted students may have

changed after the new financial aid policies were instituted. As noted in Section II,

NEU’s admissions office reports that it did not change its recruitment strategies in the

first three years after the policy change. Nevertheless, the change in financial aid policy

may have induced some students who previously would not have considered NEU to

apply. If these students were more inclined to choose to enroll at NEU conditional on

acceptance (perhaps due to more limited alternative college options), then it is possible

that changes in the characteristics of the applicant pool led to changes in the admitted

pool, which led to changes in the yield rates.

        We address this possibility using data from the College Board on SAT test takers.

As discussed earlier, we model the student’s decision to have his or her SAT scores sent

to NEU using a model analogous to that in equation (6). Those who took the SAT after

January, 1998 are considered to have been potentially affected by the policy change,

while those who took the SAT before then are part of the comparison group. The results


($20,000 / $2,000). Solving, ∆Y = 0.043.
                                                                                                      29


are presented in Table 8. Overall, approximately 2.2 percent of SAT takers request to

have their scores sent to NEU.32 Without controlling for other covariates (column (1)),

low-income students who took the SAT after the announcement of the policy change

were no more likely to express interest in NEU than low-income students who took the

test earlier (the coefficient estimate is 0.003 percentage points with a p-value of 0.95).

Once one controls for student characteristics, as shown in column (2), low-income

students were 0.051 percentage points more likely to express interest in NEU after the

announcement of the policy change. This increase is a relatively small 2.3 percent of the

overall likelihood that a student expresses interest in NEU, although the effect is

statistically significant at the 5 percent level. The story for minority applicants, however,

is quite different as shown in columns (3) and (4). Low-income minority students who

took the SAT after the announcement were less likely to express interest in NEU,

although the effect essentially disappears once one controls for student characteristics.

        These results suggest that among low-income students, overall, there may have

been a small increase in interest in applying to NEU. However, there was no detectable

effect among minority applicants suggesting that a change in the applicant pool is

unlikely to explain the results in Table 6.

        A more compelling explanation for the greater impact among minorities is based

on differing perceptions between minorities and non-minorities about the burden of

financing college through loans. Such differences may be due to greater uncertainty




31
   The corresponding medians are $81,449 and $97,317, indicating that the difference in means is not
driven only by a small number of very high-income families.
32
   Appendix Figure 1 shows the percentage of students expressing interest in NEU, by the year they took
the SAT test.
                                                                                        30


among minorities about the future returns to college education, and hence ability to repay

loans. In this context, recall the result of our model in Section III,

                               δ2θ/δLδp = U'(B-L) – U'(G-L),                           (5)

where θ is the net advantage to attending NEU, L is loan payments, G is earnings on a

good job, B is earnings on a bad job, and p is the probability that the individual gets a

good job after college.

       Assuming that the marginal utility of income is decreasing, equation (5) is

negative, and the marginal disutility of loans increases as p decreases. Thus, those with a

lower value of p (and hence with lower expected future earnings) will be more averse to

financing their education through debt. That minorities may expect lower future earnings

than non-minorities is consistent with much of the empirical literature (e.g., Neal and

Johnson [1996]). A difference in expected future earnings therefore provides a plausible

explanation for why the effect of NEU’s change in financial aid policy was larger for

minority students.



VI.    Conclusion

       We examine a program instituted at a Northeastern university to replace loans

with grant aid for low-income students. We find the program increased the likelihood of

matriculation by low-income students by about 3 percentage points, although the effect is

not statistically significant. The effect among low-income minority students was between

8 and 10 percentage points and statistically significant at the 10 percent level. That the

program appears to have had a larger effect on minorities than non-minorities is

consistent with a lower expectation of post-college earnings among minorities. While it
                                                                                           31


is perilous to generalize on the basis of the experience of a single institution, an important

lesson emerges from our analysis: as in so many other areas of economics, expectations

can play an important role in the efficacy of programs and should be incorporated into

their initial design and analysis.
                                                                                   32


                                     References

Consortium on Financing Higher Education (COFHE). 1998. “Tuition, Student Budgets,
and Self-Help at the Consortium Institutions for Academic Year 1998-99.” (COFHE
Yellow Book), (June).

Digest of Education Statistics. 2000. (Washington, D.C.: Department of Health,
Education, and Welfare, Education Division, National Center for Education Statistics).

Dynarski, Susan. 1999. “Does Aid Matter? Measuring the Effect of Student Aid on
College Attendance and Completion,” NBER Working Paper #7422.

Dynarski, Susan. 2000. “Hope for Whom? Financial Aid for the Middle Class and Its
Impact on College Attendance.” National Tax Journal 53(3), Sept 2000 part 2: 629-661.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Daniel R. Sherman. 1984. “Optimal Financial Aid Policies for
a Selective University.” Journal of Human Resources 19(2): 202-30.

Feldstein, Martin. 1992.    “College Scholarship Rules and Private Saving,” NBER
Working Paper #4032.

Hoenack, Stephen. 1971. “The Efficient Allocation of Subsidies to Higher Education.”
American Economic Review, 61 (June): 302-311.

Jackson, Gregory A. 1990. “Financial Aid, College Entry, and Affirmative Action.”
American Journal of Education, August 1990, 523-550.

Kane, Thomas. 1994. “College Entry by Blacks since 1970: The Role of College Costs,
Family Background, and the Returns to Education.” The Journal of Political Economy,
102(5): 878-911.

Kane, Thomas. 1999. The Price of Admission: Rethinking How Americans Pay for
College. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.

Manski, Charles F. and David A. Wise. 1983. College Choice in America. Cambridge:
Harvard University Press.

McPherson, Michael S. and Morton Owen Schapiro. 1991a. Keeping College
Affordable: Government and Educational Opportunity. Washington, DC: The Brookings
Institution.

McPherson, Michael S. and Morton Owen Schapiro. 1991b. “Does Student Aid Affect
College Enrollment? New Evidence on a Persistent Controversy.” American Economic
Review 81(1): 309-318.
                                                                                     33


Moore, Robert L., A. H. Studenmund, and Thomas Slobko. 1991. “The Effect of the
Financial Aid Package on the Choice of a Selective College.” Economics of Education
Review, 10(4), 311-321.

Neal, Derek A. and William A. Johnson. 1996. “The Role of Premarket Factors in
Black-White Wage Differences.” Journal of Political Economy 104: 869-895.

Rouse, Cecilia Elena. 1994. “What to Do After High School: The Two-Year versus
Four-year College Enrollment Decision.” Choices and Consequences: Contemporary
Policy Issues in Education (Ronald G. Ehrenberg, editor) (Ithaca, NY: ILR Press).

Savoca, Elizabeth. 1991. “The Effect of Changes in the Composition of Financial Aid
on College Enrollments” Eastern Economic Journal 17(1): 109-121.

Schwartz, J. Brad. 1985. “Student Financial Aid and the College Enrollment Decision:
the Effects of Public and Private Grants and Interest Subsidies.” Economics of Education
Review. 4(2), 129-144.

U.S. Department of Education, “SFA [Student Financial Aid] Handbook,” 1997-1998,
1998-1999, and 1999-2000 versions. At http://ifap.ed.gov/csb_html/fsfabknew.htm

van der Klaauw, Wilbert. 1996. “A Regression-Discontinuity Evaluation of the Effect of
Financial Aid Offers on College Enrollment,” New York University mimeo, forthcoming
in International Economic Review, 2002.
                                            Table 1:
                              Means of Student Characteristics
             Regular Admission U.S. Citizens in the Graduating Classes of 1992-2004


                                          Admitted                            Enrolled
                                          Not low-       Low-                 Not low-     Low-
                                  All      income      income          All    income     income
Low-income                      0.101       0.000       1.000        0.109     0.000      1.000
Financial Aid Recipient         0.487       0.432       0.983        0.515     0.457      0.989
Financial Aid Applicant         0.618       0.576       1.000        0.642     0.598      1.000
Female                          0.470       0.470       0.473        0.448     0.448      0.454
Census Division:
    New England                 0.054       0.055       0.042        0.050     0.051     0.038
    Middle Atlantic             0.320       0.325       0.278        0.358     0.362     0.328
    East North Central          0.101       0.104       0.067        0.095     0.099     0.059
    West North Central          0.034       0.034       0.030        0.030     0.029     0.032
    South Atlantic              0.113       0.112       0.117        0.113     0.114     0.109
    East South Central          0.062       0.062       0.065        0.066     0.066     0.066
    West South Central          0.068       0.064       0.111        0.070     0.065     0.109
    Mountain                    0.034       0.032       0.048        0.030     0.028     0.047
    Pacific                     0.172       0.171       0.175        0.140     0.140     0.141
Academic Rating:
    A                           0.266       0.279       0.143        0.176     0.184     0.109
    B                           0.355       0.366       0.256        0.354     0.369     0.235
    C                           0.222       0.210       0.337        0.254     0.246     0.323
    D                           0.126       0.114       0.233        0.171     0.157     0.284
    E                           0.022       0.021       0.030        0.038     0.037     0.047
Non Academic Rating:
    A                           0.022       0.023       0.012        0.023     0.024     0.013
    B                           0.215       0.222       0.157        0.246     0.254     0.186
    C                           0.433       0.439       0.376        0.436     0.441     0.391
    D                           0.301       0.288       0.413        0.271     0.260     0.366
    E                           0.020       0.017       0.041        0.017     0.014     0.042
Admissions Ratings Missing      0.009       0.010       0.001        0.007     0.007     0.003
Athlete                         0.153       0.157       0.117        0.228     0.236     0.169
Alumni child                    0.065       0.071       0.017        0.091     0.100     0.015
African-American                0.146       0.129       0.297        0.118     0.100     0.263
Hispanic                        0.102       0.085       0.257        0.095     0.078     0.230
Native American                 0.010       0.008       0.021        0.011     0.008     0.029
Asian                           0.152       0.158       0.101        0.121     0.125     0.087
Minority                        0.257       0.221       0.576        0.223     0.186     0.522

Number of Observations           13701       12322       1379          6558    5842       716
Note: Minority includes African-American, Hispanic, and Native American.
                                                                     Table 2:
                                                     Time Series of Student Characteristics
                                      Regular Admission U.S. Citizens in the Graduating Classes of 1992-2004

                                                                    Proportion A or B1
                       Financial Financial                                                                       Median       Average
              Low-        Aid       Aid                             Acad.     Nonacad.               Alumni   Income of Aid Financial Aid       Cost of
  Class     income     Recipient applicant    Female    Minority    Rating     Rating     Athlete     Child     Applicants     Award2         Attendance
Admitted students
  1992       0.096       0.449       0.571     0.395      0.200      0.552      0.508      0.173     0.086       $77,111         $11,037        $27,729
  1993       0.117       0.480       0.603     0.439      0.229      0.518      0.198      0.188     0.078       $76,330         $12,262        $28,241
  1994       0.109       0.470       0.595     0.454      0.233      0.592      0.174      0.174     0.060       $79,229         $12,421        $28,553
  1995       0.088       0.473       0.612     0.453      0.247      0.568      0.176      0.181     0.076       $79,049         $12,575        $29,198
  1996       0.100       0.492       0.598     0.486      0.246      0.527      0.178      0.182     0.055       $78,404         $14,397        $30,102
  1997       0.098       0.486       0.615     0.462      0.280      0.612      0.201      0.157     0.050       $85,151         $13,768        $30,916
  1998       0.107       0.505       0.609     0.494      0.283      0.593      0.210      0.161     0.058       $84,543         $16,920        $31,544
  1999       0.094       0.522       0.643     0.493      0.282      0.616      0.195      0.163     0.049       $79,297         $18,651        $32,139
  2000       0.107       0.506       0.641     0.483      0.259      0.694      0.206      0.124     0.066       $82,554         $16,623        $31,856
  2001       0.083       0.479       0.654     0.480      0.253      0.690      0.247      0.123     0.060       $91,620         $16,234        $33,081
  2002       0.096       0.534       0.656     0.510      0.284      0.722      0.233      0.111     0.062       $88,947         $19,479        $33,780
  2003       0.110       0.479       0.656     0.498      0.277      0.774      0.243      0.110     0.069       $94,531         $16,750        $34,180
  2004       0.098       0.478       0.627     0.519      0.314      0.735      0.277      0.094     0.071       $92,018         $18,372        $34,171
Enrolled students
  1992        0.102      0.454       0.570     0.395      0.162      0.465      0.511      0.249     0.117       $73,270         $13,701        $27,729
  1993        0.122      0.481       0.593     0.431      0.185      0.386      0.202      0.273     0.132       $73,420         $13,970        $28,241
  1994        0.134      0.520       0.644     0.420      0.225      0.483      0.195      0.259     0.086       $77,548         $14,676        $28,553
  1995        0.070      0.493       0.628     0.415      0.189      0.439      0.215      0.280     0.122       $80,959         $14,232        $29,198
  1996        0.105      0.547       0.649     0.440      0.200      0.425      0.211      0.275     0.092       $72,731         $16,857        $30,102
  1997        0.113      0.547       0.670     0.414      0.234      0.496      0.254      0.262     0.082       $82,374         $15,980        $30,916
  1998        0.113      0.551       0.632     0.472      0.247      0.490      0.253      0.251     0.069       $80,587         $18,355        $31,544
  1999        0.101      0.575       0.695     0.478      0.268      0.518      0.223      0.243     0.066       $78,200         $19,210        $32,139
  2000        0.127      0.532       0.667     0.478      0.236      0.604      0.230      0.187     0.076       $79,516         $17,779        $31,856
  2001        0.079      0.484       0.662     0.445      0.211      0.630      0.284      0.184     0.086       $89,644         $16,569        $33,081
  2002        0.095      0.556       0.673     0.496      0.250      0.649      0.264      0.163     0.071       $88,623         $20,136        $33,780
  2003        0.144      0.499       0.672     0.457      0.247      0.698      0.300      0.171     0.079       $86,343         $19,286        $34,180
  2004        0.108      0.476       0.616     0.517      0.271      0.679      0.318      0.144     0.093       $89,611         $19,587        $34,171

Notes: Only includes non-early admission U.S. citizens. Minority students include those who self-report as African-American, Hispanic, or Native
American. All dollar amounts are in 1999 dollars. The cost of attendance is the university's published total of tuition, fees, room and board, and
additional expenses. Whether or not a student is categorized as "low-income" is defined retroactively according to the post-2002 definition (see text).
1
  "A" is the highest admissions rating; "B" is the second highest (see text). Non-academic rating is 1992 is coded differently and is not comparable.
2
   Among financial aid recipients.
                                             Table 3:
                   Yield Rates at NEU for the Graduating Classes of 1992-2004



                                                       Regular admission US citizens
                                                               All                    Minority
                                                      Not low-       Low-       Not low-      Low-
Graduating Class           All admits       All       income       income       income      income
   1992                     54.59%        47.30%      47.01%       50.00%       34.29%     53.57%
   1993                     54.81%        46.75%      46.50%       48.65%       37.44%     38.46%
   1994                     55.93%        46.53%      45.26%       56.83%       40.19%     58.02%
   1995                     55.93%        42.91%      43.76%       34.04%       35.61%     23.33%
   1996                     56.34%        43.02%      42.81%       44.86%       33.50%     39.68%
   1997                     57.82%        43.88%      43.17%       50.46%       35.48%     41.27%
   1998                     58.98%        45.66%      45.34%       48.28%       39.48%     41.10%
   1999                     62.96%        48.55%      48.18%       52.13%       46.05%     46.30%
   2000                     68.80%        51.26%      50.12%       60.78%       44.81%     52.38%
   2001                     68.13%        50.32%      50.52%       48.10%       41.03%     45.65%
   2002                     71.86%        54.69%      54.76%       54.02%       46.41%     55.10%
   2003                     70.95%        52.89%      50.85%       69.46%       40.54%     70.37%
   2004                     72.52%        53.12%      52.53%       58.54%       44.23%     51.85%

Average                     61.50%        47.87%       47.41%     51.92%         39.87%      47.10%
Number of Observations       24805         13701        12322      1379           2729         794

Minority students include those who self-report as African-American, Hispanic, or Native American.
                                                Table 4:
                             Probit Analysis of Enrollment Decision at NEU


                                           Regular Admission U.S. Citizens
                                                            Add Middle-                      Reintroduce
                                            Add Student       Income       Allow for Class      Early
                               No Controls Characteristics    Controls         Effects        Applicants
                                   (1)            (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)
Low-income                        0.036          -0.038          -0.034         -0.052          0.004
                                 (0.016)        (0.019)         (0.020)        (0.057)         (0.040)
Program                           0.066          0.168           0.166
                                 (0.011)        (0.013)         (0.013)

Program * Low-income              0.047          0.020           0.023
                                 (0.036)        (0.038)         (0.038)
Net program effect                                                              0.023           0.010
                                                                               (0.039)         (0.028)

Financial Aid Award/103                          0.006           0.006          0.005           0.004
($1999)                                         (0.001)         (0.001)        (0.001)         (0.000)
Female                                           -0.026          -0.026         -0.029          -0.024
                                                (0.009)         (0.009)        (0.009)         (0.007)
Alumni Child                                     0.155           0.155          0.150           0.146
                                                (0.019)         (0.019)        (0.019)         (0.014)
Academic Rating:
   A                                             -0.644          -0.648         -0.698          -0.600
                                                (0.040)         (0.040)        (0.041)         (0.032)
   B                                             -0.423          -0.423         -0.454          -0.416
                                                (0.039)         (0.039)        (0.040)         (0.031)
   C                                             -0.265          -0.265         -0.289          -0.266
                                                (0.038)         (0.038)        (0.039)         (0.030)
   D                                             -0.152          -0.153         -0.166          -0.145
                                                (0.039)         (0.039)        (0.039)         (0.031)
Non-academic Rating:
   A                                             -0.206          -0.206         -0.218          -0.225
                                                (0.045)         (0.045)        (0.046)         (0.032)
   B                                             -0.057          -0.057         -0.060          -0.072
                                                -(0.006)        (0.034)        (0.035)         (0.024)
   C                                             -0.006          -0.006         -0.007          -0.022
                                                (0.032)         (0.033)        (0.033)         (0.023)
   D                                              0.006           0.007          0.008          -0.010
                                                (0.033)         (0.033)        (0.033)         (0.023)
Admissions Ratings Missing                       -0.565          -0.566         -0.563          -0.581
                                                (0.068)         (0.068)        (0.069)         (0.046)
Recruited Athlete                                0.084           0.084          0.078          0.038
                                (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.017)    (0.013)
African-American                 -0.370    -0.370    -0.385     -0.339
                                (0.017)   (0.017)   (0.017)    (0.013)
Latino                           -0.263    -0.263    -0.276     -0.226
                                (0.028)   (0.028)   -(0.276)   (0.023)
Mexican                          -0.300    -0.300    -0.314     -0.270
                                (0.023)   (0.023)   (0.024)    (0.019)
Other Hispanic                   -0.097    -0.098    -0.099     -0.107
                                (0.043)   (0.043)   (0.043)    (0.029)
Native American                  -0.145    -0.145    -0.161     -0.174
                                (0.047)   (0.047)   (0.047)    (0.040)
Asian                            -0.047    -0.047    -0.053     -0.056
                                (0.013)   (0.013)   (0.014)    (0.010)
Middle Income                             (0.009)
                                          (0.021)
Middle Income * Program                   (0.023)
                                          (0.044)
Graduating Class
   1992                                              -0.087     -0.074
                                                    (0.024)    (0.017)
   1993                                              -0.084     -0.076
                                                    (0.024)    (0.017)
   1994                                              -0.088     -0.058
                                                    (0.024)    (0.017)
   1995                                              -0.102     -0.073
                                                    (0.025)    (0.017)
   1996                                              -0.092     -0.063
                                                    (0.025)    (0.017)
   1997                                              -0.074     -0.043
                                                    (0.024)    (0.017)
   1998                                              -0.054     -0.038
                                                    (0.024)    (0.017)
   2000                                              0.056       --
                                                    (0.025)
   2001                                              0.053      -0.010
                                                    (0.025)    (0.020)
   2002                                              0.129      0.058
                                                    (0.025)    (0.020)
   2003                                              0.106      0.035
                                                    (0.026)    (0.020)
   2004                                              0.138      0.071
                                                    (0.026)    (0.020)
Low-income * Graduating Class
   1992                                              0.051     -0.020
                                                                                      (0.074)         (0.053)
   1993                                                                                0.010           -0.054
                                                                                      (0.073)         (0.052)
   1994                                                                                0.152           0.089
                                                                                      (0.074)         (0.053)
   1995                                                                                -0.106          -0.132
                                                                                      (0.082)         (0.055)
   1996                                                                                0.012           -0.055
                                                                                      (0.078)         (0.054)
   1997                                                                                0.036           -0.038
                                                                                      (0.077)         (0.054)
   1998                                                                                0.004           0.014
                                                                                      (0.076)         (0.055)
   2000                                                                                0.040           -0.039
                                                                                      (0.079)         (0.058)
   2001                                                                                -0.065          -0.102
                                                                                      (0.083)         (0.060)
   2002                                                                                -0.066          -0.089
                                                                                      (0.081)         (0.059)
   2003                                                                                0.163           0.050
                                                                                      (0.081)         (0.058)
   2004                                                                                0.019           -0.042
                                                                                      (0.084)         (0.059)
Applied early action/decision                                                                           0.425
                                                                                                      (0.008)
Early decision year                                                                                     0.135
                                                                                                      (0.019)

Census Division dummies                No              Yes             Yes             Yes             Yes

Log Likelihood                     -9457.319       -8444.490        -8444.121       -8376.591      -13023.924
Number of Observations               13701           13701            13701           13701          24805
Base Probability                     0.479           0.479            0.479           0.479           0.615

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Coefficients reported are marginal effects.
The net program effect in columns (4) and (5) is calculated as the average of the Class * Low-income
interactions after the policy change (2002-2004) minus the average of the interactions before the policy change.
The base probability is the predicted probability of enrollment evaluated at the mean student characteristics.
Class of 2000 effect is omitted in column (5) because of colinearity with program and early decision year
                                       Table 5:
                                 Alternative Samples


                                   Sample Excludes the Specified Graduation Classes
                                                         All Classes Before Pre-1997, 2000,
                              2001      2000 and 2001           1997               2001
                               (1)            (2)                (3)                (4)
Low-income                    -0.034         -0.036            -0.035            -0.037
                             (0.019)        (0.020)           (0.027)           (0.034)
Program                       0.180          0.194             0.129             0.167
                             (0.013)        (0.013)           (0.014)           (0.016)
Program * Low-income          0.011          0.012             0.034             0.024
                             (0.038)        (0.039)           (0.042)           (0.046)
Financial Aid Award/103       0.006          0.006             0.005             0.006
($1999)                      (0.001)        (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)
Female                        -0.025         -0.029            -0.026            -0.027
                             (0.009)        (0.010)           (0.012)           (0.014)
Alumni Child                  0.149          0.158             0.112             0.110
                             (0.020)        (0.021)           (0.026)           (0.030)
Academic Rating:
   A                          -0.657         -0.661            -0.730            -0.705
                             (0.041)        (0.042)           (0.075)           (0.080)
   B                          -0.427         -0.426            -0.492            -0.465
                             (0.040)        (0.040)           (0.074)           (0.078)
   C                          -0.263         -0.262            -0.334            -0.303
                             (0.039)        (0.039)           (0.073)           (0.078)
   D                          -0.148         -0.145            -0.229            -0.193
                             (0.039)        (0.040)           (0.074)           (0.078)
Non-academic Rating:
   A                          -0.226         -0.232            -0.204            -0.244
                             (0.047)        (0.049)           (0.060)           (0.070)
   B                          -0.066         -0.072            -0.038            -0.061
                             (0.035)        (0.037)           (0.046)           (0.053)
   C                          -0.015         -0.024            0.001             -0.031
                             (0.034)        (0.035)           (0.044)           (0.051)
   D                          -0.001         -0.014            0.010             -0.028
                             (0.034)        (0.036)           (0.044)           (0.051)
Admissions Ratings Missing    -0.567         -0.562            -0.697            -0.659
                             (0.069)        (0.070)           (0.189)           (0.192)
Recruited Athlete             0.082          0.080             0.101             0.105
                             (0.017)        (0.018)           (0.024)           (0.028)
African-American              -0.375         -0.373            -0.379            -0.374
                             (0.018)        (0.018)           (0.023)           (0.026)
Latino                        -0.276         -0.278            -0.262            -0.279
                             (0.029)        (0.031)           (0.038)           (0.044)
Mexican                                  -0.309      -0.314      -0.323      -0.340
                                        (0.024)     (0.025)     (0.030)     (0.035)
Other Hispanic                           -0.117      -0.125      -0.067      -0.098
                                        (0.044)     (0.045)     (0.051)     (0.056)
Native American                          -0.156      -0.159      -0.174      -0.188
                                        (0.049)     (0.051)     (0.056)     (0.063)
Asian                                    -0.050      -0.054      -0.040      -0.045
                                        (0.014)     (0.015)     (0.017)     (0.020)
Census Division Dummies Included?         Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes

Number of Observations                   12749       11799       7700        5798
Log Likelihood                         -7825.920   -7214.539   -4754.616   -3549.307
Base Probability                         0.477       0.474       0.502       0.497

Notes: See notes to Table 4.
Includes only regular admission U.S. citizens
                                                 Table 6:
                     Probit Analysis of Enrollment Decision at NEU among Minorities


                                              Regular Admission U.S. Citizens
                                                                      Add Middle-   Allow for   Reintroduce
                                          Add Student                   Income       Class         Early
                             No Controls Characteristics   Add Race    Controls      Effects     Applicants
                                 (1)           (2)            (3)         (4)          (5)          (6)
Low-income                      0.051         -0.084         -0.092      -0.115      -0.145        -0.101
                               (0.023)       (0.026)        (0.026)     (0.030)     (0.076)       (0.071)
Program                         0.054         0.116          0.118       0.108
                               (0.022)       (0.024)        (0.024)     (0.027)

Program * Low-income            0.098         0.089          0.082       0.090
                               (0.049)       (0.051)        (0.051)     (0.052)
Net program effect                                                                   0.081         0.100
                                                                                    (0.052)       (0.049)

Financial Aid Award/103                       0.008          0.008       0.009       0.008         0.007
($1999)                                      (0.001)        (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)       (0.001)
Female                                        0.006          0.010       0.010       0.006         0.002
                                             (0.018)        (0.018)     (0.018)     (0.018)       (0.017)
Alumni Child                                  0.157          0.155       0.156       0.149         0.126
                                             (0.074)        (0.074)     (0.074)     (0.074)       (0.065)
Academic Rating:
   A                                          -0.533         -0.601      -0.605      -0.674        -0.644
                                             (0.081)        (0.082)     (0.083)     (0.084)       (0.076)
   B                                          -0.474         -0.500      -0.504      -0.574        -0.587
                                             (0.070)        (0.071)     (0.071)     (0.073)       (0.066)
   C                                          -0.359         -0.364      -0.368      -0.434        -0.455
                                             (0.069)        (0.069)     (0.069)     (0.071)       (0.065)
   D                                          -0.199         -0.197      -0.200      -0.243        -0.258
                                             (0.069)        (0.069)     (0.070)     (0.071)       (0.064)
Non-academic Rating:
   A                                          -0.177         -0.218      -0.221      -0.226        -0.168
                                             (0.119)        (0.122)     (0.122)     (0.124)       (0.103)
   B                                          -0.076         -0.076      -0.076      -0.093        -0.078
                                             (0.053)        (0.053)     (0.054)     (0.055)       (0.050)
   C                                          -0.041         -0.036      -0.036      -0.046        -0.043
                                             (0.046)        (0.047)     (0.047)     (0.047)       (0.043)
   D                                          -0.029         -0.017      -0.018      -0.016        -0.024
                                             (0.046)        (0.046)     (0.046)     (0.046)       (0.042)
Admissions Ratings Missing                    -0.050         -0.029      -0.040      -0.077        -0.718

                                             (0.304)        (0.308)     (0.308)     (0.307)       (0.136)
Recruited Athlete                0.199     0.189     0.186      0.183     0.130
                                (0.049)   (0.049)   (0.049)    (0.050)   (0.045)
Latino                                     0.117     0.116      0.120     0.115
                                          (0.030)   (0.030)    (0.030)   (0.029)
Mexican                                    0.063     0.063      0.068     0.070
                                          (0.027)   (0.027)    (0.027)   (0.025)
Other Hispanic                             0.243     0.244      0.258     0.211
                                          (0.046)   (0.046)    (0.046)   (0.037)
Native American                            0.202     0.201      0.206     0.163
                                          (0.048)   (0.048)    (0.048)   (0.046)
Middle Income                                       -(0.057)   (0.018)
                                                     (0.032)   (0.021)
Middle Income * Program                             (0.049)    (0.024)
                                                    (0.061)    (0.044)
Graduating Class
   1992                                                        -0.058    -0.080
                                                               (0.051)   (0.047)
   1993                                                         -0.131    -0.170
                                                               (0.049)   (0.046)
   1994                                                         -0.063    -0.068
                                                               (0.049)   (0.045)
   1995                                                         -0.115    -0.100
                                                               (0.050)   (0.045)
   1996                                                         -0.112    -0.103
                                                               (0.050)   (0.045)
   1997                                                         -0.095    -0.084
                                                               (0.047)   (0.044)
   1998                                                         -0.056    -0.030
                                                               (0.048)   (0.045)
   2000                                                         0.045      --
                                                               (0.051)
   2001                                                         0.014     -0.066
                                                               (0.050)   (0.050)
   2002                                                         0.071     0.005
                                                               (0.049)   (0.049)
   2003                                                         0.066     0.006
                                                               (0.051)   (0.051)
   2004                                                         0.064     -0.002
                                                               (0.049)   (0.049)
Low-income * Graduating Class
   1992                                                         0.204     0.137
                                                               (0.107)   (0.098)
   1993                                                         0.034     0.075
                                                               (0.102)   (0.094)
   1994                                                        0.214     0.179
                                                                                         (0.100)       (0.093)
   1995                                                                                   -0.170        -0.178
                                                                                         (0.112)       (0.099)
   1996                                                                                   0.077         -0.012
                                                                                         (0.106)       (0.096)
   1997                                                                                   0.030         -0.032
                                                                                         (0.104)       (0.098)
   1998                                                                                   0.002         -0.058
                                                                                         (0.101)       (0.096)
   2000                                                                                   0.055         -0.030
                                                                                         (0.106)       (0.100)
   2001                                                                                   0.035         -0.006
                                                                                         (0.112)       (0.104)
   2002                                                                                   0.048         0.043
                                                                                         (0.110)       (0.104)
   2003                                                                                   0.275         0.220
                                                                                         (0.110)       (0.103)
   2004                                                                                   0.082         0.060
                                                                                         (0.108)       (0.102)
Applied early action/decision                                                                           0.525
                                                                                                       (0.029)
Early decision year                                                                                     0.113
                                                                                                       (0.047)


Census Division dummies            No            Yes            Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes

Log Likelihood                  -2375.878     -2205.500      -2180.132    -2178.570     -2148.199    -2585.493
Number of Observations            3523          3523           3523         3523          3523         4442
Base Probability                  0.415         0.409          0.407        0.407         0.406        0.460

Notes: Standard errors are in parentheses. Coefficients reported are marginal effects.
The omitted race category is African-American.
The net program effect in columns (5) and (6) is calculated as the average of the class * low-income interactions
after the policy change (2002-2004) minus the average of the interactions before the policy change.
The base probability is the predicted probability of enrollment evaluated at the mean student characteristics.
Class of 2000 effect is omitted in column (6) because of colinearity with program and early decision year
Table 8: Probit Analysis of Student Interest in NEU

                                     All Test-takers           Minority Test-takers
                                    (1)           (2)           (3)            (4)

Low-income                         -1.344        0.201          -0.976        0.157
                                  (0.025)      (0.016)         (0.034)      (0.020)
Took SAT after Jan. 1998           -0.155       -0.175          -0.044       -0.265
                                  (0.024)      (0.040)         (0.034)      (0.060)
Took SAT after Jan. 1998            0.003        0.051          -0.090       -0.002
  * Low-income                    (0.049)      (0.020)         (0.049)      (0.025)

Includes other covariates?          No          Yes              No           Yes
Log-likelihood                   -319570      -244776          -94755       -77103
Number of observations           3031573      3031573         1125231      1125231

Notes:
Marginal effects x 100 reported. Standard errors in parentheses.
Data from College Board. See text for description.
Dependent variable in all specifications is student submitted SAT scores to NEU.
Covariates are those listed in Appendix Table 1.
Weighted by weights generated by the College Board
Figure 1: Yield Rates among Regular Decision U.S. Citizens

All Students:

  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
                                                                                       Not low-income
  40%
                                                                                       Low-income
  30%
  20%
  10%
    0%
        92
        93
        94
        95
        96
        97
        98
        99
        00
        01
        02
        03
        04
      19
      19
      19
      19
      19
      19
      19
      19
      20
      20
      20
      20
      20
                                 Graduating Class



Minorities:

  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
                                                                                       Not low-income
  40%
                                                                                       Low-income
  30%
  20%
  10%
    0%
        92
        93
        94
        95
        96
        97
        98
        99
        00
        01
        02
        03
        04
      19
      19
      19
      19
      19
      19
      19
      19
      20
      20
      20
      20
      20




                                 Graduating Class


Notes:
Yield rate is the percentage of admitted students who enroll.
These calculations show only U.S. citizens who did not apply early action or early decision.
Minority is defined as Black, Hispanic, or Native American (self-reported).
Figure 2: Regression-Adjusted Yield Rates for Regular Decision U.S. Citizens
Controlling for student characteristics and total aid award



  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
                                                                              Not low-income
  40%
                                                                              Low-income
  30%
  20%
  10%
    0%
       92
       93
       94
       95
       96
       97
       98
       99
       00
       01
       02
       03
       04
     19
     19
     19
     19
     19
     19
     19
     19
     20
     20
     20
     20
     20                      Graduating Class


National-median based low-income codings, 1999 as base year
Low income rate for each class year computed as sum of low-income coefficient, class dummy
coefficient, class * low-income interaction, and base yield (1999 not low-income).
Not low-income rate for each class year computed as sum of class dummy coefficient and base yield
(1999 not low-income).
Yield rates adjusted using the marginal effects probit regression reported in Table 4 column 3
Figure 3: Yield Rates at Similar Universities
For minorities and for all students at seven other Northeastern universities



  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%                                                                                          Other Univ. Overall
                                                                                               Yield
  40%
                                                                                               Other Univ. Minority
  30%                                                                                          Yield
  20%
  10%
    0%
            1994

                   1995

                          1996

                                 1997

                                        1998

                                               1999

                                                       2000

                                                               2001

                                                                       2002

                                                                               2003

                                                                                       2004
                                   Graduating Class



  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
  40%                                                                                            NEU Overall Yield
  30%                                                                                            NEU Minority Yield
  20%
  10%
    0%
            1994

                   1995

                          1996

                                 1997

                                        1998

                                                1999

                                                        2000

                                                                2001

                                                                        2002

                                                                                2003

                                                                                        2004




                                    Graduating Class


Both panels, including NEU, from data provided by the Consortium on Financing Higher Education.
NEU data in this figure are not comparable to previous figures due to the inclusion of early admissions and
foreign students, included here for comparability with COFHE data from other universities.
Minority refers to African-American, Hispanic, and Native American students.
Figure 4: Average Grant Aid per Grant Recipient
For all students at NEU and seven other Northeastern universities


                    $24,000

                    $22,000

                    $20,000
  Current Dollars




                                                                                                           NEU grant aid

                    $18,000
                                                                                                           Other Univ.
                    $16,000                                                                                average grant

                    $14,000

                    $12,000

                    $10,000
                              1995

                                     1996

                                            1997

                                                   1998

                                                          1999

                                                                 2000

                                                                        2001

                                                                               2002

                                                                                      2003

                                                                                             2004

                                                                                                    2005
                                                     Graduating Class

Notes: Data from COFHE. See text for description.
                                            Appendix Table 1:
                           Means of Student Characteristics -- College Board Data

                                     Expressed interest in NEU          Did not express interest in NEU
                                             Not low-                              Not low-
                                    All      income Low-income           All        income Low-income
Plan to apply for financial aid    0.700      0.644         0.938       0.762        0.693         0.904
Family Income in $1000             80.31      93.11         26.17       60.76        77.88         25.54
Female                             0.469      0.460         0.506       0.554        0.535         0.592
Recentered SAT I Math              660.3      673.7         603.6       518.4        536.4         481.3
Recentered SAT I Verbal            652.3      665.2         597.6       517.6        534.1         483.7
Don't know if apply for aid        0.175      0.204         0.052       0.158        0.197         0.080
Grade 12 junior ROTC               0.007      0.005         0.013       0.012        0.009         0.019
Expect to play a sport             0.860      0.877         0.786       0.779        0.809         0.716
Income missing                     0.124      0.153         0.000       0.107        0.159         0.000
Financial aid missing              0.009      0.011         0.001       0.008        0.011         0.002
Sport missing                      0.072      0.062         0.114       0.111        0.094         0.144
After 1998                         0.363      0.362         0.365       0.372        0.371         0.375
Northeast                          0.075      0.080         0.051       0.088        0.092         0.080
Mid-Atlantic                       0.352      0.341         0.396       0.219        0.214         0.228
West North Central                 0.029      0.030         0.023       0.017        0.020         0.011
South-Atlantic                     0.176      0.178         0.169       0.240        0.233         0.256
East North Central                 0.094      0.100         0.067       0.101        0.112         0.079
Mountain                           0.031      0.031         0.034       0.036        0.039         0.032
East South Central                 0.021      0.022         0.019       0.017        0.019         0.013
West South Central                 0.072      0.067         0.094       0.107        0.101         0.121
State Missing                      0.000      0.000         0.000       0.000        0.000         0.000
Father's education
   Grade school                    0.012      0.004       0.042         0.020        0.006     0.049
   Some high school                0.018      0.007       0.064         0.043        0.019     0.092
   High school diploma             0.077      0.047       0.202         0.193        0.141     0.300
   Business school                 0.026      0.020       0.053         0.049        0.043     0.062
   Some college                    0.087      0.070       0.158         0.150        0.141     0.169
   Associate's degree              0.031      0.026       0.050         0.062        0.062     0.061
   Bachelor's degree               0.198      0.203       0.180         0.205        0.244     0.126
   Some graduate school            0.059      0.063       0.044         0.042        0.052     0.022
   Graduate degree                 0.462      0.533       0.162         0.193        0.256     0.064
Mother's education
   Grade school                    0.011      0.004       0.040         0.018        0.005     0.045
   Some high school                0.018      0.007       0.064         0.036        0.015     0.079
   High school diploma             0.103      0.075       0.223         0.226        0.184     0.312
   Business school                 0.029      0.023       0.054         0.052        0.045     0.065
   Some college                    0.114      0.099       0.179         0.174        0.163     0.196
   Associate's degree              0.061      0.055       0.084         0.091        0.092     0.088
   Bachelor's degree               0.261      0.278       0.189         0.189        0.224     0.117
   Some graduate school            0.083      0.090       0.050         0.052        0.064     0.028
   Graduate degree                 0.296      0.342       0.104         0.134        0.174     0.051
Father's ed missing                0.030      0.027       0.045         0.042        0.036     0.054
Mother's ed missing                0.023      0.026       0.014         0.027        0.032     0.018

Number of observations          61476         47170       14306        2970097      1834579   1135518
Note: Data from College Board. See text for description
Appendix Figure 1: Student Interest in NEU


                             Fraction Expressing Interest in NEU

  0.035

   0.03

  0.025

   0.02
                                                                                        Not low-income
  0.015                                                                                 Low-income


   0.01

  0.005

      0
           1993     1994     1995     1996     1997    1998     1999     2000
                                        Test Year



                      Fraction Expressing Interest in NEU (Minorities)

   0.03

  0.025

   0.02

                                                                                        Not low-income
  0.015
                                                                                        Low-income

   0.01

  0.005

      0
           1993     1994     1995     1996     1997    1998     1999     2000
                                        Test Year


Chart shows fraction of students taking SAT in each year who sent their test scores to NEU.
Data from the College Board. See text for more complete description.
