                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        FOOD INSECURITY AND PUBLIC ASSISTANCE


                                            George J. Borjas


                                          Working Paper 9236
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9236


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




I am grateful to Jonathan Gruber, Craig Gundersen, Daniel Hamermesh, Christopher Jencks, Lawrence Katz,
Robert LaLonde, Caroline Minter-Hoxby, Mark Nord, Stephen Trejo, James Ziliak, and a referee for
providing helpful suggestions on earlier drafts of this paper. This research was funded by a grant from the
Economic Research Service, US Department of Agriculture. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by George J. Borjas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Food Insecurity and Public Assistance
George J. Borjas
NBER Working Paper No. 9236
October 2002
JEL No. I38, J61

                                        ABSTRACT

          This paper examines if welfare programs reduce the probability that vulnerable household
experience food deprivation because of financial constraints. Although the 1996 welfare reform
legislation specifically limited the eligibility of immigrant households to receive assistance, many
states chose to protect their immigrant populations by offering state-funded aid to these groups. I

exploit these changes in eligibility rules to examine the link between food insecurity and public

assistance. The evidence indicates that a 10 percentage point cut in the fraction of the population that
receives public assistance increases the fraction of food-insecure households by about 5 percentage
points.


George J. Borjas
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu
                                                        2


                              Food Insecurity and Public Assistance

                                            George J. Borjas*

I. Introduction

        The rapid growth of the welfare state spawned a large literature examining the factors

that determine whether households participate in particular programs, and investigating the

programs’ impact on various social and economic outcomes, such as labor supply, household

income, and family structure.1 To a large extent, this literature identifies the behavioral

distortions caused by these programs, and then calculates various measures of the costs of the

distortions, such as reduced work activity or an increased rate of marriage dissolution.

        In contrast, relatively few studies attempt to measure the benefits from these programs.

Presumably, the social goal of enacting programs that provide housing assistance is to upgrade

housing conditions among disadvantaged households. The objective of Medicaid is to improve

health outcomes in vulnerable populations. And the purpose of food stamps is to reduce the

vulnerability of needy households to bouts of food insecurity and hunger. Remarkably, after a

half century of experimentation with welfare programs and after thousands of empirical studies

that examine many aspects of these programs, the answers to these questions remain elusive.

        In recent years, there has been a growing awareness of the skewed nature of the questions

that dominate research on the economics of welfare programs. Such studies as Hamermesh

(1982), Gruber (1997), and Crossley and Browning (2001) have estimated the consumption-

smoothing effects of the unemployment insurance program, while Gruber (2000) and Meyer and


        *   Robert W. Scrivner Professor of Economics and Social Policy, John F. Kennedy School of Government,
Harvard University; and Research Associate, National Bureau of Economic Research. I am grateful to Jonathan
Gruber, Craig Gundersen, Daniel Hamermesh, Christopher Jencks, Lawrence Katz, Robert LaLonde, Caroline
Minter-Hoxby, Mark Nord, Stephen Trejo, James Ziliak, and a referee for providing helpful suggestions on earlier
drafts of this paper. This research was funded by a grant from the Economic Research Service, US Department of
Agriculture.
                                                           3

Sullivan (2001) examine the link between consumption and welfare benefits. Similarly, Currie

and Thomas (1995) document that Head Start, a program designed to improve the skills and

health outcomes of disadvantaged preschool children, improves test scores in the targeted

population, and Currie and Yelowitz (2000) suggest that public housing relieves overcrowding

and may even improve the educational outcomes of the affected children.

        This paper addresses a simple question: Do welfare programs reduce the probability that

vulnerable households are food insecure? If the primary objective of public assistance is to

guarantee that households do not experience severe spells of various types of hardships and

deprivation, ensuring the food security of vulnerable households must then surely be one of the

central goals of the welfare state.2

        The link between public assistance and food insecurity is difficult to measure because a

built-in spurious correlation precludes researchers from drawing credible inferences: the

households that are most likely to be food insecure are also the households that are most likely to

qualify for and participate in welfare programs. The impact of public assistance on food

insecurity could be identified through a randomized experiment wherein the government

provides aid to some households and denies aid to a control group. Although such an idealized

experiment does not exist, the huge changes in eligibility introduced by the Personal

Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA) provide a great

deal of exogenous variation that could, in principle, help address this important question.3




        1   Moffitt (1992) gives a comprehensive review of the literature.

        2 Rossi (1998) presents a detailed evaluation of the effectiveness of the Food Stamp Program. The key
conclusion is that we do not know if the program actually helps to “feed the poor.”

        3 In a related study, Gundersen and Oliveira (2001) use the Survey of Income and Program Participation to
examine if the Food Stamp Program helps targeted households reach a level of food sufficiency.
                                                        4

       Although PRWORA changed eligibility rules for almost all households, some key

changes were specifically targeted at immigrants. It is well known that immigrant participation in

welfare programs rose rapidly in recent decades (Borjas and Hilton, 1996). This steep rise in

immigrant welfare use motivated Congress to include a number of eligibility restrictions in the

1996 legislation. It turns out, however, that these restrictions could potentially affect only a

subset of the immigrant population, depending on the household’s state of residence, on whether

the household entered the country as refugees, and on whether the foreign-born person was

naturalized or not. As a result, the idiosyncratic changes in immigrant eligibility present a unique

opportunity to examine if public assistance programs alleviate the adverse social outcomes, such

as food insecurity, that justify the existence of these programs in the first place.

       Remarkably little is known about the extent of food insecurity in the United States.4 Not

surprisingly, there is more food insecurity among immigrants than among natives. Moreover,

food insecurity increased most during the 1994-98 period among the immigrants most adversely

affected by the eligibility restrictions in welfare reform. The evidence suggests that a 10

percentage point cut in the fraction of the population that receives public assistance increases the

fraction of the population that is food insecure by around 5 percentage points. The study,

therefore, provides evidence of a causal link between the receipt of public assistance and food

insecurity in targeted households.




II. Welfare Reform

       The welfare reform legislation made fundamental changes in the federal system of public

assistance. In addition to granting state governments a great deal of authority to set their own



       4   Andrews et al (2000) summarize the available evidence.
                                                  5

eligibility and benefit rules, the legislation mandates that most welfare recipients go to work after

two years and imposes a five-year lifetime limit for receiving assistance. The legislation also

specifically limits the extent to which immigrant households can receive welfare. As signed by

President Clinton, PRWORA contained two key provisions applying to legal immigrants who

did not enter the country as refugees:

          1. Most non-citizens who arrived in the country before August 22, 1996, the “pre-

             enactment” immigrants, were to be kicked off from the SSI and food stamp rolls

             within a year. This provision of the legislation was never fully enforced.

          2. Immigrants who entered the United States after August 22, 1996, the “post-

             enactment” immigrants, are prohibited from receiving most types of public assistance.

             The ban is lifted when the immigrant becomes an American citizen.

In contrast to these restrictions on the (legal) non-refugee, non-citizen population, PRWORA did

not restrict refugee participation in the various public assistance programs. In addition, the

legislation continued to prohibit illegal immigrants from receiving most types of aid.

          One can loosely interpret the restrictions on post-enactment immigrants as setting up a

five-year “waiting period” before they can qualify for public assistance. After five years in the

United States, the immigrant can become a naturalized citizen and the ban on welfare use is

lifted.

          The restrictions on immigrant welfare use brought together a number of powerful interest

groups after the 1996 presidential election—all of which lobbied hard for their repeal. The

balanced budget agreement reached in 1997 between President Clinton and the Republican-

controlled Congress repealed some of the most draconian aspects of the legislation. The partial

restoration of federal aid, combined with actions taken by individual states (discussed below),

implies that few of the pre-enactment immigrants ended up being kicked out of the SSI and Food
                                                         6

Stamp Programs.5 The mandated waiting period for post-enactment immigrants, however,

remained on the books.

         Table 1 presents a more detailed summary of the restrictions that the welfare reform

legislation (as subsequently amended) now imposes on immigrant welfare use. Since most of the

restrictions on the pre-enactment immigrants were never enforced, and since only a relatively

small fraction of the immigrant population in the United States arrived after 1996, it would seem

that PRWORA could not have had a large impact on welfare participation rates in the immigrant

population. However, even though the welfare participation rate declined in both immigrant and

native households between 1994 and 1998, the decline was much steeper among immigrants.

This finding led Fix and Passel (1999) to conclude that welfare reform had a “chilling effect” on

the propensity of immigrants to apply for benefits they are legally entitled to (see also Borjas,

2001).

         The Current Population Surveys (CPS) collects information on the immigration status of

survey participants since 1994. The Annual Demographic Files (i.e., the March Supplement) of

the CPS provide detailed information on participation in various types of public assistance

programs during the calendar year prior to the survey. I use the 1995-99 March Supplements in

the empirical analysis reported below.6 Throughout the paper, the household is the unit of

analysis. I restrict the study to households that do not reside in group quarters. A household will

be classified as an immigrant household if the household head was born outside the United States



          5 See US General Accounting Office (1998) for a discussion of the various policy changes that occurred
after the enactment of PRWORA at both the federal and state levels.

         6 I do not use the 1994 Current Population Survey because that survey provided limited information on the
national origin of immigrants. There also seem to be some problems with the foreign-born sample in the 1994 and
1995 surveys. In particular, the “official” person weights provided in these surveys do not yield an accurate
enumeration of the immigrant population. Passel (1996) gives a detailed discussion of this problem, and uses a
complex algorithm to calculate revised weights for each person in both the 1994 and 1995 surveys. I use the “Passel
weights” in all calculations that involve the 1995 survey.
                                                            7

and is either an alien or a naturalized citizen. All other households are classified as native

households. In addition, an immigrant household will be classified as a citizen household or a

non-citizen household based on the naturalization status of the household head.7

         Table 2 summarizes some of the key trends for the 1994-98 period. As suggested by

earlier research, the decline in welfare use was indeed steeper among immigrant households. For

example, the fraction of native households that received some type of assistance (defined as

receiving cash benefits, food stamps, or Medicaid) fell from 15.6 to 13.4 percent (or 2.2

percentage points) between 1994 and 1998. In contrast, the fraction of immigrant households

receiving some type of assistance declined by 3.4 percentage points over the period. Moreover,

the decline was even steeper among non-citizen households—precisely the group targeted by

welfare reform. Their participation rate fell by 6.5 percentage points (from 29.4 to 22.9 percent).

         The trends are equally striking for the Food Stamp Program: the proportion of natives

receiving food stamps fell by 2.7 percentage points, but the drop was 7.4 percentage points for

non-citizens. The evidence, therefore, suggests that welfare reform—at least at the national

level—may have had a sizable chilling effect on immigrant participation in welfare programs.

         Since 1995, the Food Security Supplements of the CPS report food security at the

household level.8 The food security variable comes from the household’s response to an 18-item

array of questions (see the appendix for the full set of questions). These questions determine if



         7 I also used the nativity and citizenship status of other household members to construct alternative
definitions of what constitutes a native or an immigrant household. For example, one can categorize the household
as “exclusively citizen” if all members are native-born or naturalized citizens, and as “exclusively non-citizen” if all
members are non-citizens. The conclusions reported below are not sensitive to these alternative definitions.

         8   The variables summarizing participation in welfare programs in the March CPS refer to participation in
these programs in the previous calendar year. In contrast, the food insecurity information refers to the 12-month
period prior to the survey. To avoid confusion, I will report the data obtained from the Food Security Supplement as
if it referred to the prior calendar year (i.e., the April 1995 survey is used to obtain data for the 1994 calendar year;
the September 1996 survey gives the data for the 1995 calendar year, and so on). I use the supplement weights in all
of the calculations reported in this paper.
                                                          8

the household skipped meals or was “hungry but did not eat” because it could not afford to buy

food. The US Department of Agriculture calculates various summary measures of food security

from these responses. Bickel et al (2000) define four key classifications:

    a. Food secure: the “household shows no or minimal evidence of food insecurity.”

    b. Food insecure without hunger: there are concerns “about adequacy of the household food

         supply.”

    c. Food insecure with hunger (moderate): “Adults have repeatedly experienced the physical

         sensation of hunger.”

    d. Food insecure with hunger (severe): “Children have experienced hunger,” or adults “have

         repeatedly experienced more extensive reductions in food intake.”

My summary measure of the household’s food insecurity during the 12-month period prior to the

survey is given by the joint set of classifications b, c, and d.9 The food insecurity variable used in

this study, therefore, is probably best interpreted not as a measure of severe deprivation, but

rather as a correlate of consumption effects.

         One potential problem is that the CPS measure of food insecurity is subjective. However,

the available evidence indicates that the food insecurity measure is related to the household’s

nutritional intake, particularly for adults (Lee and Frongillo, 2001; and Battacharya, Currie, and

Haider, 2002). Furthermore, there is a significant correlation between my food insecurity

variable and the rough data on food expenditures available in the Food Security Supplements:

households that are food insecure spend 20 percent less on food than households that are not.

And this correlation persists even after controlling for an extensive set of socioeconomic



         9 Stricter definitions of food insecurity would capture much rarer events. For example, only 2.9 percent of
native households and 3.9 percent of immigrant households were food insecure with hunger (either moderate or
severe) in 1999. Similarly, only .5 percent of native households and .6 percent of immigrant households were food
insecure with severe hunger.
                                                          9

characteristics, including the household’s composition and state of residence, as well as the age,

race, gender, and educational attainment of the household head.10

         Table 2 shows that there is a sizable gap in food insecurity rates between immigrant and

native households. In 1994, for instance, 11.3 percent of native and 17.9 percent of immigrant

households were food insecure. The relatively worse performance of immigrant households is

not surprising since the typical immigrant is relatively less skilled than the typical native.

         The fraction of natives who are food insecure fell from 11.3 to 9.5 percent (or 1.8

percentage points) between 1994 and 1998, while the respective decline among immigrants was

larger, from 17.9 to 14.9 percent. The economic boom of the late 1990s probably accounts for

the decline in food insecurity among all types of households, but it is difficult to explain why the

contraction of the welfare state did not have a particularly adverse effect on food security in

immigrant households. Moreover, the differential trends between citizen and non-citizen

households only deepen the puzzle. Food insecurity actually rose slightly for citizen households

and declined by 4.3 percentage points for non-citizen households, precisely the opposite of what

one would have expected since welfare reform targeted mainly non-citizen households.11

         In sum, the aggregate trends indicate that the period of welfare reform was marked by a

relatively steep decline in welfare participation among immigrant households, but that this


         10 The US Department of Agriculture defines a market basket that specifies the foods that people could
consume to obtain a nutritious diet at a minimal cost (U.S Department of Agriculture, 1999). This “Thrifty Food
Plan” is used as the basis for food stamp allotments. I combined the information on the household’s food
expenditures with the cost of the thrifty food plan to determine if the household’s expenditures are below those
required to purchase the Thrifty Food Plan. The probability of spending below the minimum required to purchase
the Thrifty Food Plan is 19.6 percentage points higher for food-insecure households.

         11  The Food Security Supplements also provide some information on participation in the Food Stamp
Program, but these data are not very useful. The definition of program participation is not consistent over time and
the screen used to determine which households were asked the participation questions varies across surveys. As a
result, the supplements miss the steep downward trend in welfare participation revealed by other sources (Figlio,
Gundersen, and Ziliak, 2000). For example, the proportion of households that received food stamps in the Food
Security Supplements fell only from 6.1 to 5.6 percent between 1995 and 1998, as compared to the 2.3 percentage
point drop documented in the March CPS.
                                                 10

decline did not seem to increase food insecurity in this vulnerable population. I will show below,

however, that these nationwide trends mask disparities within the immigrant population, mainly

because they ignore the fact that different states responded differently to the federal restrictions

on immigrant welfare use.




III. Welfare Participation

       To better assess the role played by PRWORA, it is instructive to conduct an analysis that

takes into account three unrelated facts that influence how welfare reform differentially affected

various types of immigrants. First, the restrictions in PRWORA are targeted to immigrants who

are not naturalized and who did not enter the country as refugees. Second, the post-enactment

immigrants face more severe restrictions on welfare eligibility than do the pre-enactment

immigrants, so that welfare reform may have had a more dramatic impact among newer arrivals.

Finally, a key provision of PRWORA allows states to offer state-funded assistance programs to

their immigrant populations if they wish to attenuate the adverse impact of federal welfare

reform on the foreign-born.

       Some states chose to provide state-funded assistance to immigrants, while others did not.

Zimmermann and Tumlin (1999) document the various programs that states extended to

immigrants in the wake of welfare reform. These programs included offering Temporary

Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), Medicaid, food assistance, and Supplemental Security

Income (SSI) to pre-enactment and/or post-enactment immigrants. As Table 3 shows, practically

every state extended both TANF and Medicaid to pre-enactment immigrants. A few states went

beyond this “minimal” level of generosity and offered other programs to their immigrant

populations. It is worth noting that many of the states with large concentrations of immigrants

exceeded the minimal level of generosity. In fact, California, the state with a third of the
                                                          11

immigrant population, was one of only two states that offered all eight possible programs to

immigrants (the other such state was Maine).

         To show how the chilling effect of welfare reform depended on the decisions made by

individual states, I pool the 1994-95 calendar years of the March CPS to calculate the welfare

participation rates prior to welfare reform, and the 1997-98 calendar years to calculate those rates

after welfare reform.12 Initially, I use an aggregate measure of welfare participation: the

probability that the household receives some type of assistance (defined as receipt of cash

benefits, food stamps, or Medicaid).

         I then group states into two categories. I define a “more generous” state to be one that

went beyond the minimal level of generosity and offered either an additional cash or food

assistance program to its immigrant population; all other states will be defined as “less

generous.”13

         Finally, I calculate the welfare participation rates in four mutually exclusive population

groups, depending on the birthplace, citizenship status, and year of arrival of the household head.

These groups are: (1) native households; (2) citizen households that have been in the country at

least 5 years; (3) non-citizen households that have been in the country at least 5 years; and (4)

immigrant households that have been in the country fewer than 5 years. The definition of the

newly arrived immigrant cohort is particularly useful because it helps to partly identify the

impact of welfare reform on post-enactment immigrant households.14




          12 I exclude the 1996 calendar year data from the calculations. This helps to isolate the break in the time
series that can presumably be attributed to PRWORA.

       13 Specifically, the state is more generous if it offered food assistance or SSI to pre-enactment immigrants,
or TANF, food assistance, or SSI to post-enactment immigrants. By this definition, 27 states are “more generous.”

         14 In the 1994-95 pooled sample, there are 94,814 native households, 4,449 citizen households that have
been in the country at least 5 years; 5,573 non-citizen households that have been in the country at least 5 years; and
                                                       12

        The top panel of Table 4 summarizes the evidence. The table shows that the decisions

made by some states to offer a state-funded safety net to their immigrant populations did not

affect the welfare participation of natives, but these decisions had a substantial impact on the

welfare participation of immigrants. Before proceeding to discussing the trends for the various

groups composing the immigrant population, note that the aggregate welfare participation rate of

immigrants declined much faster in the less generous states. In particular, the participation rate of

immigrants living in the less generous states fell by almost 8 percentage points (from 21.3 to

13.4 percent), while that of immigrants residing in the more generous states fell by only 2.8

percentage points (from 23.9 to 21.1 percent).

        As the remaining rows of the table show, welfare reform had a differential impact on the

various immigrant groups. For example, the welfare participation rate of non-citizen households

who have been in the United States for more than 5 years declined by 12.0 percentage points

(from 30.3 to 18.3 percent) in the less generous states, but by only 4.9 percentage points in the

more generous states (from 30.4 to 25.5 percent). In contrast, the participation rate of citizen

households declined by 3.0 percentage points in the less generous states and rose by 2.3

percentage points in the more generous states. As a result, non-citizen households experienced a

somewhat larger relative decline in welfare participation than citizen households, who in turn

experienced a larger relative decline than native households.

        The data also indicate that the decline in welfare use experienced by newly arrived

immigrants was roughly similar to that experienced by non-citizens who had arrived earlier. For

example, the participation rate of new immigrants declined by almost 12 percentage points in the




1,787 newly arrived households. In the 1997-98 pooled sample, there are 89,235 native households, 4,937 citizen
households, 5,204 non-citizen households, and 1,762 newly arrived households.
                                                         13

less generous states, but by only 7 percentage points in the more generous states. Because of this

similarity, I will often pool all non-citizen households in what follows.

         The differential trends for non-citizen households between the less generous and more

generous states remain when the sample is restricted to the non-refugee population.15 The non-

refugee, non-citizen households residing in the less generous states experienced a 12 percentage

point decline in their welfare participation rate, as compared to a 4 percentage point decline for

the non-refugee, non-citizen households residing in the more generous states.16

         The other panels of Table 4 replicate the analysis for two specific programs: food stamps

and cash benefits. The state-funded assistance clearly had a differential impact on the probability

that immigrant households participate in these programs. Although the probability that a native

household received food stamps declined by 2 percentage points in both types of states, food

stamp participation declined by 8 percentage points for non-citizens in the less generous states

and by 5 percentage points for non-citizens in the more generous states. The restrictions had a

particularly powerful effect in the sample of newly arrived non-refugees: their participation rates

in the food stamp program dropped from 9.2 to 6.9 percent in the more generous states, and from

9.4 to 0.1 percent in the less generous states. In the absence of any attenuating effects provided

by state-funded assistance, the PRWORA restrictions effectively removed the newly arrived

immigrant population from the food stamp rolls.




         15The CPS does not report the type of visa used by a particular immigrant to enter the country. I
approximate the refugee population by using information on the national origin of the foreign-born. The main
refugee-sending countries over the 1970-95 period were: Afghanistan, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Cuba, Czechoslovakia,
Ethiopia, Hungary, Laos, Poland, Romania, Thailand, the former U.S.S.R., and Vietnam. I classified all households
where the household head originated in one of these countries as refugee households.

          16 Because a third of the immigrant population lives in California, it could be the case that California-
specific events could drive the national trend. However, the conclusions are unchanged if households residing in
California are excluded from the analysis. Borjas (2001) presents a detailed discussion of the differences in welfare
participation between California and other states.
                                                         14

         It is instructive to formalize the descriptive evidence in terms of a simple regression

model. By controlling for various characteristics, the regression allows one to determine if the

differential trends observed in the more and less generous states arise because different types of

immigrants tend to live in different states, or because state-specific trends in economic activity

may be correlated with the state’s welfare generosity. I pool the CPS data available for the

calendar years 1994, 1995, 1997, and 1998, and estimate the triple-difference linear probability

model:



(1)             pij = Xij β + α0 tij + α1 Iij + α2 Gij

                    + γ0 (Iij × tij) + γ1 (Iij × Gij) + γ2 (Gij × tij) + θp (Iij × Gij × tij) + εij ,



where pij is a dummy variable indicating if household i in state j receives public assistance; Xij is

a vector of socioeconomic characteristics defined below; tij is a dummy variable set to unity if

the observation refers to the post-PRWORA period; Iij is a vector of two dummy variables

indicating if the head of the household is a non-citizen or a naturalized citizen (the omitted

variable indicates if the head is native-born); and Gij is a dummy variable indicating if the

household resides in a “more generous” state. The parameters of interest are the two elements of

the vector θp, which measure the impact of the state-provided safety net on the relative trend in

the welfare use of non-citizens and citizens, respectively.

         The first two rows of Table 5 reports the estimated triple-difference coefficients from a

number of alternative specifications of the model. The first column of the table includes only a

constant term in the vector X, so that δ is the unadjusted difference-in-difference-in-difference

that could be calculated from a descriptive cross-tabulation. The second column adds a vector of

socioeconomic characteristics including the age, race, gender, and educational attainment of the
                                                          15

household head; the number of persons, children, elderly persons, and disabled persons in the

household; and the year of the immigrant’s arrival in the United States (set to zero for native

households).17 The third column adds a vector of state fixed effects (sj), as well as the interaction

between these fixed effects and the time dummy variable (sj × tij) and the interaction between the

fixed effects and the variable indicating if the household is citizen or non-citizen (sj × Iij). The

state-time interactions capture state-specific differences in the level and trend of participation

rates, and the state-group interactions capture state-specific differences between non-citizens,

citizens, and natives. The last column adds country-of-birth fixed effects to control for potential

differences in participation propensities across national origin groups.18

         In the most general specification, the estimated triple-difference coefficient for non-

citizen households is .077 (with a standard error of .019), while the coefficient for citizen

households is .053 (.021). Although the impact of welfare reform on non-citizens is somewhat

larger than the impact on citizens, the difference between the two groups is not significantly

different. Overall, the evidence suggests that the state-funded programs helped attenuate the

potential chilling effect of federal welfare reform for all immigrants.

         The rough similarity between the trends for citizens and non-citizens is somewhat

surprising since the welfare reform legislation targeted only non-citizens. This similarity,

however, could arise for a number of reasons. For instance, there may have been a great deal of

misinformation about the legislative changes in the immigrant population, particularly because

the federal government and many states altered the eligibility restrictions soon after the reforms


         17 Age is defined as a vector of dummy variables indicating if the head is 18-24, 25-34, 35-44, 45-54, 55-
64, 65-74, or over 75 years old. The educational attainment variable is defined as a vector of dummy variables
indicating if the head is a high school dropout (less than 12 years), a high school graduate (12 years), has some
college (13-15 years), or is a college graduate (at least 16 years). The year of arrival dummy variables indicate if the
household arrived before 1950, in 1950-59, 1960-64, 1965-69, 1970-74, 1975-79, 1980-84, 1985-89, 1990-94, or
after 1995.
                                                          16

were enacted. Similarly, there is some evidence that citizenship status is systematically

misreported by immigrants, many of whom may be not be fully familiar with the difference

between a permanent residence visa (the “green card” that entitles a foreign-born person to reside

permanently in the United States) and U.S. citizenship.19

         Perhaps most important, the comparison between citizens and non-citizens may be

contaminated by the potential endogeneity of the citizenship classification. After all, the

immigrants most affected by welfare reform could neutralize many of the restrictions by simply

becoming naturalized. In fact, there was a rapid rise in the number of naturalization applications

during the period (Wasem, 1998). In 1995, the INS received 960 thousand such petitions; in

1997, the INS received 1.4 million petitions (US Immigration and Naturalization Service, 1999,

p. 172). This increase in the number of naturalization applications generated a huge backlog at

the INS, further delaying the time it takes to become a naturalized citizen.

         A simple solution to the endogeneity problem is to compare immigrant households that

differ in terms of how long they have resided in the United States, rather than in terms of their

citizenship status. Immigrants have to live in the United States for five years before they can

apply for naturalization, but the lags in the application process imply that it may take 8 years or

more before an immigrant can become a naturalized citizen. In fact, only 10.3 percent of the

immigrants who have been in the country fewer than 10 years and 35.3 percent of those who

have been in the country between 10 and 20 years are naturalized citizens. In contrast, the

naturalization rate for those who have been in the country at least 20 years is 67.5 percent. The

second panel of Table 5 re-estimates equation (1) by defining the immigrant groups in terms of


         18   This vector contains 102 dummy variables indicating the birthplace of the household head.

         19As an example, the 1999 March CPS reports that 6.4 percent of the immigrants who have been in the
United States fewer than 5 years are naturalized citizens. A foreign-born person must reside in the United States a
minimum of five years before he can file a naturalization petition.
                                                      17

how long the household has resided in the United States, so that the vector Iij is now composed

of two dummy variables indicating if the household has been in the United States less than 10

years or more than 10 years (the omitted group being native households). There is a sizable

(although not statistically significant) difference in the triple-difference coefficient between these

two groups. The coefficient is .081 for the recent immigrants, and only .043 for the earlier

immigrants.

        The endogeneity issue is also avoided by simply comparing the immigrant and native

populations, so that the vector I in equation (1) contains a single variable indicating if the

household is headed by an immigrant. As reported in row 5 of Table 5, the triple-difference

coefficient is .064, and statistically significant.

        Finally, I examine if the generosity variable is isolating programs that specifically benefit

immigrants or simply provides a general measure of the state’s assistance to disadvantaged

populations. The bottom panel of Table 5 conducts comparisons within the population of native

households. In particular, row 6 compares black and white households; row 7 compares less-

educated households (where the head has at most 12 years of schooling) and more educated

households; row 8 compares single mothers (with children under 18) and two-parent households;

and row 9 compares younger households (where the head is 40 years or younger) with older

households. The triple-difference coefficients in these sensitivity tests are usually numerically

small or insignificantly different from zero. The contrast with the coefficient in the sample of

non-citizen households (or even better, in the sample of recently arrived immigrants) is striking.

The state-funded programs clearly affected the participation of targeted immigrants, but had little

impact on other disadvantaged groups. Therefore, the differential effect of welfare reform on the

various immigrant groups can be used to define the “treatment” that would help identify if the

cutback in public assistance programs increased food insecurity.
                                                 18




IV. Food Insecurity

       The previous section showed that state-level decisions to offer alternative programs to

immigrants in the aftermath of PRWORA had a substantial impact on the probability that certain

types of immigrant households received public aid. I now examine if these state choices also

influenced food insecurity in the affected households.

       The top panel of Table 6 summarizes some of the key trends in food insecurity before and

after PRWORA. As before, these trends are presented separately by the level of the state’s

generosity, and by the citizenship status of the household. Consider the trends in food insecurity

rates experienced by native households. The proportion of native households that is food

insecure declined by about 1 percentage point in both the less generous and more generous

states. In contrast, the proportion of immigrant households that is food insecure rose in the less

generous states from 12.8 to 14.2 percent, but fell in the more generous states from 16.9 to 16.0

percent.

       These differential trends in food insecurity between the two types of states are also found

within the various immigrant groups. In particular, the proportion of non-citizen households that

is food insecure rose in the less generous states (from 20.5 to 22.2 percent), but fell in the more

generous states (from 23.3 to 21.5 percent). Similarly, the proportion of newly arrived immigrant

households who are food insecure rose from 10.2 to 14.3 percent in the less generous states, but

declined from 17.2 to 16.5 percent in the more generous states. In short, the states that extended

public assistance to their non-citizen populations after 1996 were able to arrest and reverse the

rise in food insecurity that would likely have occurred had no actions been taken—both in

absolute terms and relative to the trends in food insecurity experienced by the native population.
                                                         19

       Table 6 also shows a similar rise in food insecurity among the less generous states even

when the analysis is restricted to non-refugee households. For example, the food insecurity rate

for non-refugee, non-citizen households rose from 20.6 to 23.2 percent in the less generous

states, but declined by about 2 percentage points (from 23.3 to 21.5 percent) in the more

generous states.

       To investigate the extent to which these trends can be explained by differences in

socioeconomic characteristics among the groups or by state-specific trends in economic or social

conditions, consider again the triple-difference regression model:



(2)            fij = Xij β + α0 tij + α1 Iij + α2 Gij

                   + γ0 (Iij × tij) + γ1 (Iij × Gij) + γ2 (Gij × tij) + θf (Iij × Gij × tij) + εij ,



where fij is a dummy variable indicating if the household is food insecure. Note that the

regression specification in (2) is identical to the one used in the previous section to quantify the

impact of welfare reform on welfare participation rates. The coefficient vector θf now measures

the impact of the state-provided safety net on the relative trend in immigrant food insecurity.

       Table 7 reports the relevant regression coefficients from alternative specifications of the

model in equation (2). The impact of generous state programs on the food insecurity of non-

citizen households is negative and statistically significant in almost all of the specifications. The

unadjusted estimate of θf is -.050 (with a standard error of .022). In other words, the pre- and

post-PRWORA relative growth in the fraction of non-citizen households that experienced food

insecurity was almost 5 percentage points lower in the more generous states than in the less

generous states. The remaining columns of the table show that θf remains negative even after

controlling for socioeconomic characteristics, state fixed effects, and country-of-birth fixed
                                                            20

effects. In the most general specification, the coefficient is -.039 and marginally significant,

indicating that the various statutory changes increased food insecurity for the targeted

households even within national origin groups. In contrast, the second row of Table 7 shows that

the food insecurity of citizen households was not responsive to changes in the state regulations.

         There is also a striking difference in the impact of welfare reform on the food insecurity

of newer and earlier immigrant arrivals. The unadjusted triple-difference coefficient is negative

and significant (-.053, with a standard error of .024) for the newer immigrant arrivals, but much

weaker for the earlier arrivals. Finally, the remaining rows of the table indicate that the state-

funded programs offered to particular immigrants did not substantially affect the food insecurity

status of various disadvantaged groups in the native population.20




V. Does Public Assistance Reduce Food Insecurity?

         This section examines the causal link between food insecurity and public assistance.

Consider the linear probability model:



(3)               fij = Wij β + δ pij + ωij,



where fij is a dummy variable indicating the food insecurity status of household i in state j; Wij is

a vector of socioeconomic characteristics defined below; and pij is a dummy variable indicating

if the household receives some type of public assistance.




         20 For simplicity, I aggregated various types of state-funded assistance into a single measure of the state’s
generosity. Food insecurity may be more closely related to some particular programs than to others. Because various
types of assistance are often linked, there is relatively little independent variation in the data to measure the extent to
which food insecurity reacts to specific types of assistance.
                                                          21

         The correlation between fij and pij will likely be positive because those households that

are most at risk of being food insecure are the ones that qualify for and receive public assistance.

The welfare reform legislation and subsequent state responses introduced many (presumably)

exogenous changes in eligibility rules for particular subgroups of the population. I use these

eligibility changes to instrument for program participation in equation (3).

         To illustrate, consider first a model that uses the citizenship status of the household to

identify the parameter δ. I pool the three groups of native households, citizen households, and

non-citizen households. The first-stage regression is then given by:



(4)               pij = Xij β + λ1 Rij Zij + λ2 (1 – Rij) Zij + vij,



where Rij is a dummy variable set to unity if the household is a refugee household; and the vector

Zij = (tij, Iij, Gij, Iij × tij, Gij × tij, Iij × Gij, Iij × Gij × tij ), where I is the vector containing two

dummy variables indicating if the head of household is a citizen or a non-citizen. Note that the

vector Zij contains precisely the same set of variables used in the descriptive triple-difference

regression models estimated in the previous sections. The vector Wij in the second stage
                                                                  ~              ~           ~
regression in equation (4) can then be defined as Wij = [Xij, Rij Zij, (1 – Rij) Zij], where Zij = (tij, Iij,

Gij, Iij × tij, Gij × tij, Iij × Gij). The identification of the coefficient δ then depends entirely on the

exclusion of the triple-difference interaction terms from the second-stage regression. I estimate

equation (4) using the linear probability model.

         As noted earlier, the Food Security Supplements provide flawed information on program

use by survey participants. Because the data required to estimate the system of equations in (3)

and (4) is then contained in two separate data sets, I use the technique of Two Sample

Instrumental Variables (TSIV) introduced by Angrist and Krueger (1992, 1995). This statistical
                                                          22

procedure is particularly useful whenever two data sets share a common set of instruments, but

the endogenous regressors and the dependent variable are not jointly included in both data sets.

In the current context, the first-stage regression on program participation is estimated using data

from the March CPS. These regressions are then used to predict the probability that a particular

household in the Food Security Supplements receives public assistance. The predicted

probabilities form the regressor that stands in for pij in the second-stage regressions. The standard

error of the structural coefficient δ is corrected for the fact that a predicted variable is used in the

second stage.

         For illustrative purposes, the first row of Table 8 reports the relevant coefficient from the

OLS regression that can be estimated in the Food Security Supplements using the limited data

available in those surveys on food stamp participation. It is evident that there is a strong positive

spurious correlation between food insecurity and food stamp receipt.

         The second row of the table uses TSIV to estimate the structural coefficient, and uses the

household’s citizenship status to define the groups in the vector Iij. In the most general

specification, which controls for the household’s socioeconomic background, state of residence,

and country-of-birth fixed effects, the parameter δ is -.400, with a standard error of .271. An

increase in the probability of receiving assistance of 10 percentage points reduces the probability

of food insecurity by 4 percentage points.21

         As noted above, one can avoid the potential endogeneity of the household’s citizenship

status by using information on year-of-arrival. In particular, I classify households as native,



          21 It is easy to provide a back-of-the-envelope calculation to get a sense of the magnitude of the structural
effect implied by the reduced-form evidence summarized in the previous sections. Suppose the population consists
only of native and non-citizen households. The most general specification in Table 5 suggests that the reduced-form
impact of welfare reform on program participation is approximately .077. Similarly, Table 7 reports that the
analogous impact on food insecurity is −.039. The TSIV estimate of the structural coefficient, which in the exactly
identified case is equivalent to the Wald estimator, is δ = θf/θp = −.039/.077 = −.506.
                                                  23

newer arrivals (those who arrived in the country in the past 10 years), and earlier arrivals (those

who have been in the country at least 10 years), and use these groups to define the vector Iij. The

third row of Table 8 shows that the results are similar when I use this alternative set of

instrumental variables. In the most complete specification, the coefficient δ is -.486, with a

standard error of .291. The similarity between the two sets of results arises because the

household’s citizenship status can be accurately predicted using information on socioeconomic

characteristics, country of birth, and year of arrival.

        Alternative, one can avoid the endogeneity issue by simply using information on the

birthplace of the household head, so that the immigrant vector I in equation (4) contains a single

variable indicating if the head is an immigrant. The results are quite similar to those obtained

using different classifications of the immigrant population. In the most complete specification,

the coefficient δ is -.455, with a standard error of .254. The weight of the evidence, therefore,

suggests an important causal link between public assistance and food insecurity.




VI. Summary

        The central objective of many of the programs that make up the welfare state is to help

needy families attain a sufficient level of consumption in such necessities as housing, health care,

and food. Although a large literature evaluates the social and economic costs of these programs,

fewer studies examine if the programs are successful in terms of their stated goals—that is, do

these programs help the targeted households avoid homelessness, chronic illnesses, and hunger?

This paper evaluated the extent to which these programs help needy families escape the prospect

of food insecurity.

        The 1996 welfare reform legislation contained a number of crucial provisions that greatly

limited the eligibility of immigrant households to receive many types of public assistance. In
                                                 24

response to the federal legislation, many states chose to protect their immigrant populations from

the presumed adverse impact of PRWORA by offering state-funded assistance to these groups.

The empirical analysis uses data drawn from the 1995-99 Annual Demographic Files and the

Food Security Supplements of the CPS to determine if these changes in the eligibility rules had a

substantial impact on food insecurity in the immigrant population.

       The study yields two empirical findings. First, the immigrants most likely to be adversely

affected by the welfare reform legislation—the non-refugee, non-citizen population living in

states that did not extend assistance to immigrants—did, in fact, experience a significant relative

decline in the likelihood of welfare receipt. At the same time, this population also experienced a

significant relative increase in food insecurity. By combining data from the two samples, the

evidence suggests that eligibility restrictions that reduced the proportion of welfare recipients by

10 percentage points increased the proportion of food-insecure households by about 5 percentage

points. The data, therefore, provide some evidence to support the hypothesis that welfare

programs achieve one of their key objectives, providing households with a minimal level of food

sufficiency.

       The findings of this paper have policy implications for two of the most contentious issues

in the debate over social policy. The results clearly suggest that tightening welfare eligibility

rules can have adverse outcomes. In other words, although the tighter rules reduce the cost of

welfare expenditures, they also aggravate the social ills that the programs were designed to

address. This tradeoff has been largely ignored by most social science research that attempts to

quantify the costs and benefits of the welfare state.

       The evidence also has implications for immigration policy. The earliest restrictions on

immigration—dating back to the Colonial days—limited the potential migration of “public

charges.” There is little disagreement over the fact that immigrant use of public assistance grew
                                                  25

rapidly in the past three decades. Congress perceived an actual problem, and tried to do

something about it by including a number of immigrant-related provisions in the welfare reform

legislation. It seems, however, that there may be a significant social cost to limiting eligibility to

public assistance programs in a disadvantaged population. The evidence, therefore, suggests that

it may be easier and cheaper to address the problems raised by the immigration of public charges

not by “ending welfare as we know it,” but by reforming immigration policy instead.
                                                26


                                           References

        Altonji, J.G., Card, D., 1991. The effects of immigration on the labor market outcomes of
less-skilled natives. In: Abowd, J.M., Freeman, R.B. (Eds), Immigration, Trade, and the Labor
Market. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, pp. 201-234.

       Andrews, M., Nord, M., Bickel, G., Carlson, S., 2000. Household Food Security in the
United States, 1999. Economic Research Service, US Department of Agriculture, Food
Assistance and Nutrition Research Report No. 8, Washington.

       Angrist, J.D., Krueger, A.B., 1992. The effect of age at school entry on educational
attainment: an application of instrumental variables with moments from two samples. Journal of
the American Statistical Association 87 (418), 328-336.

        Angrist, J.D., Krueger, A.B., 1995. Split sample instrumental variables estimates of the
returns to schooling. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 13 (2), 225-235.

        Battacharya, J., Currie, J., Haider, S., 2002. Food insecurity or poverty: measuring need-
related dietary adequacy. National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper No. 9003,
Cambridge, MA.

       Bickel, G., Nord, M., Price, C., Hamilton, W., Cook, J., 2000. Guide to Measuring
Household Food Security, Revised 2000. US Department of Agriculture, Food and Nutrition
Service, Washington.

      Borjas, G.J., 2001. Welfare reform and immigration. In: Blank R., Haskins, R. (Eds), The
New World of Welfare: An Agenda for Reauthorization and Beyond. Brookings Press,
Washington, pp. 369-385.

        Borjas, G.J., Hilton, L., 1996. Immigration and the Welfare State: Immigrant
Participation in Means-Tested Entitlement Programs. Quarterly Journal of Economics 111 (2):
575-604.

      Crossley, T.F., Browning, M., 2001. Unemployment insurance benefit levels and
consumption changes, Journal of Public Economics 80 (1), 1-23.

      Currie, J., Thomas, D., 1995. Does Head Start make a difference? American Economic
Review 85 (3), 341-364.

       Currie, J., Yelowitz, A., 2000. Are public housing projects good for kids? Journal of
Public Economics 75 (1), 99-124.

       Figlio, D.N., Gundersen, C., Ziliak, J.P., 2000. The impact of the macroeconomy and
welfare reform on food stamp caseloads, American Journal of Agricultural Economics 82 (3),
635-641.

       Fix, M., Passel, J.S., 1999. Trends in noncitizens’ and citizens’ use of public benefits
following welfare reform: 1994-97. The Urban Institute, Washington.
                                                27



      Gruber, J., 1997. The consumption smoothing benefits of unemployment insurance.
American Economic Review 87 (1), 192-205.

      Gruber, J., 2000. Cash welfare as a consumption smoothing mechanism for divorced
mothers, Journal of Public Economics 75 (2), 157-182.

      Gundersen, C., Oliveira, V., 2001. The food stamp program and food insufficiency.
American Journal of Agricultural Economics 83 (4), 875-887.

      Hamermesh, D.S., 1982. Social insurance and consumption: an empirical inquiry.
American Economic Review 72 (1), 101-113.

       Lee, J.S., Frongillo, E.A., 2001. Nutritional and health consequences are associated with
food insecurity among US elderly persons. Journal of Nutrition 131 (5), 1503-1509.

       Meyer, B.D., Sullivan, J.X., 2001. The effects of welfare and tax reform: the material
well-being of single mothers in the 1980s and 1990s. Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.

      Moffitt, R., 1992. Incentive effects of the US welfare system: a review. Journal of
Economic Literature 30 (1), 1-61.

      Passel, J.S., 1996. Problem with March 1994 and 1995 weighting. The Urban Institute,
Washington.

      Rossi, P.H., 1998. Feeding the Poor: Assessing Federal Food Aid. AEI Press,
Washington.

       US Department of Agriculture, 1999. The Thrifty Food Plan, 1999. Center for Nutrition
Policy and Promotion, CNPP-7A, Washington.

       US General Accounting Office, 1998. Welfare Reform: Many States Continue Some
Federal or State Benefits for Immigrants. Report Number GAO/HEHS-98-132, Washington.

      US Immigration and Naturalization Service, 1999. Statistical Yearbook of the
Immigration and Naturalization Service, 1999. US GPO, Washington.

       Vialet, J.C., Eig, L.M., 1998. Alien eligibility for public assistance. Congressional
Research Service, Report No. 96-617, Washington.

       Wasem, R.E., 1998. Naturalization trends, issues, and legislation. Congressional
Research Service, Report No. 98-190, Washington.

      Zimmermann, W., Tumlin, K.C., 1999. Patchwork policies: state assistance for
immigrants under welfare reform. The Urban Institute, Occasional Paper No. 24, Washington.
                                               28


                       Appendix: Measurement of Food Insecurity

The Food Security Supplements of the CPS contain an 18-item array of questions that are
combined to create the food insecurity index used in this paper. The questions are:

Now I’m going to read you several statements that people have made about their food situation.
Please tell me whether the statement was often, sometimes, or never true in the last 12 months:
   1. “I worried whether our food would run out before we got money to buy more.”
   2. “The food that we bought just didn’t last, and we didn’t have money to get more.”
   3. “We couldn’t afford to eat balanced meals.”
   4. “We relied on only a few kinds of low-cost food to feed the children because we were
        running out of money to buy food.”
   5. “We couldn’t feed the children a balanced meal because we couldn’t afford that.”
   6. “The children were not eating enough because we just couldn’t afford enough food.”

Additional questions:
   7. In the last 12 months, did you or other adults in your household ever cut the size of your
       meals or skip meals because there wasn’t enough money for food?
       8. How often did this happen—almost every month, some months but not every month,
           or in only one or two months?

   9. In the last 12 months, did you ever eat less than you felt you should because there wasn’t
      enough money to buy food?

   10. In the last 12 months, were you ever hungry but didn’t eat because you couldn’t afford
       enough food?

   11. Sometimes people lose weight because they don’t have enough to eat. In the last 12
       months, did you lose weight because there wasn’t enough food?

   12. In the last 12 months, did you or other adults in your household ever not eat for a whole
       day because there wasn’t enough money for food?
       13. How often did this happen—almost every month, some months but not every month,
           or in only one or two months?

   14. In the last 12 months, did you ever cut the size of any of the children’s meals because
       there wasn’t enough money for food?

   15. In the last 12 months, did any of the children ever skip meals because there wasn’t
       enough money for food?
       16. How often did this happen—almost every month, some months but not every month,
           or in only one or two months?

   17. In the last 12 months, were the children ever hungry but you just couldn’t afford more
       food?

   18. In the last 12 months, did any of the children ever not eat for a whole day because there
       wasn’t enough money for food?
                                                            29


                    Table 1. Alien Eligibility for Means-Tested Federal Programs

                                                                    Program
Category of
                                 SSI                    Food stamps                     Medicaid                TANF
alien:
Non-citizen             Eligible, if             Eligible, if age 65 or          Eligible, for SSI-           Eligibility
arrived before          receiving SSI on         over on 8/22/96, or             derivative benefits;         is a state
8/22/96                 8/22/96, or              under age 18, or                otherwise,                   option
                        subsequently             subsequently disabled           eligibility is a state
                        disabled                                                 option

Non-citizen             Not eligible             Not eligible                    Eligible for                 Not
arrived after                                                                    emergency services           eligible
8/22/96                                                                          only

Refugees and            Eligible                 Eligible                        Eligible                     Eligible
asylees

Non-immigrants          Not eligible             Not eligible                    Eligible for                 Not
and illegal aliens                                                               emergency services           eligible
                                                                                 only

Source and notes: Vialet and Eig (1998), Table 1. Non-immigrants include foreign-born persons who are in the
United States on a temporary basis, such as foreign students and tourists. The information provided for non-citizens
who arrived after 8/22/96 and for refugee and asylees refers to their eligibility status during the first five years after
arrival.
                                                          30


                   Table 2. Trends in Program Participation and Food Insecurity

                                                                                     Calendar Year
                                                                  1994        1995        1996        1997       1998
March CPS:
 Percent receiving assistance              Natives                15.6        15.0        15.3       14.0        13.4
                                           Immigrants             23.4        23.9        21.9       20.2        20.0
                                           Citizens               14.3        15.8        16.1       16.5        16.3
                                           Non-citizens           29.4        29.3        26.6       23.2        22.9

 Percent receiving food stamps             Natives                 8.7         8.1         8.0        6.8          6.0
                                           Immigrants             12.5        11.7        10.1        9.3          7.5
                                           Citizens                6.0         6.9         6.1        6.3          5.4
                                           Non-citizens           16.7        14.9        13.2       11.6          9.3

Food Security Supplements:
 Percent food insecure                     Natives                11.3        10.9         9.1       11.3         9.5
                                           Immigrants             17.9        15.2        13.3       16.8        14.9
                                           Citizens                9.6         9.5         8.4       11.7        10.0
                                           Non-citizens           23.4        19.4        17.4       21.2        19.1

Notes: The household receives assistance if it receives cash benefits, food stamps, or Medicaid. The timing of the
data differs somewhat for the food insecurity rates. The Food Security Supplements of the CPS are the April 1995,
September 1996, April 1997, August 1998, and April 1999 surveys. Although the food insecurity rates refer to the
12-month period prior to the survey, this table simplifies the exposition by reporting the food insecurity rates as if
they referred to the calendar year prior to the survey.
                                                     31

                          Table 3. State-Funded Assistance to Immigrants After 1996
                                Pre-enactment immigrants                  Post-enactment immigrants
                                             Food                                         Food
State                     TANF Medicaid                    SSI     TANF      Medicaid                 SSI
                                           Assistance                                   Assistance
Alabama                   No       Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Alaska                    Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Arizona                   Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Arkansas                  Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
California                Yes      Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
Colorado                  Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         Yes        No
Connecticut               Yes      Yes        Yes          No       Yes         Yes        Yes        No
Delaware                  Yes      Yes        No           No       No          Yes        No         No
District of Columbia      Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Florida                   Yes      Yes        Yes          No       No          No         No         No
Georgia                   Yes      Yes        No           No       Yes         No         No         No
Hawaii                    Yes      Yes        No           No       Yes         Yes        No         No
Idaho                     Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Illinois                  Yes      Yes        Yes          Yes      No          Yes        No         No
Indiana                   Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Iowa                      Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Kansas                    Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Kentucky                  Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Louisiana                 Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Maine                     Yes      Yes        Yes          Yes      Yes         Yes        Yes        Yes
Maryland                  Yes      Yes        Yes          No       Yes         Yes        Yes        No
Massachusetts             Yes      Yes        Yes          No       Yes         Yes        Yes        No
Michigan                  Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Minnesota                 Yes      Yes        Yes          No       Yes         Yes        Yes        No
Mississippi               Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Missouri                  Yes      Yes        Yes          No       Yes         No         No         No
Montana                   Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Nebraska                  Yes      Yes        Yes          No       Yes         Yes        Yes        No
Nevada                    Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
New Hampshire             Yes      Yes        No           Yes      No          No         No         No
New Jersey                Yes      Yes        Yes          No       No          No         No         No
New Mexico                Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
New York                  Yes      Yes        Yes          No       No          No         No         No
North Carolina            Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
North Dakota              Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Ohio                      Yes      Yes        Yes          No       No          No         No         No
Oklahoma                  Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Oregon                    Yes      Yes        No           Yes      Yes         No         No         Yes
Pennsylvania              Yes      Yes        No           No       Yes         Yes        No         No
Rhode Island              Yes      Yes        Yes          No       Yes         Yes        No         No
South Carolina            Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
South Dakota              Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Tennessee                 Yes      Yes        No           No       Yes         No         No         No
Texas                     Yes      Yes        Yes          No       No          No         No         No
Utah                      Yes      Yes        No           No       Yes         No         No         No
Vermont                   Yes      Yes        No           No       Yes         No         No         No
Virginia                  Yes      Yes        No           No       No          Yes        No         No
Washington                Yes      Yes        Yes          No       Yes         Yes        Yes        No
West Virginia             Yes      Yes        No           No       No          No         No         No
Wisconsin                 Yes      Yes        Yes          No       Yes         No         Yes        No
Wyoming                   Yes      No         No           No       Yes         No         No         No
States offering program   50        50         17           5       19          14          10         3
Source: Zimmermann and Tumlin (1999, Table 5). The state-funded programs for post-enactment immigrants are
offered during the (federal) five-year bar following the time of entry into the United States.
                                                          32


                                 Table 4. Trends in Program Participation
                                (Percent of households receiving assistance)

                                 Households in less generous states              Households in more generous states

                                                         Non-refugee                                     Non-refugee
                                All households           households               All households         households

Program/Group:                  Pre-        Post-      Pre-       Post-           Pre-       Post-      Pre-          Post-
                                1996        1996       1996       1996            1996       1996       1996          1996
Some type of assistance
Natives                         16.4        14.3       16.4       14.3           14.8        13.5       14.8          13.5
Immigrants                      21.3        13.4       21.4       13.2           23.9        21.1       22.7          19.9
   Citizens                     14.3        11.3       15.4       11.2           14.8        17.1       14.6          16.1
   Non-citizens                 30.3        18.3       30.4       18.8           30.4        25.5       29.3          24.9
   New arrivals                 21.2         9.4       18.3        7.9           27.4        20.1       21.6          15.9

Food stamps
Natives                          9.1         7.1        9.1        7.1            8.0         6.1        8.0           6.1
Immigrants                      10.9         4.9       10.9        4.9           12.2         8.9       10.8           7.9
   Citizens                      5.7         2.7        5.8        2.6            6.2         6.2        5.9           5.3
   Non-citizens                 17.5         9.4       17.8        9.9           16.4        11.3       15.1          10.6
   New arrivals                 11.2         1.9        9.4        0.1           14.7        10.0        9.2           6.9

Cash benefits
Natives                          7.6         6.5        7.6        6.5            7.8         6.2        7.8           6.2
Immigrants                       8.4         4.2        7.9        4.0           12.0         9.7       10.5           8.3
   Citizens                      6.7         3.6        7.2        3.5            6.8         8.5        6.8           7.6
   Non-citizens                 10.5         6.2        9.6        6.2           15.9        11.4       13.9          10.2
   New arrivals                  8.7         2.0        6.6        1.3           13.6         8.2        8.4           4.6

  Notes: The household receives some type of assistance if it receives cash benefits, food stamps, or Medicaid. The
  samples of citizen and non-citizen households include households where the head has been in the United States at
  least 5 years. The sample of newly arrived immigrants includes households where the head has been in the United
  States fewer than 5 years.
                                                         33


          Table 5. Impact of Welfare Reform on Receipt of Some Type of Assistance,
                                 Triple Difference Estimates

                                                                                        Regression model
   Sample:                                                                     (1)        (2)      (3)             (4)
   By citizenship status:
    1. Non-citizens relative to natives                                       .056        .068        .071        .077
                                                                             (.021)      (.019)      (.019)      (.019)
     2. Citizens relative to natives                                          .048        .059        .059        .053
                                                                             (.023)      (.021)      (.021)      (.022)

   By year of migration:
    3. Immigrants in US ≤ 10 years relative to natives                        .057        .077        .076        .081
                                                                             (.024)      (.021)      (.022)      (.022)
     4. Immigrants in US > 10 years relative to natives                       .033        .044        .050        .043
                                                                             (.021)      (.019)      (.019)      (.019)

   By birthplace:
    5. Immigrants relative to natives                                         .043        .061        .065        .064
                                                                             (.016)      (.014)      (.015)      (.015)

   Within native population:
    6. Blacks relative to whites                                              .023        .018        .023         ---
                                                                             (.010)      (.010)      (.010)
     7. Less-educated relative to more educated households                   -.011       -.010       -.010         ---
                                                                             (.007)      (.006)      (.006)
     8. Single mothers relative to two-parent households                      .006        .001        .004         ---
                                                                             (.015)      (.014)      (.014)
     9. Younger households relative to older households                      -.003        .002        .003         ---
                                                                             (.007)      (.007)      (.007)

   Controls for:
     Socioeconomic characteristics                                             No         Yes         Yes         Yes
     State fixed effects, with interactions                                    No         No          Yes         Yes
     Country-of-birth fixed effects                                            No         No          No          Yes

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. There are 207,752 observations in the regressions estimated in
the first five rows of the table; row 6 has 179,746 observations; rows 7 and 9 have 184,040 observations; and row 8
has 62,615 observations. The “socioeconomic characteristics” include the age, race, gender, and educational
attainment of the household head; the total number of persons, children, elderly persons, and disabled persons in the
household; and a vector of dummy variables indicating the household’s year of arrival in the United States. The
“state fixed effects, with interactions” include a vector of state fixed effects interacted with the dummy variable
indicating if the observation was drawn from the post-1996 period. The state fixed effects are also interacted with
the dummy variables that indicate the household’s classification (i.e., citizen or non-citizen; new arrival or earlier
arrival, etc.). The country-of-birth fixed effects include 102 dummy variables indicating the birthplace of the
household head.
                                                          34


                                   Table 6. Trends in Food Insecurity
                              (Percent of households that are food insecure)


                                 Households in less generous states              Households in more generous states

                                                         Non-refugee                                      Non-refugee
                                All households           households               All households          households
                                 Pre-       Post-      Pre-       Post-           Pre-        Post-     Pre-       Post-
Group:                          1996        1996       1996       1996           1996         1996      1996       1996
Natives                         11.8        10.4       11.8       10.4           10.8         10.3      10.8       10.3
Immigrants                      12.8        14.2       12.5       15.0           16.9         16.0      17.3       16.3
   Citizens                      7.2         7.5        6.9        8.1            9.8         11.0      10.0       11.6
   Non-citizens                 20.5        22.2       20.6       23.2           23.3         21.5      23.3       21.5
   New arrivals                 10.2        14.3        8.8       13.8           17.2         16.5      17.6       15.4

  Notes: The sample of citizen and non-citizen households includes households where the head has been in the United
  States at least 5 years. The sample of newly arrived immigrants includes households where the head arrived in the 5-
  year period prior to the survey.
                                                         35


                       Table 7. Impact of Welfare Reform on Food Insecurity,
                                    Triple Difference Estimates

                                                                                        Regression model
   Sample:                                                                     (1)        (2)      (3)             (4)
   By citizenship status:
    1. Non-citizens relative to natives                                      -.050       -.042       -.040       -.039
                                                                             (.022)      (.021)      (.021)      (.021)
     2. Citizens relative to natives                                          .002        .005        .011        .009
                                                                             (.024)      (.023)      (.023)      (.023)

   By year of migration:
    3. Immigrants in US ≤ 10 years relative to natives                       -.053       -.042       -.040       -.035
                                                                             (.024)      (.023)      (.023)      (.023)
     4. Immigrants in US > 10 years relative to natives                      -.015       -.010       -.006       -.009
                                                                             (.022)      (.020)      (.021)      (.021)

   By birthplace:
    5. Immigrants relative to natives                                        -.032       -.023       -.021       -.019
                                                                             (.016)      (.015)      (.016)      (.016)

   Within native population:
    6. Blacks relative to whites                                              .011        .018        .025         ---
                                                                             (.010)      (.010)      (.010)
     7. Less-educated relative to more educated households                   -.001        .001        .001         ---
                                                                             (.006)      (.007)      (.007)
     8. Single mothers relative to two-parent households                      .002        .003        .008         ---
                                                                             (.016)      (.015)      (.015)
     9. Younger households relative to older households                       .000        .005        .005         ---
                                                                             (.007)      (.007)      (.007)

   Controls for:
     Socioeconomic characteristics                                             No         Yes         Yes         Yes
     State fixed effects, with interactions                                    No         No          Yes         Yes
     Country-of-birth fixed effects                                            No         No          No          Yes

Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. There are 163,902 observations in the regressions estimated in
the first five rows of the table; row 6 has 146,146 observations; rows 7 and 9 have 149,507 observations; and row 8
has 50,306 observations. The “socioeconomic characteristics” include the age, race, gender, and educational
attainment of the household head; the total number of persons, children, elderly persons, and disabled persons in the
household; and a vector of dummy variables indicating the household’s year of arrival in the United States. The
“state fixed effects, with interactions” include a vector of state fixed effects interacted with the dummy variable
indicating if the observation was drawn from the post-1996 period. The state fixed effects are also interacted with
the dummy variables that indicate the household’s classification (i.e., citizen or non-citizen; new arrival or earlier
arrival, etc.). The country-of-birth fixed effects include 102 dummy variables indicating the birthplace of the
household head.
                                                           36


                     Table 8. The Impact of Public Assistance on Food Insecurity

                                                                                  Specification
   Statistical procedure:                                       (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)
      1. OLS                                                   .411            .302           .301            .300
                                                              (.003)          (.003)         (.003)          (.003)
       2. TSIV: Using citizenship status                      -.645           -.484          -.419           -.400
                                                              (.354)          (.292)         (.274)          (.271)
       3. TSIV: Using year of arrival                         -.695           -.556          -.516           -.486
                                                              (.388)          (.304)         (.291)          (.291)
       4. TSIV: Using only immigration status                 -.925           -.529          -.490           -.455
                                                              (.373)          (.263)         (.252)          (.254)

   Controls for:
     Socioeconomic characteristics                              No             Yes             Yes             Yes
     State fixed effects, with interactions                     No             No              Yes             Yes
     Country-of-birth fixed effects                             No             No              No              Yes
Notes: Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The second-stage regressions have 163,902 observations. All of
the variables included in the first-stage regression, except for the triple-difference interaction terms, are included in
the second-stage regressions. The “socioeconomic characteristics” include the age, race, gender, and educational
attainment of the household head; the total number of persons, children, elderly persons, and disabled persons in the
household; and a vector of dummy variables indicating the household’s year of arrival in the United States. The
“state fixed effects, with interactions” include a vector of state fixed effects interacted with the dummy variable
indicating if the observation was drawn from the post-1996 period. The state fixed effects are also interacted with
the dummy variables that indicate the household’s classification (i.e., citizen or non-citizen; new arrival or earlier
arrival). The country-of-birth fixed effects include 102 dummy variables indicating the birthplace of the household
head.
