NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PEOPLE’S OPIUM? RELIGION AND ECONOMIC ATTITUDES
Luigi Guiso
Paola Sapienza
Luigi Zingales
Working Paper 9237
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9237
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002

We thank Roc Armenter for excellent research assistantship, Chiara Corti and Adam Cartabiano for their
help in inputting the tables, Jason Hwang for his great help with the WVS coding, and Louise Kelley and
participants to the 2002 Carnegie Rochester series for comments. Luigi Guiso also thanks MURST and the
EEC and Luigi Zingales the Stigler Center at the University of Chicago for financial support. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

People’s Opium? Religion and Economic Attitudes
Luigi Guiso, Paola Sapienza, and Luigi Zingales
NBER Working Paper No. 9237
October 2002
JEL No. O57, O40, P51
ABSTRACT
Since Max Weber, there has been an active debate on the impact of religion on people’s
economic attitudes. Much of the existing evidence, however, is based on cross-country studies in
which this impact is confounded by differences in other institutional factors. We use the World
Values Surveys to identify the relationship between intensity of religious beliefs and economic
attitudes, controlling for country fixed effects. We study several economic attitudes toward
cooperation, the government, working women, legal rules, thriftiness, and the market economy. We
also distinguish across religious denominations, differentiating on whether a religion is dominant
in a country. We find that on average, religious beliefs are associated with “good” economic
attitudes, where “good” is defined as conducive to higher per capita income and growth. Yet
religious people tend to be more racist and less favorable with respect to working women. These
effects differ across religious denominations. Overall, we find that Christian religions are more
positively associated with attitudes conducive to economic growth.
Luigi Guiso
Ente Per Gli Studi Bancari
Luigi Einaudi
Via Due Macelli 73
00187 Rome
ITALY
guiso@tin.it

Luigi Zingales
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, Illinois 60637
and NBER, CEPR
luigi.zinagles@gsb.uchicago.edu

Paola Sapienza
Kellogg Graduate School of Management
Finance Department
Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, Illinois 60208-2001
paola-sapienza@kellogg.nwu.edu

Economists, sociologists, and political scientists have long been interested in
explaining the economic success of certain countries and the persistent poverty of others.
In search of the ultimate cause, an obvious role has been suggested for religion. There is
hardly an aspect of a society’s life that is not affected by religion. Why shouldn’t it affect
a country’s ability to produce efficiently and grow?
Max Weber (1905) was the first to identify the significant role that religion plays
in social change. He went as far as to state that the Protestant Reformation triggered a
mental revolution that made possible the advent of modern capitalism.
Almost a century after Weber’s seminal work, the importance of religion in
explaining the prosperity of nations seems to be experiencing a rebirth. While scholars
prefer to avoid correlating religion directly with economic prosperity, they try to relate it
to fundamental institutions that have been shown to be conducive to growth. In his study
of development across Italy, for instance, Putnam (1993) attributes the prevailing lack of
trust toward others in the South to the strong Catholic tradition, which emphasizes the
vertical bond with the Church and tends to undermine the horizontal bond with fellow
citizens. In a cross-country study, both La Porta et al. (1997) and Inglehart (1999) find
some evidence for this theory. On a similar note, Landes (1998) attributes the failure of
Spain to develop in the 16th and 17th century to the culture of intolerance diffused by the
Catholic Church, which forced some of the most skillful people out of the country.
Finally, Stulz and Williamson (2001) attribute the low level of creditors’ protection
present in Catholic countries to the anti-usury culture pervasive in the Catholic tradition.
Unlike Weber, most of these authors provide compelling evidence in favor of
their claim, showing a robust correlation between a country’s main religion and these

2

institutions. Such evidence, however, can be interpreted in two ways. One possible
interpretation is that there is something intrinsic to certain religions, such as Catholicism,
that makes them inimical to the development of talents and institutions that foster
economic growth. An alternative interpretation, which is equally consistent with the
results, is that there was something in the past (correlated with religion, but not
necessarily religion) that trapped a country in a bad equilibrium. According to this
interpretation, there is nothing fundamental, but it is hysteresis that keeps a country
trapped in this equilibrium. A possible variation of this hypothesis, which is
observationally equivalent to the previous one, is that there were some aspects of a
religion, in this case Catholicism, that were inimical to the development of certain
institutions, for example trust, but that these aspects disappeared over time, possibly
because of a reform.
While the difference between the two hypotheses seems rather uninteresting from
a historical point of view, from a policy perspective it is very important. If the first
alternative is true, then short of changing a country’s religion (a task beyond the power
even of the World Bank), there is very little hope for bringing prosperity to many poor
countries. By contrast, the second alternative provides some hope. It is sufficient to find a
coordinating device to escape the bad equilibrium trap without trying to change people’s
religious beliefs.
Unfortunately, the existing cross-country analysis cannot distinguish between
these two hypotheses. To identify the effect of religion separately from the effect of other
historical accidents, we have to resort to a within country analysis. Such an analysis
cannot be conducted in one country alone, because the role of a religion might depend

3

highly upon the social and historical context in which it developed. To address this issue
in this study, we use a dataset containing data on individuals for a large set of countries.
The World Values Survey is actually a collection of surveys administered to a
representative sample of people in 66 countries from 1981 to 1997. These questionnaires
contain information not only about religious affiliation, but also about the intensity of
beliefs (frequency of attending religious services) and how the interviewee was raised
(religiously or not). Thus, we are able to study the relation between the degree of
religiosity and the type of religion on a series of fundamental societal attitudes that have
been shown to be conducive to higher productivity and growth.
We analyze the relation between religion and six groups of variables: people’s
attitudes toward cooperation, women, government, legal rules, the market economy and
its fairness, and thriftiness. As measures of attitudes toward cooperation, we use
individual responses to questions regarding how much one trusts other people in general
and how tolerant individuals are toward neighbors of different races and/or countries. As
measures of attitude toward women, we use responses to a variety of questions ranging
from who should get a job first, a man or a woman, when jobs are scarce; whether men
should have priority in obtaining university education; and whether both men and women
should contribute to household income. As measure of attitudes toward the government,
we use individual responses on how much people trust the government and other
government institutions. As measures of attitude toward legal norms, we use individual
responses regarding trust of the legal system and willingness to break the law, including
cheating on taxes, avoiding a fare on public transportation, or paying bribes. The World
Values Survey asks people to state their position along the efficiency versus equity trade

4

off. The interviewer shows a card to the respondent in which there are two opposite
statements at the extremes of a 1 to 10 interval. The respondent chooses the number that
best describes his or her relative position. Questions range from whether people think pay
inequality is necessary to provide better incentives to whether competition brings out the
worst in people or stimulates hard work and new ideas. Finally, to measure people’s
attitudes toward thriftiness, we use responses to a question concerning whether it is
especially important to instill the “virtue” of thriftiness in children.
To isolate the effect of religion from other confounding effects, we control for
country fixed effects and several individual characteristics: health status, age, sex,
education, income, and perceived social status.
We find that on average religion is associated positively with attitudes that are
conducive to free markets and better institutions. Religious people trust others more, trust
the government and the legal system more, are less willing to break the law, and are more
likely to believe that markets’ outcomes are fair. The relation between religiosity and
market mechanisms (incentives, competition, and private property) is more mixed. On the
negative side, religious people are more intolerant and less sympathetic to women’s
rights.
The aspect of religion that is associated with economic attitudes is different
across the intensity of religious beliefs. Trust toward others is associated mostly with
religious participation, not religious upbringing. By contrast, intolerance is mostly an
outcome of being raised religiously. Active churchgoers are not more intolerant toward
immigrants than the rest of the population (but not less either) and they are less

5

sympathetic to women’s rights. Finally, both a religious upbringing and active religious
participation increase trust toward government institutions.
We find that different religions have different effects on people’s attitudes.
Participation to religious services increases trust only among Christians. The effect is
zero or even negative for other denominations. Within the Christian family, the effect is
stronger for Protestant than for Catholics, as suggested by Putnam (1993).
The relation between religion and intolerance is present in all religious
denominations. The only exception is Buddhists who are more tolerant than non-religious
people. Hindus and Muslim are the less tolerant towards immigrants and other races,
followed by Jews, Catholics and Protestants. The point estimates for Protestants and
Catholics are very similar, while based on previous studies one would have expected less
tolerance from Catholics (Landes, 1998). Active participants in any religion trust the
government more than non- religious people, with the only exception of Buddhists. The
effect is stronger for Hindus and Muslim, weaker for Catholics and Protestant. Similarly,
all religious denominations are associated with a more conservative attitude toward
women. However, the effect is much stronger for Muslims.
Judaism has the strongest negative impact on the willingness to cheat on taxes,
followed by Protestantism (second), Catholicism and Hinduism (third), and Islam
(fourth). The ranking changes somehow when it comes to accept a bribe. The strongest
negative effect is for Buddhist, with Protestants and Muslim next, and Catholics last.
Protestants are the only religious group that favors incentives. This result vindicates
Weber’s claims.

6

Religious denominations also differ in their attitude toward private ownership.
Observant Catholics support private ownership twice as much as Protestants, while
Muslims and Hindus are strongly against competition. Finally, with the exception of
Buddhists, religious people of all denominations are more inclined to believe that poor
people are lazy and lack will power. The effect is stronger for Protestants than Catholics.
Overall, we find that Christian religions are more positively associated with
attitudes conducive to economic growth, while religious Muslims are the most
antimarket. Within Christian denominations, the ranking is unclear: Protestants are more
trusting and favor incentives more, Catholics are more thrifty and favor private property
and competition more.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follow. Section I briefly reviews the theoretical
priors on the economic effects of religion. Section II presents the dataset we use and our
measure of religious affiliation and attitude toward cooperation, government, legal rules,
and the market economy. Section III reports the results of the effects of religion in
general, while Section IV differentiates across religious denominations. Section V
concludes.

I. Theoretical Predictions
An excellent survey of the theoretical debate on the links between religion and
economic development is provided by Steuart (1998). Without aspiring to be exhaustive,
we now summarize the main points of this debate.
The earliest crucial point was the direction of causality. On the one hand,
Feuerbach and Marx see religion as a mere reflection of human life. In his Criticism of

7

Hegel's Law, Marx (1844) states: "The grounds of the unreligious critique is man made
religion, religion does not make man... Religious misery is, by one side, an expression of
the real misery. Religion is the exhausted creature's sigh, the state of animus of a
heartless world, the spirit of spiritless situations. Religion is the people's opium.”
Weber was of the opposite view. In his classic “The Protestant Ethic and the
Spirit of Capitalism,” Weber attributes the emergence of the spirit of capitalism to the
development of a Protestant ethic. Weber’s Protestant ethic results from the interaction of
the doctrine of salvation and the concept of good works. It was Luther who decisively
altered the Christian concept of good works by prescribing the “fulfillment of duties in
worldly affairs as the highest form which the moral activity of the individual could
assume” (Weber, 1905).
Eisenstadt moves away from an analysis of a direct causal link between
Protestantism and capitalism to focus on the “transformative potential” of religions. The
transformative potential refers to the “capacity to legitimize, in religious or ideological
terms, the development of new motivations, activities, and institutions which were not
encompassed by their original impulses and views” Eisenstadt (1968). Eisenstadt’s main
thesis is that Protestantism redefined political and social institutions, and impacted on the
reformulation of roles within the economic sphere.
Eisenstadt’s concept of transformative potential is also useful in assessing the
potential impact of other religions, such as Hinduism. Given the multiplicity of gods and
sects, it is very difficult to identify a clear position of Hinduism toward economic
activity. In particular, the stereotype that portrays Hindu as ascetic and uninterested in the
material world can be rejected easily. In the Panchatantra we find statements such as

8

“wealth gives constant vigor, confidence and power” and “poverty is a curse worse than
death” (Uppal, 1986).

Nevertheless, according to Eisenstadt, the highly ritualistic

behavior promoted by Hinduism is less likely to facilitate the development of more
systematic efforts in any field of activity.
We encounter similar problems when we analyze Islam. While the Sunnah
prohibits the formation and conclusion of aleatory contracts based on chance (Jomo,
1992), many verses of the Quaran encourage effort and improvement. Thus, the
underdevelopment of many Islamic countries cannot be attributed to Islam per se, but is
possibly due to the development, somewhere in between the ninth and the eleventh
century, of inflexible political and legal institutions in the Islamic world designed to
discourage growth values and practices and aimed at preserving the status quo.
More recently, the debate has focused on the impact of religion on specific
attitudes that might promote or hamper growth, rather than on differences in the
Weltanschauung fostered by different religions. Putnam (1993) for instance, focuses on
trust and claims that the Catholic tradition, which emphasizes the vertical bond with the
Church rather than a horizontal bond with fellow citizens, has a negative impact on
people’s average level of trust in others. Landes (1998) focuses on tolerance and claims
that the culture of intolerance diffused by the Catholic Inquisition negatively affected the
ability of Catholic countries to grow.
We follow this more recent literature in considering religious beliefs as low
frequency variables, based on religious teachings, which affect people’s attitudes towards
the economic system. These religious teachings do not necessarily reflect the authentic
message contained in the sacred texts. They simply represent the way certain religion

9

beliefs became crystallized over time and the way they are taught and transmitted from
one generation to the next. As a result, even if we were willing to interpret in a causal
way the negative correlation between attitudes towards private property and the Muslim
religion, we do not want to say that this is Mohammed’s or the Quaran’s fault, but simply
the effect of the Muslim cultural tradition and the way it has evolved as a result of
historical circumstances.

Existing empirical studies
In his survey on the economics of religions, Iannaccone (1998) claims that “the
most noteworthy feature of the Protestant Ethic thesis is its absence of empirical
support.” In fact, work by Samuelsson (1993) and Tawney (1926) shows that most of the
capitalist institutions described by Weber were antecedent to the Protestant Reformation.
However, this evidence only rejects the specific channel proposed by Weber, not
a more general link between the Protestant ethic and the development of a capitalist
attitude. In fact, in a cross-country study of former British, French, and Spanish colonies,
Grier (1997) shows that Protestantism is correlated positively with growth and
development.
To verify or disprove Weber’s thesis, however, it is necessary to go past the fact
that the Protestant countries have been more successful economically. This was the fact
that motivated Weber in the first place, so it cannot be used to test his theory.
Blum and Dudley (2001) make an important step in this direction. First, they
refine Weber’s thesis. They argue that Protestantism, by rejecting the Catholic sacrament
of penance and increasing the individual penalty for defaulting, improved the level of

10

mutual trust and cooperation. Second, they use this theory to explain why wages rose in
Protestant cities between 1500 and 1750, while at the same time the wages in Catholic
cities fell.
The recent literature can be distinguished between macro and micro studies. The
macro literature focuses on cross-countries studies. La Porta et al. (1997) and Inglehart
(1999) provide evidence in favor of Putnam’s argument that Catholic countries have a
lower level of trust. Barro and McCleary (2002) find that economic growth responds
positively to the extent of religious beliefs, but negatively to church attendance. Finally
Stulz and Williamson (2001) claim that countries permeated by Catholic culture, with its
traditional anti-usury bent, tend to protect creditors’ rights less.
The problem with these studies is that there are too many institutional differences
across countries and too few degrees of freedom to identify the specific effects of
religions separately. For example, it is impossible to distinguish whether the ultimate
effect is due to the country’s main religion or to some other characteristics correlated
with the beliefs of the dominant religion. Country-fixed effects would solve this
identification problem, but they cannot be used in this framework.
At the micro level, there are several studies on the effects of religion on economic
outcomes. Religion seems to affect wages (Chiswick, 1983), school attendance (Freeman,
1986), health (Ellison, 1991), and criminal behavior (Evans et al., 1995). Yet, there are
problems with these studies. First, there is an issue of endogeneity: “good kids may avoid
drugs, stay in school, and go to church” (Freeman, 1986). Thus, it is far from clear that
the correlation is causal. Second, these studies are based on a single country (generally
the United States). Thus, they can hardly be generalized to other countries. Finally, they

11

focus on the correlation between religion and outcomes, not attitudes. Outcomes are the
result of attitudes but also of the surrounding environment. For example, ceteris paribus
Catholics in the United States tend to have higher wages (not as high as Jews, but higher
than other religions). But this success is generally attributed to the quality of their
educational system. Thus, it is not necessarily Catholicism per se that makes them more
successful in life, but rather the interaction between the educational system and Catholic
Church organizations in the United States. It would be very dangerous, therefore, to
extrapolate this result to Latin America and to claim for example, that Catholicism would
have a positive influence on the standard of living there.
In sum, more than one hundred years after its inception, the debate on the
economic effects of religion is far from settled. The complexity and variety of every
religion make it impossible to reach any conclusion on purely theoretical grounds. On the
other hand, empirical work is plagued by identification problems.

Our Empirical Strategy
We plan to overcome these problems in the following ways. First, we will control
for individual country effects, eliminating the impact of other institutional variables. This
approach runs the risk of underestimating the effect of religion to the extent its impact
has been absorbed fully in the national culture.1 Nevertheless, what we find can be
attributed more credibly to religion.
Second, we use religious upbringing to identify the effect of religion that is
independent of individual characteristics, particularly those that are unobservable to us.

1

For example, the Italian philosopher Benedetto Croce stated that the Christian tradition has affected the
Italian culture so much that Italian cannot be considered non-Christian even if they are atheists.

12

Third, we reduce the effect of potentially spurious factors by looking at people’s
attitudes rather than at their economic outcome. Asking somebody his view on cheating
on taxes is different from asking him if he has cheated on his taxes. The first question,
however, is more appropriate for our purposes than the second. The decision of whether
to actually cheat is affected greatly by the probability of being caught. This is a function
of a country’s law enforcement, not of an individual’s attitude. Therefore, looking at
attitudes is a better way of identifying the effect of religious beliefs on people’s
preferences.
In spite of all these improvements, we are well aware of the difficulty in
interpreting the observed correlations as causal effects. The traditional latent variable
critique (that a latent variable causes people both to be more religious and to behave in a
certain way) can be applied even to religious upbringing, as long as we are willing to
assume that this latent variable can be transmitted from parents to children (either
genetically or through education). For this reason, we prefer to interpret our results as
more precisely estimated partial correlations. Even when, to simplify the exposition, we
will talk about the “impact” of religion, the reader should interpret this as mere
correlation.
We choose as our dependent variables attitudes that might have an important
economic impact. Our variables can be grouped into six categories; attitudes toward: 1)
trust and cooperation; 2) women; 3) the government; 4) the law; 5) the market and its
fairness; 6) thriftiness. We chose the first set of variables because trust and cooperation
have been shown to be relevant for economic growth (Knack and Keefer, 1997, Knack
and Zak, 2001). Also, Landes (1998) claims that intolerance has negative impact on

13

growth. We chose to look at attitudes toward women because of their obvious link with
the labor market participation decision and thus with a country’s endowment of labor. We
looked at attitudes toward the government because political instability has been shown to
be detrimental for growth (e.g. Barro, 1991) and investments (e.g. Alesina and Perotti,
1994). Attitudes toward the law are important because they affect a country’s law-andorder tradition, which in turn affects financial development (La Porta et al, 1997) and
finally growth. One of the variables analyzed here is the attitude toward corruption,
which has been shown to be detrimental to growth (Mauro, 1995). Pro-market policies
are widely believed to favor growth, and Easton and Walker (1997) provide systematic
evidence for this. Finally, we look at attitudes toward thrift not only for historical reasons
(Weber attributed the success of Capitalism in certain countries to Protestants’ superior
thrift), but also because of its importance in the modern theory of growth.

II. The Data
Description of the World Value Survey
The World Values Survey (WVS) is a cross-country project coordinated by the
Institute for Social Research of the University of Michigan, under the direction of Ronald
Inglehart. Each wave carries out representative national surveys of the basic values and
beliefs of individuals in a large cross-section of countries. This questionnaire contains
information about demographics (sex, age, education, etc.), self-reported economic
characteristics (income, social class), and answers to specific questions about religion,
political preferences, and attitudes.

14

We use the last three waves that are available (1981-4, 1990-3 and 1995-7).
Respondents come from 66 independent countries. These countries include almost 80
percent of the world's population. The coverage of countries varies across surveys. The
1981-3 survey covered 22 independent countries and Northern Ireland; the 1990-3 survey
expanded to cover 42 independent countries, Northern Ireland, and greater Moscow; the
1995-7 survey covered 54 independent countries.
Being a large and very complex dataset, the WVS suffers from some coding
problems. Even after implementing all the changes suggested by the codebook, we found
that a few countries have a distribution of religious denominations that is very different
from the one reported in the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) factbook. To be on
the safe side, we eliminated these country-years.2 We might thus be eliminating valid
observations for countries where the survey weights are very different from the
population weights. Nevertheless, we think this procedure does not introduce any clear
bias, while the opposite type of error would.
We were also forced to drop a few countries because of missing data on some
other variables that are crucial for our analysis (these countries included Canada, South
Korea, Pakistan, China, the Czech Republic and Slovakia). The summary statistics for the
remaining countries are presented in Table 1.

2

As a result, we dropped Australia (1,228 obs.) for the 1981 wave; Canada (1,730 obs.) and Nigeria (1,001
obs.) for the 1990 wave; Taiwan (1,452 obs.), Nigeria (2,767 obs.), Ghana (95 obs.) and the Philippines
(1,200 obs.) for the 1995 wave. Our only doubt was Finland, where the percentage of Protestant was fine,
but the percentage of Jews appeared too high. For this reason, we reran all the regressions excluding
Finland, without appreciable differences in the results.

15

Measures of religious affiliation
Table 1, Panel A, reports summary statistics of the attitudes toward religion by
country. The first column reports the percentage of respondents that answered yes to the
question “Were you brought up religiously at home?” The second and third column
report the answer to the following question “Apart from weddings, funerals, and
christenings, about how often do you attend religious services these days?” The fourth
column is the percentage of people who answer no to the question “Do you believe in
God?”
Table 1, Panel B, reports the distribution of population by religious denomination
and country. Religious denomination is coded based on the answers to the following
question: “Do you belong to a religious denomination? IF YES: Which one?”
We use the first set of answers to identify the exogenous component of religion,
the one that does not depend on individual characteristics. To measure the intensity of
religious beliefs, we use the frequency of attendance at religious services, rather than
self-declared membership in a religious denomination. Many people who have been
raised in a certain religion continue to declare that they belong to that religion even if
they attend religious services less than once a year. We do not regard this as additional
information with respect to religious upbringing.3
Religious denominations differ in the extent to which they prescribe weekly
attendance at religious services. Our goal, though, is not to measure adherence to a
precept, but rather exposure to religious teachings. Since people who attend religious

3

In several specifications we have tried and used self-declared membership in a religious denomination
instead of attendance at religious services at least once a year, as a measure of religious belief. The results
were very similar.

16

services more are exposed to religious principles more, we use church attendance as a
proxy for the dimension of religiosity we care about.
Table 1, Panel C, reports the distribution of the intensity of religious beliefs by
religious denomination. People who declare themselves Catholic, for instance, attend
religious services much more often than people who declare themselves of any other
religious denomination except Hindu. In evaluating the potential impact of different
religious denominations, we have to take into consideration these systematic differences
in the intensity of beliefs.

Our dependent variables
Table 1, Panel D, reports the summary statistics for our dependent variables. All
of them represent measures of people’s attitudes. We focus on attitudes that have a direct
impact on economic life. We divide them into four groups.
Measures of attitude toward cooperation
The first group contains measures of people’s attitude toward cooperation.
Variable 1, which we label trust, is based on the following question: “Generally
speaking, would you say that most people can be trusted or that you can't be too careful
in dealing with people?” The variable is equal to 1 if participants report that most people
can be trusted and zero otherwise. Variables 2 and 3, which we label intolerance toward
other races and intolerance toward immigrants, respectively, are based on the following
question: “On this list are various groups of people. Could you please sort out any that
you would not like to have as neighbors?” (Variable 2: People of a different race;
Variable 3: The immigrants). Variable 4, which we label average intolerance, is the

17

combination of variables 2 and 3 and is equal to 1 if either variable 2 or 3 is equal to one
or if both are.

Measures of attitude toward government
The second group of variables contains measures of people’s attitude toward
government institutions. Variables 5, 6, and 7 are based on the following: “I am going to
name a number of organizations. For each one, could you tell me how much confidence
you have in it: a great deal of confidence, quite a lot of confidence, not very much
confidence, or none at all?” The answers are coded 1 to 4, by increasing degree of
confidence. The organizations we considered are the government, the police, and the
armed forces.

Measures of attitude toward women
The third group of variables contains measures of people’s attitude toward
women. Since we are ultimately interested in the effects on labor participation, we
focused on questions that might influence women’s propensity to work. Hence, variable 8
is the answer to this question: “When jobs are scarce, should men have more right to a
job than women?” Answers are coded 1 to 4; we recoded them so that a higher number
represents a higher degree of agreement. Variable 9 comes from the answer to the
question: “Do you think that women should have children in order to be fulfilled, or is
this not necessary?” The answer needs children is coded as one, the answer not
necessary is coded as zero. Variables 10 to 12 come from the answer to the question “For
each of the following statements I read out, can you tell me how much you agree with

18

each. Do you agree strongly, agree, disagree, or disagree strongly?” The statements are:
“Being a housewife is just as fulfilling as working for pay” (variable 10); “Both the
husband and wife should contribute to household income” (variable 11); “A university
education is more important for a boy than for a girl” (variable 12). We recoded them so
that a higher number represents a higher degree of agreement.

Measures of attitude toward legal norms
The fourth group of variables contains measures of people’s attitude toward legal
norms. Variable 13 is based on a question similar to variables 5 to 7, except that the
organization mentioned is the legal system. Answers are coded 1 to 4; we recoded them
so that a higher number represents a higher degree of confidence. Variables 14 to 18 are
based on the following question: “ Please tell me for each of the following statements
whether you think it can always be justified, never be justified, or something in between,
using this card.” Answers are in the range 1-10, with 1 = never justifiable and 10=
always justifiable.
The questions we are interested in are: “Claiming government benefits to which
you are not entitled” (var. 14); “Avoiding a fare on public transport” (var.
15);“Cheating on taxes if you have a chance” (var. 16); “Buying something you knew
was stolen” (var. 17); “Accepting a bribe in the course of their duties” (var. 18).
Measures of attitude toward the market
The fifth group contains measures of people’s attitude toward the market
(variables 19-21). They are based on the following question: “Now I'd like you to tell me

19

your views on various issues. How would you place your views on this scale? 1 means
you agree completely with the statement on the left; 10 means you agree completely with
the statement on the right; and if your views fall somewhere in between, you can choose
any number in between.” The statement on the left is normally the opposite of the
statement on the right. The statements considered are (reporting only the statements on
the right): “We need larger income differences as incentives for individual effort” (var.
19); “Private ownership of business and industry should be increased” (var. 20);
“Competition is good. It stimulates people to work hard and develop new ideas” (var.21).
Measures of attitude toward the thriftiness and fairness of the market
As measure of attitude toward thriftiness, we use the answer to the question: Here
is a list of qualities that children can be encouraged to learn at home. Which, if any, do
you consider to be especially important? We code a 1 if the respondent lists as important
“Thrift, saving money and things”.4
Variables from 23 to 25 are questions framed as are variables 19 to 21, except that
the statements are: “People should take more responsibility to provide for themselves”
(var. 23);“In the long run hard work usually brings a better life” (var. 24); “Wealth can
grow so there is enough for everybody” (var.25).
Finally, variable 26 is based on the question: “Why, in your opinion, are there
people in this country who live in need? Here are two opinions: Which comes closest to
you view? We code as 1 the answer “They are poor because of laziness and lack of will
power” and zero the answer “They are poor because society treats them unfairly.”

4

The interviewed person is presented with a list of eleven alternatives, ranging from imagination to
obedience, and can mention at most five as important.

20

Other control variables
To isolate the effect of religion from other confounding effects, we control for
country fixed effects and several individual characteristics. This strategy might
underestimate the impact of religion, since religion positively affects health (Ellison,
1991, Levin, 1994 and Levin and Vanderpool, 1987), and income (Chiswick, 1983).
Nevertheless, we think it is important to establish whether religion has an additional
direct effect.
Table 1, Panel E, reports the demographic characteristics of the respondents.
“Health” is coded based on the question: “All in all, how would you describe your state of
health these days?” (1=Very poor; 2=Poor, 3=Fair, 4=Good, 5=Very good). “Male” is an
indicator variable equal to one if the respondent is male, otherwise it is zero. “Age” is
expressed in years. “Education” is the age in years at which the respondent completed his
or her highest education (excluding apprenticeships). “Social class” is coded based on the
response to the question: “People sometimes describe themselves as belonging to the
working class, the middle class, or the upper or lower class. Would you describe yourself
as belonging to the: 1=Lower class, 2=Working class, 3=Lower middle class, 4=Upper
middle class, 5=Upper class.”
“Income” is coded based on the response to the question: “Here is a scale of
incomes. We would like to know in what group your household is, counting all wages,
salaries, pensions, and other income that comes in. Just give the letter of the group your
household falls into, before taxes and other deductions” (income categories are coded by
decile for each society, 1=lowest decile, 10=highest decile).

21

III. The Impact of Religion
In Table 2 we present our results on the overall effects of religion. Each attitude
is regressed on our four indicators of religiosity - atheists, people brought up religiously,
currently religious, and actively religious - some control variables, country specific
effects, and calendar year dummies. The size of the reference sample differs across
regressions; valid observations vary according to specific questions on individual
attitudes, and range from 52,252 to 95,739.
Control variables
Before we comment on the results on the impact of religion, it is useful to discuss
the effect of our control variables. The results, which are of independent interest, are
very reasonable and provide credibility to the measures of attitude we are going to use.
First, health has a strong positive impact on all attitudes. Healthier people trust
other people more, are more tolerant, trust the government and the police more, have a
more progressive attitude toward women, are less likely to break legal norms, and believe
more in markets. The only exception is that healthier people view thrift as less of a value
(perhaps because, being healthy, they appreciate the benefits of precautionary saving
less). All of these results are statistically significant. From a quantitative point of view,
the strongest impact is on trust toward others; an improvement in the health status from
“fair” to “very good” increases the average level by 27 percent. In intolerance toward
immigrants, the same increase in health reduces the level of intolerance by 12 percent.
Gender also plays a role in some, but not all, attitudes. Males tend to be more
intolerant, to trust the government and the armed forces more (but not the police), to be

22

more likely to break legal norms, and to be more in favor of markets. Not surprisingly,
their attitude toward women is less progressive than that of women themselves.
Older people tend to trust others more, perhaps reflecting a cohort effect, but they
are also more intolerant and less progressive toward women. They trust government
institutions more, and they are less likely to break the law. Their attitude toward markets,
however, is more mixed. Older people lean more toward equality in the equality versus
incentives trade off and are less enthusiastic about an increase in private ownership. On
the other hand, they believe more in individual (instead of government) responsibility,
they believe more that competition is good, and that hard work improves life. They also
have more confidence that wealth can grow so that there is enough for everyone.
Education increases trust toward others, reduces intolerance, and improves
attitude toward women, but it does decrease the level of trust in government institutions.
Education tends to reduce the willingness to break legal norms, but the effect is not
always there. For example, more educated individuals seem to be more willing to cheat
on taxes (although this effect is not statistically significant) and more willing to avoid
paying the fare on public transport. Education also seems to improve attitude toward the
market, but to decrease thriftiness and the conviction that the market outcome is fair.
More educated people are more willing to believe that success is a matter of luck and
connections rather than hard work and less willing to believe that the poor are such
because they are lazy.
A higher (self-perceived) social status is associated with more trust toward others,
but also more intolerance. Its impact on trust toward government institutions is mixed and
tends not to be significant. A higher (self-perceived) social status also is associated with

23

a lower willingness to break legal norms and with a higher acceptance of market
principles.
Finally, higher income has similar effects to higher social status but with a few
interesting exceptions. Higher income people have more progressive attitudes toward
women, although they perceive that the wife has less of a duty to contribute to household
income. Higher income people are more (rather than less) tolerant, but trust government
institutions less. In general they are less willing to break legal norms, but there are two
important exceptions: they are more willing to cheat on taxes and more willing to justify
a bribe.
In summary, while these controls are difficult to interpret because they may be
reflecting several effects, their sign conforms to some intuitive priors, and this reassures
us that the attitudes we are focusing on are correctly picking up what they are meant to
measure.
The average impact of religiosity
Table 2 also contains our estimates for the impact of different levels of religiosity.
The excluded group is made up of non-religious people, who are not openly atheist. The
effects should be read cumulatively. Hence, the trust of somebody who has been raised
religiously and attends service at least once a week (and thus also at least once a month)
can be obtained by adding the coefficients for our three indicators of religiosity. For this
reason, we also report the cumulative effects at the bottom of the table.
We find that on average religion is good for the development of stronger
institutions. Religious people trust others more, trust the government more, are less

24

willing to break the law, and believe more in the fairness of the market, but they are more
intolerant and they have less progressive attitudes toward women.
In general, convinced atheists behave in the opposite way from religious people:
they are more tolerant, less trusting of the government and the police, have more
progressive attitudes toward women, trust the legal system less, are more willing to break
the law, and have worse attitudes toward the market and its perceived fairness. The only
exception is that atheists tend to trust other people more. These effects are not simply
attributable to the attitudes of Communists in the former socialist countries. Excluding
former socialist countries from the sample yields similar results (not reported).
Interestingly, the aspect of religion that seems to matter is different for the
various attitudes. “Trust toward others” is affected mostly by religious participation, not
by being brought up religiously. This could be because this effect is entirely spurious
(good people trust others more and they attend church) or that the dominant aspect is
socialization at the service, rather than religious upbringing. By contrast, intolerance is
mostly (but not uniquely) an outcome of being raised religiously. Active churchgoers are
not more intolerant toward immigrants than the rest of the population (but not less either).
Finally, both a religious upbringing and active religious participation increase trust
toward government institutions.

Similarly, the more conservative attitude of religious

people toward women is not associated with religious upbringing: the more a person
participates in religious services, the more his attitude toward women is conservative.
Not surprisingly, religious upbringing and affiliation are associated with a
reduced willingness to break any sort of legal rule. It is important to stress that this result
is also present for religious upbringing alone, which is a sign that this is not just the result

25

of a spurious correlation between unobserved individual characteristics, religiosity, and
attitude toward legal norms.
The correlation between religiosity and attitudes toward the market is more
complex. People raised religiously are less willing to trade off equality for incentives and
are less in favor of private property. The correlation changes sign, however, when it
comes to people attending religious services on a more regular basis: they are more
willing to trade off equality for incentives and in particular, they favor more private
ownership.
By contrast, religiosity is associated with a higher emphasis on thrift, a greater
sense of individual responsibility, and a stronger belief that the market outcome is fair.
Interestingly, religious people are more likely to believe that people are in need because
they are lazy and lack willpower rather than because society treats them unfairly. Overall,
religious people tend to be more supportive of markets.
The effect of religious upbringing is particularly interesting in light of the
identification problem that plagues all the studies on the effects of religion. Any “effect”
of religion might be spurious because of some underlying characteristics that shape both
religious behavior and the attitudes we focus on. This is the case for example, when we
analyze the relationship between attendance to service and attitudes toward women.
Being raised religiously, however, is not a choice and cannot be attributed to individual
characteristics. It is still possible, though, that religious upbringing might be correlated
with some latent characteristics of the parents, which affect children’s attitudes directly
and not through religious education.

26

Therefore, even when we use religious upbringing, we cannot exclude the
possibility that a latent variable might drive both religiosity and people’s attitudes. For
each individual attitude, it is easy to imagine such a variable. For example, individual (or
parents) sociability can easily explain both religious attendance (upbringing) and level of
trust toward other people. Nevertheless, it is difficult to imagine the same latent variable
explaining all the dependent variables. If more social people are more trusting, how do
we explain that they are also more intolerant? One would need several latent variables, all
positively correlated, to explain all of our facts. At this point, Occam’s razor should lead
us to accept a causal interpretation of our results.
Yet, even if the observed correlations were driven entirely by unobserved
individual characteristics, we still think it is interesting to show that the characteristics
that make somebody attend religious services on a regular basis also make her more
intolerant toward immigrants and people of other races. Even if religious people are more
intolerant because of personal characteristics, it is hard to imagine that a community that
attracts the intolerant would not breed further intolerance.
Does the impact differ if a religion is dominant?
Before probing into the differences between religions, we want to distinguish the
effect of religiosity from the effect of adhering to a country’s dominant religion. A
dominant religion often becomes enmeshed with the national culture and transmitted
from generation to generation, not necessarily because of some deep convictions but by
force of habit. Thus, being raised religiously and attending the services of the country’s
dominant religion might mean very different things from being raised religiously and
attending the services of a minority religion.

27

For this reason, we separately control for the effect of being raised in and being
affiliated with the dominant religion (defined as the religion with the highest number of
affilates).5 The results are reported in Table 3.
Overall, the impact of religiosity seems to be smaller when this is the dominant
religion, but there are important differences. For example, we noted earlier that being
raised religiously had a small effect on trust toward others. It turns out that this weak
result is the combination of two strong but opposite effects. Somebody raised religiously
tends to trust others more, if the religion is not the dominant one. Religious upbringing in
the dominant religion is associated with a reduced trust toward others. By contrast, most
of the correlation between religion and intolerance is attributable to dominant religions.
Similarly, most of the effect of religious upbringing on the attitude toward the police and
the armed forces is attributable to being raised in the dominant religion. The effect is
negative when somebody is raised in another religion.
The anti-women bias associated with religious education is entirely associated
with the dominant religion. By contrast, regular churchgoers are relatively less
conservative toward women if they belong to the dominant religion. Similarly, regular
attendance at religious services has a less negative impact on the willingness to break
legal norms when a person attends the services of the dominant religion. We interpret
these results as suggesting that regular attendance at religious services is less an indicator
of true religious beliefs when the religion is the dominant one.
When it comes to attitudes toward the market, the differential impact of religiosity
in the dominant religion is mixed. The dominant religion tends to increase the effect of
being raised religiously on the attitude toward the market and the fairness of its
5

For this definition we use the CIA Factbook.

28

outcomes, but reduces the impact of service attendance, again consistent with this being
less a sign of strong religious beliefs.

IV. The Impact of Different Religions
Thus far we have only provided evidence that religiosity matters in general. Most
of the debate in the literature, however, is not about the effects of religion per se, but the
effects of different religions. We deal with this in Table 4.
For those people who claim to belong to a specific religious denomination, Table
4 differentiates the effect of being raised religiously, attending religious services at least
once a year, and attending services at least once a month, for the six major religious
denominations: Catholics, Protestants, Jews, Muslims, Hindus, and Buddhists.
Unfortunately, the questionnaires do not treat Eastern Orthodox consistently (in two of
the three surveys they are mixed with “others religious denominations”), so we do not
have a separate category for them. For reasons of space we select a subset of variables for
each of the four types of attitudes we study.6
Religious upbringing has a negative and statistically significant impact on trust
for Catholics, Muslims, and Hindus. In all other religions the effect is null. By contrast, in
all religions a higher attendance at religious services is associated with a higher level of
trust toward others. The only exception is Hinduism. To compare the overall effect of
religion, the last two columns of Table 4 report the total. The next to last column shows
6

These are: general trust and intolerance toward others (as representative of attitudes toward cooperation);
trust the government (for attitudes toward the government and other institutions); trust the legal system,
cheating on taxes and accepting a bribe (for attitudes toward legal rules); men deserve scarce jobs and
university education, respectively, more than women (as representative of opinions toward women);
income inequality as providing incentives, opinions about increasing private ownership, and judgement
about competition (as representative of attitudes toward the market) and teaching thriftiness to children and

29

the total impact on trust of a person who attends a religious service at least once a week.
Since the incidence of churchgoers differs across religious denominations, these figures
do not represent a true average impact of a specific religious denomination. Hence, in the
last column of table 4 we weigh the impact of the different level of religiosity by the
denomination-specific level of religiosity. Most of the time the two numbers tell the
same story, but we point out important exceptions.
Overall, Christian religions foster trust, but more so for Protestants. Because the
sign is opposite when we focus on religious upbringing, we should be suspicious that the
effect is spurious. On the other hand, the fact that it is not present for every religion is
evidence against a purely spurious effect. Why would more trusting people attend
religious services more often if they are Catholics or Protestants, but not if they are Jews
or Muslims? At the very least, we should admit that there is something specific to these
religions (and not to the others) that attracts more trusting people. The “impact” of being
Protestant is almost twice as large as that of being Catholic, and this difference is
statistically significant. In turn, Catholicism breeds trust more than any other nonChristian religion. The only caveat for Jews is that the sample does not include Israel, so
all the Jews are minorities living in countries dominated by people of different religious
denominations. Thus, this difference might reflect the discrimination to which they are
subject.
The relation between religion and intolerance seems to be present in all religious
denominations, both for religious upbringing and for attendance at religious services.
Only Buddhists are more tolerant. The point estimates for Protestants and Catholics are

believing the poor are so because are lazy (as representative of opinions about thriftiness and the fairness
of markets).

30

very similar, while those of Muslims are much higher, and those of Hindus even higher.
Actively religious Hindus are 29 percent more intolerant than non-religious people,
Muslims 19 percent, actively religious Protestant and Catholics 7 percent more.
Religious upbringing increases trust in the government for Muslims and to a
lesser extent, for Hindus. Religious participation increases trust in the government for all
religious denominations except Buddhists. The effect is stronger for Hindus and
Muslims, weaker for Catholics and Protestants.
As Panels D and E show, all religious denominations are associated with a more
conservative attitude toward women. However, that effect is twice as strong for Muslims
than for any other religion.
Similarly, all religions result in increased trust in the legal system and reduced
willingness to break legal rules; however, the effect differs significantly across religious
denominations. Judaism has the strongest negative impact on willingness to cheat on
taxes, Protestantism second, Catholicism and Hinduism third, and Islam fourth. The
rankings are different when it comes to accepting a bribe. The strongest negative impact
comes from Buddhism, with Protestants and Muslims next, and Catholics last.
Religions differ most in their position on the trade off between equality and
incentives. Protestants and Hindus are more willing to trade off equality for incentives,
while Jews and Muslims are less so. For the other religions, the effect is insignificant.
Religious denominations also differ in their attitudes toward private ownership.
Protestants, Catholics, and Hindus want more private ownership, while Muslims want
significantly less private ownership. Interestingly, Catholics support private ownership
twice as much as Protestants (and the difference is statistically significant at the 10

31

percent level). Catholics also are more in favor of competition than any other religious
group (including Protestants), while religious Muslims and Hindus are strongly against
competition.
Only Catholics believe strongly that thrift is a value to be taught to children.
Among Protestants, only those who attend religious services just once a year share this
conviction. Regular churchgoers are less likely to include thrift as a value to be taught to
children. This is somewhat at odds with Weber’s claim that the Protestant religion has
favored the development of capitalism through its emphasis on thrift.
Finally, religious people of all denominations (except Buddhists) are more
inclined to believe that people in need are lazy and lack will power. The effect is
somewhat stronger for Protestants than for Catholics.
Does the impact differ if a religion is a minority?
Table 5 reports the results obtained by dividing the sample on the basis of the
dominant religion (as reported in the CIA Factbook). For space considerations, we only
report the results with the three main religions: Catholicism, Protestantism, and Islam.
In Catholic-dominated countries, religions have a less positive impact on trust
toward others for all religious denominations, including Catholics themselves. Not
surprisingly, religions tend to increase intolerance only when they are dominant. Thus,
Catholics are more intolerant in Catholic countries, but not in Protestant countries;
Protestants are more intolerant in Protestant countries, but not in Catholic ones. An
interesting result comes from panel C: religious Jews trust the government less in a
Catholic-dominated country, while they trust it significantly more in Protestant-

32

dominated countries. This result can be explained easily in light of the strong antiSemitism historically present in the Catholic Church’s tradition, as reflected in the way
that Jews were treated in the Papal state.7
The relationship between religiosity and other attitudes does not seem to be
affected greatly by what the dominant religion is.
Has the Impact of Catholicism Changed?
The aggregate-level evidence suggests the Catholic religion has a negative effect
on trust (La Porta et al, 1997, Inglehart, 1999) and institutions (La Porta et al., 1999). In
the micro data we find some evidence for the first, but very little evidence for the second.
One possibility is that these characteristics are not specific to Catholicism, but rather
come from other dimensions of the culture in the regions where Catholicism is prevalent
(mainly Southern European countries and their former colonies). Alternatively, these
qualities may have been specific to Catholicism, but they have changed since the reforms
introduced by the Second Vatican Council. In this latter case, they would simply survive
as a cultural aspect of countries imbued with Catholic culture, but not in the Catholic
people.
To try to separate these two effects we re-run the regressions described in Table 4,
splitting the sample based on the age of the respondent. The Second Vatican Council,
which took place in 1962, substantially changed Catholic doctrine and teaching. Not only
was the use of Latin in the Mass abolished, but also there was an opening up of dialogue
with the other religious denominations. As a result, Catholics after 1960 received a very
different education from their older peers. If these changes indeed affected the influence
7

For example, the yellow star used by the Nazis to single out the Jews was first introduced and used in the

33

of Catholicism, we should see a difference in the effect of Catholicism on the older
versus the younger generation. To control for generic cohort differences in Table 6, we
insert a dummy for people born after 1960 into the basic regression and then interact this
dummy with the different levels of religiosity of Catholics.
We find that Catholics raised after Vatican II are more trusting of other people
and less intolerant. Their religious upbringing and practice also have less of a negative
effect on women’s rights. Interestingly, Vatican II does not seem to have caused a
relaxation in moral values. While the younger cohort on average is more likely to break
legal norms, Catholics raised after Vatican II are less likely to break legal norms than
older Catholics (panel C). By contrast, Catholics raised after Vatican II are less promarket (panel C). They believe less in private property and competition. They value
thrift more, but they are more willing to believe that people are poor because of some
injustice in society.

These results overall provide some preliminary evidence in favor

of the hypothesis that the negative impact of Catholicism found in the previous literature
may be explained by some cultural characteristics that survive in countries imbued with
Catholic culture, but do not exist anymore in Catholic people. More research is needed to
investigate this hypothesis further. In the meantime, we can conclude that Catholicism
today is not a significant obstacle to economic development.
V. Conclusions
In our analysis of the effect of religion on people’s attitudes toward cooperation,
government, women, legal rules, the market economy, and thriftiness we have found a
remarkable number of regularities. We found on average that religion is good for the
Vatican State (Kertzer, 2001).

34

development of attitudes that are conducive to economic growth. But this statement needs
to be qualified.
First, religious people are more intolerant and have more conservative views of the
role of women in society. Second, these correlations differ depending on whether a
specific religious denomination dominates in a country. Third, these correlations differ
across religious denominations.
Since Weber the previous literature on the effects of religions on growth has tried to
“rank” religions or at least highlight characteristics in some religious denominations that
would make them more conducive for economic growth than others. If we try to do the
same with our results, the ranking would not be consistent across attitudes. On average,
Christian religions are more positively associated with attitudes that are conducive to
economic growth, while Islam is negatively associated. The ranking between the two
main Christian denominations is less clear. Protestants trust others and the legal system
more than Catholics and they are less willing to cheat on taxes and accept a bribe with
respect to Catholics. By contrast, Catholics support private ownership twice as much as
Protestants and are more in favor of competition than any other religious group
(including Protestants). The only case in which Protestants seem more pro-market than
Catholics is on incentives. When asked whether they are willing to accept more income
inequality to provide incentives Protestants and Hindus are the only religious groups that
favor incentives. This result is consistent with Weber’s view.
From these results, however, we cannot conclude which religion is better for growth.
In order to answer this question two further steps are necessary. First, we need to
investigate the relative importance of the attitudes studied for economic growth. Second,

35

we need to make a stronger case that the statistical relations observed are causal. Further
research is needed.

36

References
Alesina, Alberto, and Roberto Perotti, 1995, Taxation and Redistribution in an Open
Economy, European Economic Review 39, 961-79.
Barro, Robert J., 1991, Economic Growth in a Cross Section of Countries, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, May, 407-443.
Barro, Robert J. and Rachel M. McCleary, 2002, Religion and Political Economy in an
International Panel, manuscript, Harvard University.
Blum, Ulrich and Leonard Dudley, 2001, Religion and economic growth: was Weber
right?, Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 11(2): 207-230.
Chiswick, Barry R., 1983, The Earnings and Human Capital of American Jews, Journal
of Human Resources, 18 (3): 313–36.
Easton, Stephen T. and Michael A. Walker, 1997, Income, Growth, and Economic
Freedom, American Economic Review 87(2): 328-32.
Eisenstadt, Shmuel Noah, 1968, The Protestant Ethic and Modernization: A Comparative
View. New York, Basic Books.
Ellison, Christopher G., 1991, Religious Involvement and Subjective Well-being, Journal
of Health & Social Behavior, 32(1): 80-99.
Evans, T. David et al., 1995, Religion and Crime Reexamined: The Impact of Religion,
Secular Controls, and Social Ecology on Adult Criminality, Criminology, 33(2):195-224.
Freeman, Richard B., 1986, Who Escapes? The Relation of Churchgoing and Other
Background Factors to the Socioeconomic Performance of Black Male Youths from
Inner-city Tracts, in: Richard B. Freeman and Harry J. Holzer, eds,. The Black Youth
Employment Crisis Chicago and London: U. Chicago Press, 353-76.
Grier, Robin, 1997, The Effect of Religion on Economic Development: A Cross-National
Study of 63 Former Colonies, Kyklos, 50(1): 47-62.
Iannaccone, Laurence R., 1998, Introduction to the Economics of Religion, Journal of
Economic Literature, 36(3): 1465-1496.
Inglehart Ronald, 1999, Trust, well-being and democracy in: Mark Warren, ed.,
Democracy and Trust, New York and Cambridge: Cambridge Univ. Press, 88-120.
Jomo, K.S., 1992, Islam and Capitalist Development: A Critique of Rodinson and Weber,
in: K.S. Jomo,ed., Islamic Economic Alternatives,. London, Macmillan.

37

Kertzer David, I, 2001, The Popes Against the Jews: The Vatican's Role in the Rise of
Modern Anti-Semitism, Random House.
Knack, Stephen, and Philip Keefer, 1997, Does Social Capital Have an Economic
Payoff? A Cross-Country Investigation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(4): 125188.
Knack, Stephen and Paul J. Zak, 2001, Trust and Growth, Economic Journal 111(470):
295-321.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny,
1997, Trust in large organizations, American Economic Review, 87(2): 333-338.
La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny,
1999, The Quality of Government, Journal of Law Economics & Organization. 15 (1):
222-79.
Landes, David, 1998, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, London: Little, Brown, and
Company.
Lessnoff, M.H., 1994, The Spirit of Capitalism and the Protestant Ethnic: An Enquiry
into the Weber Thesis. Aldershot, Edward Elgar.
Levin, Jeffery S., 1994, Religion and Health: Is There an Association, Is It Valid, and Is
It Causal?, Social Science Medical Journal, 38(11): 1475-82.
Levin, Jeffrey S. and Harold Y. Vanderpool, 1987, Is Frequent Religious Attendance
Really Conducive to Better Health? Toward and Epidemiology of Religion, Social
Science Medical Journal, 24(7): 589-600.
Mauro, Paolo, 1995, Corruption and Growth, Quarterly Journal of Economics 110(3):
681-712.
Marx, Karl, 1844, Contribution to the Critique of Hegel’s Philosophy of Law, Published
in the Deutsch Französische Jahrbücher.
Putnam, Robert, 1993, Making Democracy Work. Civic Traditions in Modern Italy,
Princeton, Princeton University Press.
Samuelsson, Kurt, 1993, Religion ad Economic Action: The Protestant Ethic, the Rise of
Capitalism, and the Abuses of Scholarship. Toronto: U. Toronto Press.
Steuart, Ian, 1998, An Investigation into the Relationship between Religion and
Economic Development, manuscript.

38

Stulz, Renee and Rohan Williamson, 2001, “Culture, Openness and Finance,” NBER
working paper 8222.
Tawney, Richard H., 1926, Religion and the Rise of Capitalism. New York: Harper and
Row.
Uppal, J.S., 1986, “Hinduism and Economic Development in South Asia,” International
Journal of Social Economics, 13(3):20-33.
Weber, Max, 1905, 1956, The Protestant Ethic and The Spirit of Capitalism. London,
Unwin.

39

Table 1: Sample Statistics
This table reports sample statistics of the responses from WORLD VALUES SURVEY 19811984, 1990-93 and 1995-97 (ICPSR 2790). Respondents were from 66 independent countries in
at least one wave. These countries include almost 80 percent of the world's population. The
coverage of countries varies across surveys. The 1981-83 survey covered 22 independent
countries plus Northern Ireland; the 1990-93 survey covered 42 independent countries plus
Northern Ireland, and Greater Moscow; the 1995-97 survey covered 54 independent countries.
Panel A reports summary statistics of religious beliefs by country. The first column reports the
percentage of respondents that answered yes to the question “Were you brought up religiously at
home?” The second and the third column reports the answer to the following question “Apart
from weddings, funerals and christenings, about how often do you attend religious services these
days?”. The fourth column is the percentage of people who answer no to the question “Do you
believe in God?”

Panel B reports distribution of population by religious denomination and country.
Religious denomination is coded based on the answers to the following question: “Do
you belong to a religious denomination? IF YES: Which one?”
Panel C reports summary statistics of the intensity of religious beliefs by religious
denomination.
Panel D reports summary statistics for the variables used in the regression analysis. Variable 1 is
based on the following question: “Generally speaking, would you say that most people can be
trusted or that you can't be too careful in dealing with people? The variable is equal to 1 if
participants report that most people can be trusted and zero otherwise. Variables 2 and 3 are
based on the following question: “On this list are various groups of people. Could you please sort
out any that you would not like to have as neighbors?” (Variable 2: People of a different race;
Variable 3: The immigrants). Variable 4 is the combination of variables 2 and 3 and is equal to 1
if either variable 2 or 3 or both is equal to one. Variables 5, 6 and 7 are based on the general
question: I am going to name a number of organizations. For each one, could you tell me how
much confidence you have in them: is it a great deal of confidence, quite a lot of confidence, not
very much confidence or none at all? Answers are coded 1-4, we recoded them so that a higher
number represents a higher degree of confidence. Organizations we considered are the
government, the police and the armed forces. Variables 8 comes from the answers to the question
Do you agree or disagree with the following statement: When jobs are scarce, men should have
more right to a job than women? Answers are coded 1-4, we recoded them so that a higher
number represents a higher degree of agreement. Variables 9 comes from the answers to the
question: Do you think that women should have children in order to be fulfilled or is this not
necessary? The answer needs children is coded as one, the answer not necessary is coded as a
zero. Variables 10-12 come from the answer to the question For each of the following statements
I read out, can you tell me how much you agree with each. Do you agree strongly, agree,
disagree, or disagree strongly? The statements are: Being a housewife is just as fulfilling as
working for pay (variable 10), Both the husband and wife should contribute to household income
(variable 11), A university education is more important for a boy than for a girl (variable 12). We
recoded them so that a higher number represents a higher degree of agreement. Variable 13 is
based on a question similar to variables 5 to 7, except that the organization mentioned is the legal
system. Answers are coded 1-4, we recoded them so that a higher number represents a higher
degree of confidence. Variables 14 to 18 are based on the following question: “ Please tell me for

40

each of the following statements whether you think it can always be justified, never be justified, or
something in between, using this card.” Answers are in the range 1-10, with 1 = never justifiable
and 10= always be justifiable. “Claiming government benefits to which you are not entitled” (var.
14). “Avoiding a fare on public transport” (var. 15). “Cheating on taxes if you have a chance”
(var. 16). “Buying something you knew was stolen” (var. 17). “Accepting a bribe in the course of
their duties” (var. 18). Variables 19-21 and 23 to 26 are based on the following question: Now I'd
like you to tell me your views on various issues. How would you place your views on this scale? 1
means you agree completely with the statement on the left; 10 means you agree completely with
the statement on the right; and if your views fall somewhere in between, you can choose any
number in between. The statement on the left is normally the opposite of the statement on the
right. Statements considered are (we report only statement on the right): We need larger income
differences as incentives for individual effort” (var. 19); “Private ownership of business and
industry should be increased“ (var. 20); “Competition is good. It stimulates to work hard and
develop new ideas” (var.21); People should take more responsibility to provide for themselves
(var. 23);“In the long run hard work usually brings a better life” (var. 24); “Wealth can grow so
there is enough for everybody” (var.25). Variable 22 is based on the answer to the question Here
is a list of qualities that children can be encouraged to learn at home. Which, if any, do you
consider to be especially important? We code as 1 if the respondent list as important “Thrift,
saving money and things”. Variable 26 is based on the question: Why, in your opinion, are there
people in this country who live in need? Here are two opinions: Which comes closest to you
view? We code as one the answer “They are poor because of laziness and lack of will power” and
zero the answer “They are poor because society treats them unfairly”.
Panel E reports the demographic characteristics of the respondents. “Health” is coded based on
the question: “All in all, how would you describe your state of health these days? (1=Very poor;
2=Poor, 3=Fair, 4=Good, 5=Very good)”. “Male” is an indicator variable equal to one if the
respondent is male, otherwise equal to zero. “Age” is expressed in years. “Education” is the age
in years at which the respondent completed his or her highest education (excluding
apprenticeships). “Social class” is coded based on the response to the question: “People
sometimes describe themselves as belonging to the working class, the middle class, or the upper
or lower class. Would you describe yourself as belonging to the: 1=Lower class, 2=Working
class, 3=Lower middle class, 4=Upper middle class, 5=Upper class”. “Income” is coded based on
the response to the question: “Here is a scale of incomes. We would like to know in what group
your household is, counting all wages, salaries, pensions and other incomes that come in. Just
give the letter of the group your household falls into, before taxes and other deductions” (income
categories are coded by decile for each society, 1=lowest decile, 10=highest decile).

41

Panel A: Attitudes towards religion by country (percentages)
Country

France
Britain
West Ger
Italy
Netherlands
Denmark
Belgium
Spain
Ireland
N. Ireland
U.S.A.
Japan
Mexico
S. Africa
Hungary
Australia
Norway
Sweden
Iceland
Argentina
Finland
Poland
Switzerland
Puerto Rico
Brazil
Chile
Belarus
India
East Ger
Slovenia
Bulgaria
Romania
Portugal
Austria
Turkey
Lithuania
Latvia
Estonia
Ukraine
Russia
Peru
Venezuela
Uruguay
Moldova
Georgia

Raised religiously Goes to church
at home
at least once a
year
32.38
37.1
23.84
30.38
43.3
56.34
56
76.86
32.57
53.22
19.8
42.68
60.12
51.21
75.33
57.9
42.44
93.73
41.4
81.33
48.28
74.57
14.26
71.06
50.57
82.06
68.52
48.78
27.97
43.32
64.06
46.34
28.27
47.98
21.13
37.77
32.29
53.22
54.8
59.88
29.44
53.41
96.84
92.35
68.26
58.23
86.77
81.19
76.08
68.41
79.92
63.96
25.65
46.77
91.39
89.27
43.71
34.88
72.82
63.61
39.55
44.73
76.97
85.4
83.8
59.92
82.05
67.67
60.64
54.68
68.09
38.43
27.58
44.56
16.07
25.33
30.74
54.46
15.96
27.13
78.2
78.78
84.5
77.92
67.3
34.8
63.72
75.2
44.43
73.81

42

Goes to church
at least once a
week
10.4
9.95
16.98
35.44
22.79
2.67
27.53
29.64
81.46
50.65
43.27
3.06
48.22
31.94
12.38
16.5
5.07
4.55
2.33
22.59
3.65
59.92
18.91
51.55
34.63
26.64
4.83
49.1
9.68
22.43
6.32
18.59
39.07
25.41
32.41
7.77
3.38
1.82
9.82
1.67
41.78
30.92
13.2
10.77
9.53

Do not believe Number
in God
of
respondents
33.02
2202
12.92
3808
19.35
4423
10.07
3366
29.54
2238
31.65
2212
22.28
3937
11.59
13370
2.75
2217
3.25
616
3.21
5706
25.45
3269
4.47
4878
1.6
7267
33.17
2463
18.65
2048
28.74
3612
39.44
3010
16.94
1629
7.58
3086
10.82
2578
1.48
2091
6.74
2612
0.69
1164
1.26
2931
3.76
2500
29.03
3107
5.99
4540
62.22
2345
33.3
2042
41.12
2106
5.98
1103
10.04
1185
11.92
1460
1.23
2937
5.97
2009
19.26
2103
21.49
2029
19.85
2811
30.3
6775
1.98
1211
0.92
1200
13.9
1000
8.94
984
6.56
2593

Armenia
Azerbaijan
Dominican
Republ
Bangladesh
Colombia
Serbia
Montenegro
Macedonia
Croatia
Bosnia

23.8
59.59
82.73

72.75
67.73
71.94

7.3
5.64
43.41

13.2
2.15
7.19

2000
2002
417

93.05
90.95
53.98
37.08
58.09
73.75
64.83

90.03
80.2
63.05
52.08
71.16
72.16
77.75

63.08
45.68
5.78
7.08
10.95
22.32
31

1.38
0.45
27.34
30.42
14.47
18.14
13.92

1525
6025
1280
240
995
1196
1200

All countries

53.62

59.25

23.75

14.77

149653

43

Panel B: Distribution of population by religious denomination and country (percentages)
Country
France
Britain
West Ger
Italy
Netherlands
Denmark
Belgium
Spain
Ireland
N. Ireland
U.S.A.
Japan
Mexico
S. Africa
Hungary
Australia
Norway
Sweden
Iceland
Argentina
Finland
Poland
Switzerland
Puerto Rico
Brazil
Chile
Belarus
India
East Ger
Slovenia
Bulgaria
Romania
Portugal
Austria
Turkey
Lithuania
Latvia
Estonia
Ukraine
Russia
Peru
Venezuela
Uruguay
Moldova
Georgia
Armenia

Catholic Protestant Jewish Muslim Hindu Buddhist
63.18
10.52
41.16
86.89
31.01
1.08
70.57
84.7
94.77
27.08
28.57
0.73
77.82
11.59
70.86
26.71
0.76
3.21
0.44
78.17
13.23
94.82
51.67
56.91
70.32
77.84
9.72
2.1
11.96
70.19
0.67
2.27
77.13
76.23
0.4
83.28
23.75
0.61
6.17
5.11
82.84
84.54
43.06
0.41
1.48
4.26

1.68
57.6
44.66
0.12
22.12
94.26
1.07
0.53
2.86
65.12
46.87
1.12
7.21
58.78
26.41
48.74
92.65
87.6
98.07
1.49
71.71
1.84
40.64
7.86
6.73
7.93
0.26
1.28
18.21
0.88
0.91
3.45
0.34
6.44
0.12
1.6
21.76
15.38
0.33
1.07
6.22
6.4
1.22
0.2
0.08
0.66

0.32
0.37
0.07
0.03
0
0.05
0.26
0.03
0
0
1.77
0.04
0.14
1.46
0.36
0.79
0.03
0.14
0
1.69
3.74
0
0.16
0
0.03
0.23
0.04
0.04
0.09
0
0.05
0
0.08
0.21
0.2
0.25
0.4
0
0.11
0.07
0
0
0.1
0
1.32
0.33

0.45
0.33
0.16
0
0.23
0.19
0.39
0.06
0.05
0
0.29
0
0.04
2
0.31
0.74
0.38
0.17
0
0.1
2.52
0
0.16
0
0.07
0
0.09
8.47
0
1.28
9.23
0.18
0
0
95.57
0.06
0.33
0.35
0.22
1.62
0.66
0
0
0.1
3.96
0

44

0.05
0.3
0.02
0
0.23
0.71
0
0.01
0
0
0.2
0.11
0.02
1.88
0
0.69
0.03
0.03
0
0.1
0
0.05
0.04
8.29
0
0.18
0.04
83.72
0
0
0.14
0
0
0
0
0.06
0
0
0.07
0.01
1.66
0.09
0
0
0
0

0.68
0.07
0.02
0.06
0.09
0.05
0.03
0.04
0
0
0.38
43.83
0.1
0.1
0
1.23
0.09
0.03
0
0.13
0
0.05
0.04
0.35
0.14
0.05
0
0.66
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0.12
0.07
0.44
0.07
0.79
0.17
0.09
0.1
0
0.19
0

Other
No religious
Affiliations Affiliations
16.09
17.55
2.62
28.19
0.75
13.16
0.77
12.13
3.04
43.29
0.47
3.20
1.1
26.58
0.6
14.03
0.5
1.82
2.82
4.98
9.41
12.52
6.31
47.86
1.36
13.30
14.17
10.01
1.44
0.62
1.87
19.22
2.92
3.15
8.81
0
1.5
0
4.25
14.06
1.18
7.61
1.45
1.79
2.49
4.79
7.86
18.74
10.84
11.87
8.29
5.50
59.19
30.66
1.61
2.10
0.43
69.31
1.92
25.74
39.01
50.00
88.21
5.89
1.01
21.43
0.62
16.51
2.37
1.35
6.48
8.14
23.95
29.74
19.67
63.55
59.52
33.49
25.9
65.42
1.41
7.05
1.2
7.69
8.78
46.73
84.13
15.16
86.83
6.14
86.56
8.20

Azerbaijan
Dominican
Republic
Bangladesh
Colombia
Serbia
Montenegro
Macedonia
Croatia
Bosnia

0.1
59.47

0.25
1.7

0.15
0

91.55
0

0
1.7

0
0

1.91
13.35

6.03
23.79

0.99
84.39
6.33
8.47
0.71
84.31
14.49

0
5.34
0.87
0
0.1
0.34
2.35

0
0.03
0
0
0.31
0.42
0.42

85.86
0
5.78
21.61
24.31
1.19
27.3

12.82
0
0
0
0
0.08
0

0.2
0
0
0
0
0
0

0.13
0
68.88
64.41
46.69
1.19
26.13

0
10.24
18.13
5.51
27.87
12.47
29.31

Total

40.87

19.7

0.36

5.29

3.07

1.01

11.61

17.19

Panel C. Religiosity by religious denomination (percentages)
Country

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Raised religiously Goes to church
at home
at least once a
year
70.3
75.3
47.4
59.5
44.6
57.0
67.9
67.8
83.8
84.7
22.2
75.8
51.0
68.2

45

Goes to church
at least once a
week
38.8
25.0
16.4
34.5
44.4
8.3
17.0

Panel D. Summary statistics of economic and social attitudes
Variable
Mean Median SD
Interq.
Range
Attitudes towards others
1. Trust people (0,1)
0.29
0
0.45
1
2. Intolerant towards other races (0,1)
0.12
0
0.33
0
3. Intolerant towards the immigrants (0,1)
0.14
0
0.35
0
4. Average intolerance
0.39
0.4
0.27
0.4

Min Max

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

Attitudes towards the government
5.Trust the government
6. Trust the police
7. Trust the armed forces

2.3
2.53
2.61

2
3
3

0.93
0.91
0.94

1
1
1

1
1
1

4
4
4

1.85

1

0.91

2

1

3

0.53

1

0.5

1

0

1

2.81

3

0.87

1

1

4

1.76

2

0.71

1

1

4

2.03

2

0.89

1

1

4

2.52

3

0.88

1

1

4

2.27

1

2.25

2

1

10

2.53
2.6
1.76
1.73

1
1
1
1

2.42
2.47
1.73
1.7

2
3
0
0

1
1
1
1

10
10
10
10

5.91

6

2.97

4

1

10

6.17

6

2.82

4

1

10

7.45

8

2.51

4

1

10

0.32

0

0.47

1

0

1

5.18

5

3.06

6

1

10

Attitudes towards women
8. When jobs are scarce, men should have more
right to a job than women
9. Do you think that women should have
children in order to be fulfilled
10. Being a housewife is just as fulfilling as
working for pay
11. Both the husband and wife should contribute
to household income
12. A university education is more important for
a boy than for a girl
Attitudes toward legal rules
13. Trust the legal system
14. It is justified to claim government benefits
you are not entitled to?
15. It is justified to avoid a fare on public
transport?
16. It is justified to cheat on taxes?
17. It is justified to buy a stolen object?
18. It is justified to accept a bribe?
Attitudes toward the market
19. Inequality of income gives incentives to
individuals versus income should be made more
equal
20. Private ownership should be increased
versus government ownership should be
increased
21. Competition is good versus competition is
harmful
Attitudes toward thriftiness
22. Do you thinks to be especially important
that children be encouraged to learn at home
“thrift, saving money and things”
Attitudes toward market’s fairness
23. Individual responsibility versus government
assistance

46

Variable

Mean Median

24. Hard work improves life versus success is
more a matter of luck and connections.
6.54
25. Wealth can grow so there's enough for
everyone versus one can get rich only at
expense of others
6.48
26. In your opinion who lives in need is poor
because of laziness and lack of will power
0.1

Mean
Health
Male
Age
Education
Social class
Income

2.7
0.46
43.13
18.06
2.52
4.75

SD

Interq.
Range

Min Max

7

2.91

5

1

10

7

2.77

4

1

10

0

0.3

0

0

1

Panel E: Demographic characteristics
Median Standard Deviation Minimum Maximum Observations
3
0
39
18
2
4

0.94
0.5
18.81
4.52
1.49
2.59

47

0
0
17
6
0
0

4
1
95
35
5
10

144704
149653
137520
127855
145518
122058

Table 2. Religion and social and economic attitudes
All the variables are defined in the legend of table 1. The row “Raised religiously+ Currently religious”
reports the sum of the coefficients for “Raised religiously”+ “Currently religious”, followed by the p-values
for the test that the sum of the coefficients is significantly different from zero (in brackets). The row
“Raised religiously+ Currently religious+Actively religious” reports the sum of the three coefficients,
followed by the p-values for the test that the sum of the coefficients is significantly different from zero (in
brackets). All the other numbers in brackets are standard errors. All the regressions include a country fixed
effect and survey-year dummies. Panel A: Attitudes toward others and the government
Trust people

Intolerant
toward other
races

Intolerant
toward
immigrants

Average
Trust the
intolerance government

Trust the
police

Trust the
army

0.0424***

-0.0052***

-0.0096***

-0.0039*** 0.0545***

0.0388***

0.0290***

(0.0017)

(0.0012)

(0.0014)

(0.0009)

(0.0047)

(0.0033)

(0.0033)

0.0027

0.0151***

0.0146***

0.0047***

0.0276***

-0.0046

0.0532***

(0.0029)

(0.0021)

(0.0023)

(0.0016)

(0.0076)

(0.0055)

(0.0056)

0.0011***

0.0009***

0.0006***

0.0016***

0.0048***

0.0048***

0.0069***

(0.0001)

(0.0001)

(0.0001)

(0.0001)

(0.0003)

(0.0002)

(0.0002)

0.0057***

-0.0031***

-0.0030***

(0.0004)

(0.0003)

(0.0003)

(0.0002)

(0.0009)

(0.0007)

(0.0007)

0.0129***

0.0020*

-0.0007

-0.0011

0.0122***

0.0068**

-0.0036

(0.0015)

(0.0011)

(0.0012)

(0.0008)

(0.0042)

(0.0028)

(0.0028)

0.0084***

-0.0040***

-0.0049***

(0.0007)

(0.0005)

(0.0005)

(0.0004)

(0.0019)

0.0313***

-0.0010

0.0123***

-0.0053**

-0.0128

(0.0044)

(0.0032)

(0.0034)

(0.0023)

(0.0117)

(0.0083)

(0.0085)

0.0075*

0.0120***

0.0107***

0.0068***

0.0556***

0.0233***

0.0086

(0.0039)

(0.0028)

(0.0030)

(0.0021)

(0.0096)

(0.0074)

(0.0076)

Currently
religious

0.0179***

0.0077***

0.0092***

0.0166***

0.0939***

0.1032***

0.1277***

(0.0035)

(0.0025)

(0.0028)

(0.0019)

(0.0094)

(0.0067)

(0.0068)

Actively
religious

0.0314***

0.0055*

0.0020

0.0056**

0.0448***

0.0964***

0.0860***

(0.0040)

(0.0029)

(0.0032)

(0.0022)

(0.0110)

(0.0077)

(0.0078)

Number of obs

95901

95739

91788

90340

52252

93803

94244

Adj. R squared

0.094

0.070

0.066

0.279

0.127

0.171

0.199

0.0254***

0.0197***

0.0199***

0.0234***

0.1495***

0.1265***

0.1363***

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

0.0568***

0.0252***

0.0219***

0.029***

0.1943***

0.2229***

0.2223***

Health
Male
Age
Education
Social class
Income
Atheist
Raised
religiously

Raised
religiously+
Currently
religious
Raised
religiously

48

-0.0017*** -0.0072*** -0.0094*** -0.0110***

-0.0016*** -0.0087*** -0.0086*** -0.0068***
(0.0013)

(0.0013)

-0.0622*** -0.1358***

religiously
+currently
religious
+actively
religious

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

Panel B: Attitudes toward women
Being a
When jobs are
Do you think that
scarce, men should women should housewife is just
as fulfilling as
have more right to have children in
working for pay
a job than women
order to be
fulfilled

A university
education is more
important for a boy
than for a girl

-0.0281***
(0.0038)
0.2126***
(0.0063)
0.0046***
(0.0002)
-0.0197***
(0.0008)
0.0044

-0.0067***
(0.0017)
0.0164***
(0.0029)
0.0026***
(0.0001)
-0.0062***
(0.0004)
0.0011

0.0120***
(0.0038)
0.1266***
(0.0062)
0.0037***
(0.0002)
-0.0122***
(0.0007)
0.0038

Both the
husband and
wife should
contribute to
household
income
-0.0045
(0.0042)
0.1380***
(0.0069)
-0.0004*
(0.0002)
-0.0051***
(0.0007)
-0.0057

(0.0035)
-0.0284***
(0.0015)
-0.1114***
(0.0095)
0.0414***

(0.0015)
-0.0045***
(0.0007)
-0.0508***
(0.0044)
0.0195***

(0.0034)
-0.0228***
(0.0015)
-0.0969***
(0.0095)
0.0488***

(0.0043)
0.0034**
(0.0017)
-0.0131
(0.0112)
0.0004

(0.0054)
-0.0197***
(0.0021)
-0.0373***
(0.0140)
0.0165

(0.0080)
0.0117

(0.0039)
0.0317***

(0.0079)
0.0526***

(0.0085)
0.0206**

(0.0107)
0.0196*

(0.0077)
0.0802***

(0.0035)
0.0302***

(0.0076)
0.1236***

(0.0085)
0.0592***

(0.0106)
0.0517***

Number of obs

(0.0088)
77347

(0.0040)
94401

(0.0087)
73467

(0.0095)
40788

(0.0119)
40025

Adj. R squared

0.141

0.257

0.098

0.083

0.124

0.0531***

0.0512***

0.1014***

0.021*

0.0361***

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0601 )

(0.0097 )

0.1333***

0.0814***

0.225***

0.0802***

0.0878***

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

Health
Male
Age
Education
Social class
Income
Atheist
Raised
religiously
Currently
religious
Actively
religious

Raised
religiously+
Currently
religious
Raised
religiously
+currently
religious
+actively
religious

49

-0.0235***
(0.0053)
0.1880***
(0.0086)
0.0037***
(0.0003)
-0.0102***
(0.0008)
-0.0050

Panel C: Attitudes towards legal rules
Trust the legal
system

Health
Male
Age
Education

Is it justified Is it justified to Is it justified Is it justified Is it justified
to buy a
to accept a
avoid a fare on to cheat on
to claim
stolen
bribe?
public
taxes?
government
object?
transport?
benefits you
are not entitled
to?

0.0428***
(0.0033)
-0.0059

-0.0634***
(0.0087)
0.1006***

-0.0596***
(0.0092)
0.1132***

-0.0479***
(0.0096)
0.3027***

(0.0056)

(0.0147)

(0.0155)

(0.0161)

0.0033***

-0.0167***

-0.0229***

-0.0196***

(0.0002)

(0.0005)

(0.0005)

(0.0005)

-0.0035***

-0.0074***

0.0074***

0.0005

-0.0294*** -0.0324***
(0.0066)
(0.0065)
0.1896*** 0.1518***
(0.0112)

(0.0110)

-0.0170*** -0.0130***
(0.0004)

(0.0004)

-0.0062*** -0.0048***

(0.0007)

(0.0019)

(0.0020)

(0.0020)

(0.0014)

(0.0014)

0.0005

-0.0674***

-0.0948***

-0.0508***

-0.0049

-0.0079

(0.0028)

(0.0074)

(0.0078)

(0.0081)

(0.0056)

(0.0055)

-0.0034***

-0.0105***

-0.0096***

0.0352***

-0.0038

0.0073***

(0.0013)

(0.0034)

(0.0036)

(0.0037)

(0.0026)

(0.0025)

Atheist

-0.0291***

0.1424***

0.1997***

0.2454***

0.2042***

0.0321*

(0.0084)

(0.0220)

(0.0232)

(0.0241)

(0.0167)

(0.0165)

Raised religiously

0.0470***

-0.0473**

-0.1585***

-0.1343***

(0.0075)

(0.0199)

(0.0210)

(0.0218)

(0.0151)

(0.0149)

0.0899***

0.0257

-0.0149

-0.0483**

-0.0335**

-0.0094

(0.0068)

(0.0179)

(0.0188)

(0.0196)

(0.0136)

(0.0134)

0.0740***

-0.0920***

-0.1699***

-0.2801***

(0.0077)

(0.0204)

(0.0215)

(0.0224)

(0.0155)

(0.0153)

Number of obs

94259

91793

93034

92392

93161

92878

Adj. R squared

0.092

0.090

0.120

0.094

0.070

0.067

0.1369***

-0.0216

-0.1734***

-0.1826***

-0.1306***

-0.073***

(0.0000 )

(0.3876 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0001 )

Social class
Income

Currently religious
Actively religious

Raised religiously+
Currently religious
Raised religiously
+currently
religious
+actively religious

0.2109

***

(0.0000 )

-0.1136

***

-0.3433

(0.0000 )

***

(0.0000 )

50

-0.4627

***

(0.0000 )

-0.0971*** -0.0636***

-0.1568*** -0.0897***

-0.2874

***

(0.0000 )

-0.1627***
(0.0000)

Panel D: Attitudes toward the market
Inequality of
income vs.
incentives

Private vs.
public ownership

Competition is
good or harmful

Raised religiously

0.0965***
(0.0126)
0.1923***
(0.0207)
-0.0015**
(0.0007)
0.0390***
(0.0026)
0.2168***
(0.0115)
0.1174***
(0.0049)
-0.2102***
(0.0310)
-0.0843***

0.1247***
(0.0121)
0.4641***
(0.0199)
-0.0054***
(0.0007)
0.0114***
(0.0025)
0.2003***
(0.0111)
0.0755***
(0.0047)
-0.2258***
(0.0298)
-0.0653***

0.1182***
(0.0110)
0.3098***
(0.0181)
0.0025***
(0.0006)
0.0115***
(0.0023)
0.1318***
(0.0101)
0.0467***
(0.0043)
-0.0924***
(0.0271)
-0.0081

Currently religious

(0.0262)
-0.0215

(0.0251)
0.1326***

(0.0229)
0.0622***

Actively religious

(0.0254)
0.0512*

(0.0245)
0.1179***

(0.0223)
-0.0054

Number of obs
Adj. R squared

(0.0297)
74126
0.100

(0.0287)
71881
0.130

(0.0260)
73311
0.064

-0.1058***

0.0673**

0.0541*

(0.0016 )
-0.0546

(0.0370 )
0.1852***

(0.0661 )
0.0487

(0.1476 )

(0.0000 )

(0.1410 )

Health
Male
Age
Education
Social class
Income
Atheist

Raised religiously+
Currently religious
Raised religiously
+currently religious
+actively religious

51

Panel E: Attitudes toward thriftiness and market’s fairness
Thrift to be
encouraged

Individual vs.
government
responsibility

Hard work
improves life

Wealth can
grow for
everyone

Poor are lazy

Number of obs

-0.0110***
(0.0018)
0.0036
(0.0030)
0.0024***
(0.0001)
-0.0063***
(0.0004)
-0.0133***
(0.0015)
-0.0070***
(0.0007)
-0.0193***
(0.0044)
0.0157***
(0.0040)
0.0064*
(0.0036)
-0.0156***
(0.0041)
94920

0.1270***
(0.0125)
0.2517***
(0.0205)
0.0003
(0.0007)
0.0092***
(0.0025)
0.1612***
(0.0114)
0.0731***
(0.0049)
-0.0530*
(0.0312)
-0.0266
(0.0261)
0.0897***
(0.0253)
0.0876***
(0.0291)
77217

0.1336***
(0.0126)
0.2625***
(0.0208)
0.0152***
(0.0007)
-0.0061**
(0.0026)
0.0894***
(0.0115)
0.0233***
(0.0049)
-0.0926***
(0.0311)
0.1357***
(0.0262)
0.1189***
(0.0255)
0.1772***
(0.0297)
74349

0.0981***
(0.0124)
-0.0889***
(0.0204)
0.0087***
(0.0007)
0.0168***
(0.0026)
-0.0035
(0.0113)
0.0324***
(0.0048)
-0.1397***
(0.0305)
-0.0039
(0.0257)
0.1205***
(0.0250)
0.1927***
(0.0292)
72229

0.0071***
(0.0011)
0.0177***
(0.0018)
-0.0000
(0.0001)
-0.0023***
(0.0002)
0.0142***
(0.0009)
0.0036***
(0.0004)
0.0013
(0.0027)
0.0044*
(0.0024)
0.0075***
(0.0022)
0.0072***
(0.0025)
92343

Adj. R squared

0.108

0.155

0.080

0.042

0.231

Raised religiously+
Currently religious

0.0221***
(0.0000 )

0.0631*
(0.0595 )

0.2546***
(0.0000 )

0.1166***
(0.0004 )

0.0119***
(0.0001 )

Raised religiously
+currently
religious
+actively religious

0.0065

0.1507***

0.4318***

0.3093***

0.0191***

(0.2320 )

(0.0001 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

Health
Male
Age
Education
Social class
Income
Atheist
Raised religiously
Currently religious
Actively religious

52

Table 3. The role of the dominant religion
All the panels report coefficients from different OLS regressions. The dependent variable of each regression is
indicated at the top of the column and is defined in the legend of Table 1. All regressions include (coefficients not
reported) the same demographic controls as in Table 2 (health, male, age, education, social class, income), an
indicator variable equal to 1 if a person answer no to the question “Do you believe in God?”, a country fixed
effect, and survey-year dummies. “Raised religiously” is an indicator variable equal to one if the respondent
answered positively to the question “Were you brought up religiously at home?”. “Currently religious” is an
indicator variable that is equal to one if the respondent attend religious services (apart from weddings, funerals
and christenings) at least once a year. “Actively religious” is an indicator variable that is equal to one if the
respondent attend religious services (apart from weddings, funerals and christenings) at least once a week.
“Raised religiously in dominant religion” is an indicator variable equal to one if “Raised religiously” is equal to
one and the respondent belongs to the religious denomination most followed in his/her country. “Currently
religious in dominant religion” is an indicator variable equal to one if “Currently religious” is equal to one and the
respondent belongs to the religious denomination most followed in his/her country. “Actively religious in
dominant religion” is an indicator variable equal to one if “Actively religious” is equal to one and the respondent
belongs to the religious denomination most followed in his/her country. Standard errors are reported in brackets.

Panel A: Attitudes towards others and the government
Trust people Intolerant
Intolerant
Average
Trust the
toward other toward
intolerance government
races
immigrants
Raised religiously
Currently religious
Actively religious

Trust the
police

Trust the
armed
forces

0.0167***

0.0007

0.0002

-0.0039

(0.0057)

(0.0040)

(0.0044)

(0.0030)

(0.0144)

(0.0107)

(0.0110)

0.0181***

0.0051

0.0024

0.0123***

0.0589***

0.0711***

0.0684***

(0.0059)

(0.0042)

(0.0045)

(0.0031)

(0.0153)

(0.0112)

(0.0114)

0.0323***

0.0072

-0.0026

-0.0052

0.0387*

0.0915***

0.0530***

(0.0082)

(0.0058)

(0.0063)

(0.0043)

(0.0217)

(0.0154)

(0.0157)

0.0144***

0.0169***

0.0165

0.0787***

0.0809***

(0.0047)

(0.0032)

(0.0162)

(0.0114)

(0.0116)

0.0041

0.0052

0.0315*

0.0331***

0.0840***

(0.0051)

(0.0035)

(0.0176)

(0.0125)

(0.0127)

0.0064

0.0137***

0.0145

0.0083

0.0429**

(0.0072)

(0.0050)

(0.0247)

(0.0174)

(0.0178)

Raised religiously -0.0156*** 0.0148***
in dominant
(0.0060)
(0.0043)
religion
Currently religious
0.0044
0.0022
in dominant
(0.0066)
(0.0047)
religion
Actively religious
-0.0015
-0.0017
in dominant
(0.0092)
(0.0066)
religion

0.0432*** -0.0279*** -0.0439***

Number of obs.

89677

89530

85614

84179

47667

87680

88124

R squared

0.095

0.073

0.070

0.272

0.132

0.171

0.197

53

Panel B: Attitudes towards women
Do you think that Being a housewife Both the husband
When jobs are
women should is just as fulfilling as and wife should
scarce, men
working for pay
contribute to
should have more have children in
household income
order to be
right to a job than
fulfilled
women
Raised religiously

A university
education is more
important for a boy
than for a girl

0.0019

0.0083

0.0296**

-0.0070

0.0231

(0.0118)

(0.0057)

(0.0117)

(0.0131)

(0.0163)

0.0274**

0.0287***

0.0373***

0.0013

0.0502***

(0.0130)

(0.0059)

(0.0129)

(0.0143)

(0.0178)

0.1397***

0.0440***

0.1848***

0.1142***

0.0200

(0.0182)

(0.0082)

(0.0180)

(0.0199)

(0.0247)

Raised religiously in
dominant religion

0.0643***

0.0206***

0.0312**

0.0099

-0.0210

(0.0130)

(0.0060)

(0.0129)

(0.0144)

(0.0179)

Currently religious
in dominant religion

-0.0108

0.0042

0.0294**

0.0218

-0.0402**

(0.0148)

(0.0066)

(0.0147)

(0.0159)

(0.0198)

-0.0811***

-0.0198**

-0.0797***

-0.0679***

0.0399

(0.0205)

(0.0092)

(0.0203)

(0.0223)

(0.0277)

Number of obs.

72186

88240

68481

38851

38148

R squared

0.138

0.249

0.100

0.084

0.122

Currently religious
Actively religious

Actively religious in
dominant religion

Panel C: Attitudes towards legal rules
Trust the legal
system?

Raised religiously
Currently religious
Actively religious
Raised religiously
in dominant
religion
Currently religious
in dominant
religion
Actively religious
in dominant
religion
Number of obs.
R squared

0.0134

Is it justified to Is it justified to Is it justified to
avoid a fare on cheat on taxes?
claim
government public transport?
benefits you are
not entitled to?
-0.0304
-0.1127***
-0.1127***

Is it justified to
buy a stolen
object?

Is it justified
to accept a
bribe?

-0.0696***

-0.0745***

(0.0108)

(0.0283)

(0.0298)

(0.0298)

(0.0212)

(0.0210)

0.0531***

0.1079***

0.0877***

0.0877***

0.0463**

0.0702***

(0.0113)

(0.0295)

(0.0310)

(0.0310)

(0.0221)

(0.0219)

0.0835***

-0.1143***

-0.3117***

-0.3117***

-0.2457***

-0.1580***

(0.0156)

(0.0405)

(0.0428)

(0.0428)

(0.0305)

(0.0301)

0.0469***

-0.0231

-0.0710**

-0.0710**

-0.0193

0.0316

(0.0115)

(0.0301)

(0.0317)

(0.0317)

(0.0226)

(0.0223)

0.0367***

-0.1107***

-0.1428***

-0.1428***

-0.1140***

-0.1095***

(0.0126)

(0.0330)

(0.0347)

(0.0347)

(0.0247)

(0.0245)

-0.0056

0.0323

0.1921***

0.1921***

0.1223***

0.0849**

(0.0177)

(0.0460)

(0.0486)

(0.0486)

(0.0346)

(0.0342)

88157

86095

87224

87224

87356

87082

0.091

0.094

0.124

0.124

0.070

0.067

54

Panel D: Attitudes towards the market
Inequality of income vs.
incentives

Private vs. public
ownership

Competition is good or
harmful

-0.0762**

-0.1099***

-0.0894***

(0.0386)

(0.0369)

(0.0337)

0.0345

0.1464***

0.1195***

(0.0425)

(0.0406)

(0.0371)

0.0595

0.1124**

-0.0474

(0.0598)

(0.0571)

(0.0523)

0.0189

0.0693*

0.1282***

(0.0428)

(0.0410)

(0.0374)

-0.0665

-0.0225

-0.0787*

(0.0487)

(0.0465)

(0.0425)

-0.0279

0.0098

0.0498

(0.0679)

(0.0650)

(0.0594)

Number of obs.

69016

66833

68177

R squared

0.094

0.131

0.064

Raised religiously
Currently religious
Actively religious
Raised religiously in dominant
religion
Currently religious in dominant
religion
Actively religious in dominant
religion

Panel E: Attitudes toward thriftiness and market’s fairness
Thrift to be
encouraged

Individual vs.
government
responsibility

Hard work
improves life

Wealth can grow
for everyone

Poor are lazy

0.0120**

-0.1770***

0.0516

0.0263

0.0003

(0.0057)

(0.0385)

(0.0385)

(0.0378)

(0.0035)

-0.0009

0.1401***

0.1405***

0.1171***

0.0130***

(0.0060)

(0.0425)

(0.0423)

(0.0417)

(0.0036)

-0.0112

0.1165*

0.2629***

0.1097*

0.0096*

(0.0082)

(0.0596)

(0.0596)

(0.0585)

(0.0050)

0.0051

0.2081***

0.1381***

-0.0562

0.0077**

(0.0061)

(0.0425)

(0.0427)

(0.0420)

(0.0037)

0.0115*

-0.0943*

-0.0485

-0.0012

-0.0082**

(0.0067)

(0.0485)

(0.0484)

(0.0478)

(0.0041)

-0.0055

-0.0484

-0.1243*

0.1165*

-0.0034

(0.0093)

(0.0673)

(0.0677)

(0.0665)

(0.0057)

Number of obs.

88696

71970

69198

67327

86305

R squared

0.111

0.158

0.083

0.045

0.233

Raised religiously
Currently religious
Actively religious
Raised religiously in
dominant religion
Currently religious in
dominant religion
Actively religious in
dominant religion

55

Table 4: The role of religious denominations
Each panel reports the coefficients of an OLS regression, whose dependent variable is indicated at the top of the panel.
Dependent variables are defined in the legend of Table 1. Regressions include the same demographic controls as in Table 2
(health, male, age, education, social class, income; coefficients not reported), an dummy variable equal to 1 if a person does
not believe in God, country fixed effects, and survey-year dummies. Included are also the following indicators of religious
intensity: “Raised religiously”:=1 if the respondent answered “yes” to the question “Were you brought up religiously at
home?”; “Currently religious”: =1 if the respondent attends religious services (apart from weddings, funerals and
christenings) at least once a year; “Actively religious”:=1 if the respondent attend religious services (apart from weddings,
funerals and christenings) at least once a week. Entries in columns 2 to 4 are the coefficients of the variables obtained
interacting the corresponding variable in the first column with that in the first row. Entries in the last two columns are the
sum of the coefficients of the specified variables. They should be interpreted as the cumulative effect of the different degree
of religiosity, relatively to individuals who declare they have no religious affiliation. In the first three columns, standard
errors are reported in brackets; in the last two columns p-values for the F-test that the coefficient is equal to zero are reported
in brackets. *** indicate the coefficient is different from zero at the 1% level, ** at the 5% level , and * at the 10 % level.
A. General trust (N. of observations: 91,656; R2: 0.094)
Total weighted
Raised religiously Raised religiously
Actively
Raised
Currently
impact of religion
+Currently
+Currently
religious
religiously
religious
Religious+
Religious
Actively Religious
Catholic
-0.0132**
0.0089*
0.0431***
-0.0043
0.0388***
0.0141***
(0.0053)
(0.0053)
(0.0054)
(0.4396)
(0.0000)
(0.0001)
Protestant
-0.0005
0.0307***
0.0395***
0.0302***
0.0697***
0.0279***
(0.0076)
(0.0068)
(0.0102)
(0.0002)
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
Jew
0.0508
-0.0051
-0.0069
0.0457
0.0388
0.0186
(0.0553)
(0.0444)
(0.0717)
(0.3849)
(0.5725)
(0.4128)
Muslim
-0.0246*
0.0285*
-0.0154
0.0039
-0.0115
-0.0027
(0.0135)
(0.0149)
(0.0162)
(0.7985)
(0.4591)
(0.7584)
Hindu
-0.0734***
0.0712***
-0.0305*
-0.0022
-0.0327*
-0.0147*
(0.0208)
(0.0205)
(0.0164)
(0.9128)
(0.0777)
(0.0539)
Buddhist
-0.0154
-0.0003
0.0102
-0.0157
-0.0055
-0.0028
(0.0353)
(0.0230)
(0.0642)
(0.6525)
(0.9317)
(0.8590)
Others
0.0218***
0.0052
0.0094
0.0270***
0.0364***
0.0163***
(0.0084)
(0.0079)
(0.0126)
(0.0024)
(0.0020)
(0.0007)

B. Intolerance towards immigrants and other races (N. of observations: 84,179; R2: 0.272)

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Raised
religiously

Currently
religious

Actively
religious

Raised religiously
+Currently
Religious

0.0030
(0.0029)
-0.0002
(0.0041)
0.0116
(0.0290)
0.0145**
(0.0071)
0.0978***
(0.0109)
0.0355*
(0.0185)
0.0127***
(0.0045)

0.0193***
(0.0029)
0.0136***
(0.0037)
0.0367
(0.0231)
0.0437***
(0.0079)
0.0175
(0.0107)
-0.0452***
(0.0120)
0.0031
(0.0043)

0.0027
(0.0030)
0.0051
(0.0055)
-0.0200
(0.0377)
0.0184**
(0.0085)
-0.0023
(0.0085)
0.0600*
(0.0333)
-0.0143**
(0.0066)

0.0223***
(0.0000)
0.0134***
(0.0028)
0.0483*
(0.0782)
0.0582***
(0.0000)
0.1153***
(0.0000)
-0.0097
(0.5954)
0.0158***
(0.0012)

56

Raised religiously
+Currently
Religious+
Actively Religious
0.0250***
(0.0000)
0.0185***
(0.0006)
0.0283
(0.4327)
0.0766***
(0.0000)
0.1130***
(0.0000)
0.0503
(0.1344)
0.0015
(0.8267)

Total weighted
impact of religion
0.0177***
(0.0000)
0.0093***
(0.0000)
0.0228*
(0.0546)
0.0458***
(0.0000)
0.0958***
(0.0000)
-0.0214***
(0.0094)
0.0062**
(0.0205)

C. Trust the government (N. of observations: 47,667; R2:0.133)

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Raised
religiously

Currently
religious

Actively
religious

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious

0.0059
(0.0157)
0.0044
(0.0224)
0.1309
(0.1408)
0.1285***
(0.0277)
0.0757*
(0.0446)
0.2378
(0.1498)
0.0958***
(0.0186)

0.1218***
(0.0160)
0.0920***
(0.0234)
-0.0096
(0.1270)
0.0698**
(0.0306)
0.1835***
(0.0466)
-0.0272
(0.1539)
-0.0080
(0.0178)

0.0328**
(0.0162)
0.0324
(0.0321)
0.0235
(0.2098)
0.1065***
(0.0324)
0.0023
(0.0338)
-0.0841
(0.2139)
0.0210
(0.0286)

0.1277***
(0.0000)
0.0964***
(0.0001)
0.1213
(0.3150)
0.1983***
(0.0000)
0.2592***
(0.0000)
0.2106
(0.1487)
0.0878***
(0.0000)

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious+
Actively Religious
0.1605***
(0.0000)
0.1288***
(0.0000)
0.1448
(0.4312)
0.3048***
(0.0000)
0.2615***
(0.0000)
0.1265
(0.4733)
0.1088***
(0.0001)

Total weighted impact
of religion
0.1086***
(0.0000)
0.0649***
(0.0000)
0.0568
(0.2833)
0.1713***
(0.0000)
0.2199***
(0.0000)
0.0252
(0.7885)
0.0470***
(0.0000)

D. Men deserve scarce jobs more than women (N. of observations: 72,186; R2:0.139)

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Raised
religiously

Currently
religious

Actively
religious

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious

0.0700***
(0.0121)
0.0907***
(0.0168)
-0.1024
(0.1254)
0.0706***
(0.0271)
0.1270***
(0.0445)
-0.0142
(0.0844)
0.0112
(0.0172)

-0.0028
(0.0123)
-0.0094
(0.0176)
-0.0272
(0.1168)
0.1658***
(0.0302)
-0.0399
(0.0463)
0.0885
(0.0752)
0.0052
(0.0168)

0.0634***
(0.0120)
0.0987***
(0.0250)
0.1900
(0.1912)
0.0963***
(0.0322)
0.0612*
(0.0336)
0.0863
(0.1599)
0.0458*
(0.0257)

0.0672***
(0.0000)
0.0813***
(0.0000)
-0.1296
(0.2442)
0.2364***
(0.0000)
0.0871**
(0.0330)
0.0743
(0.3133)
0.0164
(0.3765)

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious+
Actively Religious
0.1306***
(0.0000)
0.1800***
(0.0000)
0.0604
(0.7185)
0.3327***
(0.0000)
0.1483***
(0.0001)
0.1606
(0.2892)
0.0622**
(0.0105)

Total weighted impact
of religion
0.0717***
(0.0000)
0.0621***
(0.0000)
-0.0300
(0.5396)
0.1936***
(0.0000)
0.0998***
(0.0001)
0.0711
(0.1235)
0.0170*
(0.0926)

E. Men deserve university education more than women (N. of observations: 38,148; R2:0.123)

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Raised
religiously

Currently
religious

Actively
religious

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious

0.0309*
(0.0171)
0.0285
(0.0253)
0.0978
(0.1635)
-0.0180
(0.0277)
-0.0055
(0.0625)
0.2190
(0.2473)
0.0021
(0.0201)

0.0174
(0.0173)
0.0175
(0.0267)
0.0177
(0.1416)
0.0323
(0.0304)
0.1488**
(0.0677)
-0.0893
(0.2489)
0.0120
(0.0191)

0.0396**
(0.0165)
0.0595
(0.0379)
-0.4662*
(0.2636)
0.2072***
(0.0326)
-0.1417**
(0.0551)
0.0078
(0.3009)
-0.0209
(0.0306)

0.0483***
(0.0051)
0.0460
(0.1030)
0.1155
(0.4107)
0.0143
(0.6507)
0.1433**
(0.0108)
0.1297
(0.5674)
0.0141
(0.5188)

57

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious+
Actively Religious
0.0879***
(0.0000)
0.1055***
(0.0014)
-0.3507
(0.1319)
0.2215***
(0.0000)
0.0016
(0.9747)
0.1375
(0.5659)
-0.0068
(0.8132)

Total weighted impact
of religion
0.0502***
(0.0000)
0.0388***
(0.0028)
-0.0227
(0.7174)
0.0812***
(0.0000)
0.0585
(0.3542)
-0.0184
(0.9016)
0.0057
(0.6347)

F. Trust in the legal system (N. of observations: 88,157; R2:0.092)

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Raised
religiously

Currently
religious

Actively
religious

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious

0.0285***
(0.0103)
0.0430***
(0.0146)
0.1714
(0.1065)
0.1599***
(0.0262)
0.0232
(0.0400)
0.2387***
(0.0677)
0.0698***
(0.0165)

0.0973***
(0.0102)
0.0801***
(0.0133)
0.0410
(0.0857)
0.0582**
(0.0289)
0.0883**
(0.0393)
0.0619
(0.0440)
0.0335**
(0.0159)

0.0820***
(0.0104)
0.0664***
(0.0195)
0.0530
(0.1382)
0.0398
(0.0311)
-0.0351
(0.0315)
0.0780
(0.1217)
0.0490**
(0.0243)

0.1258***
(0.0000)
0.1231***
(0.0000)
0.2124**
(0.0354)
0.2181***
(0.0000)
0.1115***
(0.0040)
0.3006***
(0.0000)
0.1033***
(0.0000)

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious+
Actively Religious
0.2078***
(0.0000)
0.1895***
(0.0000)
0.2654**
(0.0441)
0.2579***
(0.0000)
0.0764**
(0.0315)
0.3786***
(0.0020)
0.1523***
(0.0000)

Total weighted impact
of religion
0.1251***
(0.0000)
0.0846***
(0.0000)
0.1085**
(0.0128)
0.1618***
(0.0000)
0.0786**
(0.0169)
0.1064***
(0.0004)
0.0668***
(0.0000)

G. Is it justified to cheat on taxes? (N. of observations: 86,627 =; R2: 0.098)

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Raised
religiously

Currently
religious

Actively
religious

Raised religiously
+Currently
Religious

-0.1529***
(0.0295)
-0.1355***
(0.0418)
-0.4927*
(0.2990)
-0.2685***
(0.0899)
-0.0187
(0.1144)
0.0372
(0.1931)
-0.1278***
(0.0474)

-0.0615**
(0.0291)
-0.2443***
(0.0378)
0.0924
(0.2409)
0.0348
(0.0950)
-0.3074***
(0.1121)
0.0428
(0.1280)
0.1126**
(0.0457)

-0.2109***
(0.0296)
-0.4312***
(0.0557)
-1.1119***
(0.3899)
0.0118
(0.1042)
-0.0828
(0.0895)
-0.3887
(0.3542)
-0.4630***
(0.0696)

-0.2144***
(0.0000)
-0.3798***
(0.0000)
-0.4003
(0.1588)
-0.2337**
(0.0112)
-0.3261***
(0.0034)
0.0800
(0.6754)
-0.0152
(0.7662)

Raised religiously
+Currently
Religious+
Actively Religious
-0.4253***
(0.0000)
-0.8110***
(0.0000)
-1.5122***
(0.0001)
-0.2219**
(0.0247)
-0.4089***
(0.0001)
-0.3087
(0.3841)
-0.4782***
(0.0000)

Total weighted
impact of religion
-0.2356***
(0.0000)
-0.3174***
(0.0000)
-0.3494***
(0.0045)
-0.1546***
(0.0045)
-0.3128***
(0.0007)
0.0084
(0.9233)
-0.0671**
(0.0153)

H. Is it justified to accept a bribe? (N. of observations: 87,082 =; R2: 0.069)

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Raised
religiously

Currently
religious

Actively
religious

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious

-0.0814***
(0.0200)
0.0251
(0.0283)
-0.0348
(0.2047)
0.4354***
(0.0605)
-0.0915
(0.0774)
-0.0233
(0.1314)
-0.0586*
(0.0317)

0.0333*
(0.0197)
-0.0608**
(0.0256)
0.0263
(0.1645)
-0.6909***
(0.0640)
-0.1132
(0.0757)
-0.0198
(0.0868)
0.0257
(0.0306)

-0.0764***
(0.0201)
-0.1846***
(0.0378)
-0.2133
(0.2706)
-0.0084
(0.0701)
0.0709
(0.0606)
-0.4060*
(0.2379)
-0.1924***
(0.0467)

-0.0481**
(0.0276)
-0.0357
(0.2545)
-0.0085
(0.9651)
-0.2555***
(0.0000)
-0.2047***
(0.0067)
-0.0431
(0.7401)
-0.0329
(0.3371)

58

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious+
Actively Religious
-0.1245***
(0.0000)
-0.2203***
(0.0000)
-0.2218
(0.3915)
-0.2639***
(0.0001)
-0.1338*
(0.0538)
-0.4491*
(0.0600)
-0.2253***
(0.0000)

Total weighted impact
of religion
-0.0618***
(0.0000)
-0.0704***
(0.0000)
-0.0355
(0.6743)
-0.1757***
(0.0000)
-0.1411**
(0.0193)
-0.0539
(0.3649)
-0.0451**
(0.0152)

I. Accept more income inequality to provide incentives? (N. of obs.: 69,016 =; R2: 0.095)

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Raised
religiously

Currently
religious

Actively
religious

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious

-0.0100
(0.0404)
0.0272
(0.0550)
-0.6147
(0.4297)
-0.3547***
(0.0900)
0.2512*
(0.1443)
-0.3905
(0.2782)
-0.2158***
(0.0563)

-0.0290
(0.0413)
-0.0612
(0.0572)
0.3402
(0.3864)
-0.0402
(0.1001)
-0.0920
(0.1510)
0.2837
(0.2515)
0.0053
(0.0548)

-0.0050
(0.0411)
0.1821**
(0.0831)
-1.0308
(0.6403)
0.1807*
(0.1058)
0.0509
(0.1106)
0.1453
(0.5138)
0.0813
(0.0844)

-0.0390
(0.3438)
-0.0340
(0.5690)
-0.2745
(0.4471)
-0.3949***
(0.0001)
0.1592
(0.2333)
-0.1068
(0.6641)
-0.2105***
(0.0005)

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious+
Actively Religious
-0.0440
(0.3070)
0.1481**
(0.0474)
-1.3053**
(0.0201)
-0.2142**
(0.0359)
0.2101*
(0.0903)
0.0385
(0.9373)
-0.1292
(0.1051)

Total weighted impact
of religion
-0.0308
(0.2496)
0.0220
(0.4393)
-0.2493
(0.1164)
-0.2058***
(0.0004)
0.1552*
(0.0598)
0.1404
(0.3622)
-0.0926***
(0.0052)

J. Private ownership should be increased? (N. of obs.: 66,833 =; R2: 0.133)

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Raised
religiously

Currently
religious

Actively
religious

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious

-0.0252
(0.0389)
0.1659***
(0.0524)
-0.0314
(0.3951)
-0.0996
(0.0835)
0.4198***
(0.1363)
-0.2157
(0.2781)
-0.3254***
(0.0532)

0.1683***
(0.0399)
0.0653
(0.0544)
-0.3337
(0.3604)
0.1802*
(0.0928)
-0.5407***
(0.1424)
0.5095**
(0.2546)
-0.0060
(0.0518)

0.1493***
(0.0398)
-0.0658
(0.0793)
0.5569
(0.6107)
-0.2557***
(0.0989)
0.3825***
(0.1042)
0.1453
(0.5162)
0.3951***
(0.0798)

0.1431***
(0.0003)
0.2312***
(0.0000)
-0.3651
(0.2795)
0.0806
(0.3883)
-0.1209
(0.3365)
0.2938
(0.2345)
-0.3314***
(0.0000)

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious+
Actively Religious
0.2924***
(0.0000)
0.1654**
(0.0205)
0.1918
(0.7218)
-0.1751*
(0.0678)
0.2616**
(0.0249)
0.4391
(0.3679)
0.0637
(0.3989)

Total weighted impact
of religion

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious+
Actively Religious
0.1822***
(0.0000)
0.0418
(0.5212)
0.5438
(0.2643)
-0.3229***
(0.0003)
-0.3727***
(0.0005)
-0.7271*
(0.0900)
-0.2063***
(0.0032)

Total weighted impact
of religion

0.1669***
(0.0000)
0.1010***
(0.0002)
-0.1129
(0.4538)
-0.0337
(0.5389)
0.0636
(0.0693)
0.3504***
(0.0246)
-0.1029***
(0.0011)

K. Competition is good (N. of obs.: 68,177 =; R2: 0.066)

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Raised
religiously

Currently
religious

Actively
religious

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious

0.1536***
(0.0353)
0.1043**
(0.0479)
0.1226
(0.3687)
-0.4988***
(0.0773)
-0.3992***
(0.1253)
-0.1674
(0.2410)
-0.0494
(0.0494)

-0.0258
(0.0361)
0.0133
(0.0498)
0.2360
(0.3339)
0.1883**
(0.0861)
-0.0494
(0.1309)
0.3359
(0.2172)
0.0352
(0.0481)

0.0544
(0.0360)
-0.0758
(0.0724)
0.1852
(0.5556)
-0.0124
(0.0914)
0.0759
(0.0957)
-0.8956**
(0.4516)
-0.1921***
(0.0742)

0.1278***
(0.0004)
0.1176**
(0.0235)
0.3586
(0.2510)
-0.3105***
(0.0003)
-0.4486***
(0.0001)
0.1685
(0.4303)
-0.0142
(0.7895)

59

0.1097***
(0.0000)
0.0384
(0.1218)
0.2196
(0.1116)
-0.2153***
(0.0000)
-0.3427***
(0.0000)
0.1431
(0.2837)
-0.0338
(0.2447)

L. Thrift to be taught to children (N. of obs.: 88,696 =; R2: 0.112)

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Raised
religiously

Currently
religious

Actively
religious

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious

0.0087
(0.0055)
0.0115
(0.0078)
0.0301
(0.0557)
0.0574***
(0.0137)
0.0352*
(0.0210)
-0.0553
(0.0356)
0.0274***
(0.0087)

0.0112**
(0.0054)
0.0174**
(0.0070)
0.0197
(0.0447)
-0.0310**
(0.0151)
0.0027
(0.0207)
0.0507**
(0.0232)
-0.0062
(0.0083)

-0.0061
(0.0056)
-0.0294***
(0.0103)
-0.0251
(0.0727)
-0.0525***
(0.0163)
-0.0197
(0.0166)
-0.0383
(0.0647)
-0.0407***
(0.0128)

0.0199***
(0.0009)
0.0289***
(0.0008)
0.0498
(0.3478)
0.0264*
(0.0876)
0.0379*
(0.0634)
-0.0046
(0.8965)
0.0212**
(0.0230)

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious+
Actively Religious
0.0138**
(0.0266)
-0.0005
(0.9580)
0.0247
(0.7227)
-0.0261
(0.0987)
0.0182
(0.3322)
-0.0429
(0.5104)
-0.0195
(0.1060)

Total weighted impact
of religion

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious+
Actively Religious
0.0100***
(0.0078)
0.0229***
(0.0002) **
0.0385
(0.3596)
0.0555***
(0.0000)
0.0392***
(0.0007)
0.0520
(0.1927)
0.0293***
(0.0001)

Total weighted impact
of religion

0.0122***
(0.0020)
0.0085**
(0.0366)
0.0205
(0.3711)
-0.0002
(0.9851)
0.0230
(0.1086)
0.0230
(0.1494)
0.0028
(0.5733)

M. Poor are lazy (N. of obs.: 86,305 =; R2: 0.234)

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Raised
religiously

Currently
religious

Actively
religious

Raised religiously
+Currently Religious

-0.0059*
(0.0033)
0.0106**
(0.0047)
0.0323
(0.0344)
0.0487***
(0.0086)
0.0657***
(0.0129)
0.0107
(0.0214)
0.0142***
(0.0053)

0.0120***
(0.0033)
0.0019
(0.0043)
-0.0288
(0.0273)
0.0080
(0.0096)
-0.0051
(0.0126)
-0.0125
(0.0139)
-0.0206***
(0.0052)

0.0039
(0.0033)
0.0104*
(0.0063)
0.0350
(0.0438)
-0.0012
(0.0101)
-0.0214**
(0.0101)
0.0538
(0.0394)
0.0357***
(0.0078)

0.0061*
(0.0925)
0.0125**
(0.0168)
0.0035
(0.9147)
0.0567***
(0.0000)
0.0606***
(0.0000)
-0.0018
(0.9308)
-0.0064
(0.2632)

60

0.0064***
(0.0074)
0.0088***
(0.0004)
0.0037
(0.7903)
0.0381***
(0.0000)
0.0412***
(0.0000)
-0.0026
(0.7816)
-0.0007
(0.8042)

Table 5. Interacting religious denominations and dominant religion
Each panel reports the coefficients of an OLS regression, whose dependent variable is indicated at the top of the panel.
All the dependent variables are defined in the legend of Table 1. In columns 1-3 the sample is restricted to countries
where the dominant religion is Catholic, in columns 4-6 to countries where the dominant religion is Protestant,
columns 7-9 where the dominant religion is Muslim. All regressions include as control variable (coefficients not
reported) the same demographic controls as in Table 2 (health, male, age, education, social class, income), an indicator
variable equal to 1 if a person answer no to the question “Do you believe in God?”, a country fixed effect, and surveyyear dummies. In addition these regressions include the following three indicators of religious intensity: “Raised
religiously” equal to one if the respondent answered positively to the question “Were you brought up religiously at
home?”; “Currently religious” equal to one if the respondent attend religious services (apart from weddings, funerals
and christenings) at least once a year; “Actively religious” is equal to one if the respondent attend religious services
(apart from weddings, funerals and christenings) at least once a week. We report the coefficient of these variables in a
cumulative way. Thus, the first column reports the coefficient on the dummy “raised religiously”, the second column
the sum of the coefficients of the dummies “raised religiously” and “currently religious”, the third column the sum of
the coefficients of the dummies “raised religiously”, “currently religious”, and “actively religious”. Below the
coefficient in bracket we report the p-values for the F-test that the coefficient is equal to zero (second and third
column). *** indicate the coefficient is different from zero at the 1 percent level, ** at the 5 percent level , and * at the
10 percent level.

Panel A: General trust
Dominant religion:

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Catholic

Protestant

Muslim

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

-0.0108*

-0.0019

(0.1010)

(0.7669 )

0.0437
(0.0000 )

-0.0181

0.0213

(0.3530)

(0.3712 )

***

***

0.0595
(0.0019 )

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

-0.0043

0.0289
(0.0173 )

**

0.0716
(0.0000 )

***

-0.0533

-0.0103

(0.5830)

(0.8502 )

0.1286
(0.0012 )

***

***

0.0014

0.6086
( 0.0000)

(0.7920)
0.0039
(0.6080)

0.0384
( 0.0002)

0.0898
(0.0000 )

(0.9940)

***

***

*

0.3112
( 0.0750)

0.0251

-0.0782

-0.2271

0.1128

0.1110

0.0055

-0.3103

-0.2016

-0.2552

(0.8180)

( 0.4822)

(0.2030)

(0.4990)

( 0.3528)

( 0.2346)

(0.3550)

( 0.4383)

( 0.4879)

0.0620

-0.0170

0.1280

**

(0.4250)

(0.8756 )

(0.2370 )

-0.0191
(0.0330)

-0.2931
( 0.0874)

*

0.0221

-0.0084

-0.0006

-0.0122

( 0.8996)

(0.5300)

( 0.9685)

( 0.4900)

-0.0049

0.0262

-0.0105

0.1569

-0.1751

0.2074

0.0016

0.0174

0.0061

(0.9590)

( 0.8529)

(0.8482 )

(0.6580)

( 0.7767)

( 0.7076)

(0.9740)

( 0.7787)

( 0.9051)

0.4788***
(0.0000)

0.9122
(0.0001)

0.0282

0.0425

(0.2520)

( 0.2074)

***

0.1953

-0.2901*

-0.1351

-0.1988

0.1577

0.1577

0.1577

(0.1663 )

(0.0650)

( 0.3391)

( 0.3974)

(0.4590)

( 0.4587)

( 0.4587)

**

-0.0345

0.0176

-0.0012

0.0864*

(0.2170)

(0.5449 )

(0.8141 )

(0.0720)

0.1419
( 0.0003)

0.0471
(0.0324 )

***

R2

0.066

0.104

0.058

N. observ.

38976

23018

5010

61

0.0303
(0.6423 )

Panel B: Intolerance towards immigrants and other races
Dominant religion:

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu

Others

Protestant

Muslim

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Raised

Raised +
Currently

0.0022
(0.5770)

0.0237
(0.0000 )

-0.0043

**

***

(0.7430)

0.0304
(0.0212 )

-0.0297

-0.0008

(0.6430)

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

***

-0.0144**

0.0008

-0.0058

-0.0876

0.0100

(0.0000 )
-0.0202

(0.0280)

(0.9021 )

(0.4057 )

(0.1220)

(0.7520 )

0.0613
(0.0084 )

0.0104**

0.0213

***

***

-0.0337

-0.0261

0.0987

(0.1015 )

(0.0210)

( 0.3326)

0.0271

0.0337

(0.0000 )
0.0599

( 0.6420)

0.0163

(0.0000)
0.0520

(0.7460)
-0.2081

( 0.9897)

-0.2157
( 0.0435)

(0.9490)

( 0.1449)

( 0.1296)

(0.2870)

-0.2787
( 0.0659)

-0.0195

0.0545

0.0143

0.0421

-0.0243

0.0448

-0.0012

0.0581

(0.6560)

( 0.3782)

( 0.8120)

(0.3430)

( 0.5887)

( 0.3789)

(0.8750)

0.1177**

***

0.0321

0.0204

0.0194

0.0352

0.0735**

(0.0000)
0.0328

( 0.3121)

(0.6790)

( 0.6861)

( 0.4771)

(0.0140)

( 0.3647)

(0.0350)
Buddhist

Catholic

0.2636
( 0.0008)

**

*

*

***

***

-0.1249
( 0.5601)
0.0709

***

(0.0000)
*

0.0536
( 0.0745)

0.0035

0.0940

0.0041

0.1285*

0.0572

-0.1179

-0.1179

( 0.5398)

( 0.9594)

(0.0770)

( 0.3827)

0.1855
(0.0906 )

-0.1179

(0.9630)

(0.3420)

( 0.3415)

( 0.3415)

-0.0415***

-0.0504
( 0.0131)

-0.0028

0.0239**

-0.0032

0.0015

0.0109

-0.0004

-0.0105

( 0.8289)

(0.0420)

( 0.8017)

(0.9054 )

(0.7030)

( 0.9861)

(0.7827 )

(0.0060)

**

R2

0.168

0.167

0.124

N. observ.

33324

25242

4901

Panel C: Trust in the government
Dominant religion:

Raised

Catholic

Protestant

Muslim

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Raised +
Currently

***

Catholic

0.0389**

0.1784

(0.0390)

(0.0000 )

Protestant

0.1600***
(0.0050)

0.1541
( 0.0120)

-0.1177

-0.2648

(0.7080)

Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

N. observ.

Raised

Raised +
Currently

***

-0.0466

(0.0000 )

(0.2070)

0.1206
(0.0004 )

***

-0.0118

0.1162

(0.0000 )

(0.6110)

0.2102
0.2463

***

***

-0.1556

(0.0000)
0.0093

( 0.3910)

-1.1877
( 0.0576)

(0.3470)

( 0.9495)

0.1180

0.2978

0.2642

0.9596***

(0.7240)

( 0.3136)

( 0.4149)

(0.0000)

0.5655
( 0.0047)

*

***

Raised+
Currently
+Actively
0.1921

***

Raised

Raised +
Currently

-0.4585**

-0.2617
(0.0346 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0370)

***

-0.6806*

(0.0000 )

(0.0910)

0.1368

*

0.3149
( 0.0799)
***

**

**

0.4067
( 0.0469)

0.3543
( 0.6703)

***

0.9825
( 0.0006)

0.1322***
(0.0000)

(0.0000)

**

0.3829***

0.2348

***

0.3210

(0.2280)

( 0.1537)

( 0.3282)

(0.3240)

( 0.2574)

0.6813
( 0.0162)

(0.0010)

0.5649
( 0.0001)

0.1230

1.1053

-0.0912

-0.0486

0.0798

0.0908

0.2807

0.2807

(0.7880)

( 0.2548)

( 0.7970)

(0.8660)

( 0.7356)

( 0.8337)

(0.5600)

( 0.0369)
0.090

0.1148

**

( 0.0296)

0.1427***

(0.0030)

17023

0.1170

**

( 0.0168)
0.109
9761

62

0.1048

**

(0.0498 )

0.0347
( 0.9300)

0.3543

0.5224

**

(0.5692 )

( 0.6703)

0.1163

0.1960

-0.0515

1.8214*

0.4138

0.0426

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

(0.0740)

-0.2567

(0.5090)
R2

**

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

0.0018

(0.9870)

( 0.5597)
0.2876

***

0.3607

***

(0.0000 )
0.4863

***

(0.0000)
0.2807
( 0.5597)
0.3846

***

( 0.0015) (0.0092)
0.217
4836

Panel D: Men deserve scarce jobs more than women
Dominant religion:

Raised

Catholic

0.0717***
(0.0000)

Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu

Others

Protestant

Muslim

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Raised +
Currently

0.0707

***

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

***

0.0129

0.0091

0.1402

0.0841

0.0993

(0.6800)

(0.7432 )

0.1363
(0.0000 )

(0.5480)

(0.5053 )

(0.2846 )

0.0925***

0.0700
( 0.0007)

***

0.3693
( 0.0784)

0.1144

0.0109

(0.0000 )
0.0444

(0.8080)

( 0.3411)

0.1074
( 0.0053)

0.0400

-0.1563

-0.2384

-0.2028

(0.8660)

( 0.5214)

( 0.5779)

(0.2000)

0.2934*

0.2120

0.1127

0.1769

(0.0850)

( 0.3621)

( 0.6327)

(0.2700)

0.3029
(0.1390)

Buddhist

Catholic

**

0.5637
( 0.0497)

(0.0000 )
***

*

0.1987
( 0.0871)

(0.0000)

0.6136
(0.1220)
*

***

Raised

***

0.1591
( 0.0000)

0.9278**

*

0.0823

-2.1880***

(0.6410 )

(0.0050)

0.4648

0.0489

-0.2457
(0.0923 )
***

(0.0250)

(0.0000)
0.1543

(0.0000)
0.1294

(0.0400)

( 0.2840)

( 0.2822)

0.6451
( 0.0046)

0.8059
( 0.0038)

( 0.4274)

( 0.3991)

0.0799*

0.0219

***

(0.9140)

( 0.6392)

(0.5120)

( 0.5329)

0.1372
( 0.0026)

***

(0.1200)

***

-0.0448

0.3254

0.2465**

( 0.2205)

( 0.3113)

-0.0340

***

-0.9660
( 0.2576)

***

0.8516*

(0.5260)

0.2101

( 0.1453)

( 0.0782)

0.3833

-0.3613

**

-1.1833
( 0.0498)

0.5903

***

0.1964

0.5227

*

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

0.6243
( 0.0014)

0.4601
(0.0770)

-0.1543

Raised +
Currently

0.1956
( 0.0001)

*

*

(0.0840)

0.8516
( 0.0844)

0.8516
( 0.0844)

-0.0839

-0.1493

-0.0569

( 0.1021)

( 0.7067)

(0.4520)

R2

0.101

0.132

0.098

N. observ.

31750

16658

4934

Panel E: Men deserve university education more than women
Dominant religion:

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Catholic

Protestant

Muslim

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

0.0258

0.0293

0.0653
(0.0022 )

***

0.0047

0.0329

**

-0.4091

(0.9130)

(0.3943 )

0.1077
(0.0175 )

(0.1190)

0.4985
(0.0005 )

**

**

-0.0393

0.2457

0.3805

(0.9320)

( 0.2976)

( 0.4036)

(0.1720)

(0.1587 )

0.0687

0.1089
( 0.0293)

-0.0056

0.0069

(0.3200)

0.2262
( 0.0054)

(0.8230)

( 0.8120)

0.1716

-0.0497

0.0680

-0.0877

-0.0338

(0.6800)

( 0.8887)

( 0.9307)

(0.6480)

0.6165**

-0.5001

0.2924

(0.0320)

( 0.1043)

(0.4039 )

***

0.0838
(0.0392 )
*

***

0.0921
(0.3775 )

-0.5207

0.3914

-0.8165

( 0.8577)

-0.3846
( 0.0875)

(0.5860)

( 0.5636)

( 0.3945)

-0.0532

-0.0256

-0.0099

-0.0427

-0.0024

(0.8350)

( 0.8930)

( 0.9739)

(0.2280)

( 0.9580)

0.2406
( 0.0000)

**

***

0.0377

0.1848

0.1122

-0.2364

1.1430
(0.0071 )

0.0965

0.0850

(0.8540)

( 0.5073)

( 0.3189)

(0.6480)

0.6932
( 0.0126)

(0.5080)

( 0.6045)

1.2845**

0.4402

0.4402

-0.3597

-0.1570

-0.8293

0.9684*

(0.0200)

( 0.2608)

( 0.2608)

(0.2210)

( 0.5224)

( 0.2580)

(0.0810)

0.9684
( 0.0809)

0.0109

-0.0132

-0.0636

0.0210

**

(0.8720)

( 0.8863)

(0.2234)

(0.7080)

0.1323
( 0.0130)

0.1310
( 0.0325)

**

0.1594
(0.2090)

*

0.5211

***

R

0.078

0.180

(0.0000)
0.092

N. observ.

15126

7885

4880

2

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

63

***

*

0.2386
( 0.0786)
*

0.9684
( 0.0809)
0.7546

***

(0.0000)

Panel F: Trust in the legal system
Dominant religion:

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Catholic

Protestant

Muslim

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

0.0396***

***

***

0.2427
(0.0000 )

0.0314

0.1112

(0.0030)

0.1573
(0.0000 )

0.0784*

***

***

(0.1710)

***

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

***

-0.1871
(0.0368 )

***

-0.3785*

-0.4973

(0.0000 )

(0.0000 )

(0.0910)

(0.0000 )

***

***

-0.2884

(0.0000)
0.2918

(0.4680)

0.4416
( 0.0338)

0.2926

-1.3066

-0.7308

( 0.346)

(0.7710)

( 0.1115)

( 0.3736)

0.1090***

0.1416

**

**

(0.0640)

0.1787
( 0.0001)

0.2556
( 0.0000)

0.0458***
(0.0040)

(0.0000)

-0.0546

-0.0183

-0.0257

0.1244

(0.8080)

( 0.9358)

(0.9438 )

(0.3210)

0.2108
( 0.0906)

0.5413***

0.3470

0.5366***

0.1370

(0.0010)

( 0.1516)

0.4073
( 0.0658)

(0.0010)

( 0.3804)

0.5076
( 0.0042)

(0.0000)

0.1568
( 0.0001)

-0.0201

-0.4270

0.0627

0.2360

0.2047

0.2666

0.2095*

0.1418

(0.0000)
0.0869

(0.9220)

( 0.1385)

( 0.5939)

(0.1780)

( 0.2337)

( 0.1291)

(0.0670)

( 0.3067)

( 0.4506)

*

0.0681

0.1867

0.4477

0.6011**

(0.7780)

( 0.6868)

( 0.1211)

(0.0200)

-0.0534

-0.0244

(0.2930)

( 0.7281)

0.0812
( 0.0753)

*

-0.0188
(0.6490)

0.1327

*

*

0.4516
( 0.0588)
*

0.0810
( 0.0630)

0.1827

***

***

-0.1577
( 0.6861)

0.2332

***

-0.0334

0.1705

0.1705

0.1705

( 0.9305)

(0.7200)

( 0.7196)

( 0.7196)

-0.2302**

-0.0111

-0.0745

( 0.9007)

( 0.6091)

0.1883

***

(0.0000)

(0.0330)

R2

0.057

0.108

0.103

N. observ.

38368

22779

4870

Panel G: Is it justified to cheat on taxes?
Dominant religion:

Raised

Catholic

Protestant

Muslim

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Raised +
Currently

***

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

***

-0.0957

-0.2945

(0.1610)

(0.0000 )

***

Catholic

-0.1584***
(0.0000)

(0.0000 )

Protestant

-0.4182***
(0.0000)

-0.3775
( 0.0032)

-1.1388*

-0.5202

(0.0000)
-1.5856

(0.0010)
-0.0816

(0.0000)
0.0426

(0.0740)

( 0.4207)

( 0.1266)

(0.8260)

( 0.9083)

Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

-0.1942

***

-0.4017

(0.0000 )
-0.6874

***

-0.1608***

-0.4751

***

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

***

0.3979

-0.5684

***

Raised+
Currently
+Actively
0.3657

(0.0000 )

(0.5390)

1.0316
(0.0025 )

***

-0.0270

0.5164

1.1428

(0.0000 )

(0.9810)

( 0.3592)

( 0.3535)

-0.9851

***

-1.4567
( 0.0004)

(0.1493 )

0.3057

-1.5506

2.0666

(0.8830)

( 0.3362)

( 0.3648)

-0.0796

-1.0572

-0.3294

-0.0887

-0.3321

-0.6415

-0.1702

0.0191

0.0081

(0.8600)

( 0.1008)

( 0.6004)

(0.8480)

( 0.4767)

( 0.2300)

(0.1130)

( 0.8801)

( 0.9538)

0.6037

0.7268

*

-0.5929

-0.1212

(0.2470)

-1.3761
( 0.0076)

-0.0330

( 0.3748)

-1.6180
( 0.0012)

-0.1980

(0.3010)

-0.6391
( 0.0537)

(0.5390)

( 0.9327)

( 0.7140)

-0.2321

-1.3573

-0.9988

-0.4868

-0.2457

-0.3671

-0.3387

-0.3387

-0.3387

(0.7350)

( 0.3020)

( 0.2236)

( 0.7464)

(0.7980)

( 0.7976)

( 0.7976)

0.0119

-0.2171

0.2266

(0.9340)

(0.2767 )

0.6301
( 0.0115)

***

(0.5180)

( 0.7172)

***

-0.1547

0.0577

(0.0000 )

(0.2070)

( 0.6570)

-0.6833

***

-0.9370

***

(0.0000)

(0.4780)

**

R2

0.085

0.098

0.187

N. observ.

38041

25078

3638

64

0.6445
(0.1151 )

Panel H: Is it justified to accept a bribe?
Dominant religion:

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Catholic

Protestant

Muslim

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

-0.0497*

-0.0301

(0.0610)

(0.3094 )

-0.0875
(0.0039 )

-0.0990

-0.1406

(0.2350)

( 0.1137)

-0.2778
(0.5300)

0.8085
( 0.0716)

0.5425*

***

**

Raised

Raised +
Currently

-0.0833**

-0.0244

(0.0440)

(0.5676 )

-0.0095

**

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

***

-0.1291

0.0289

0.1134

(0.0000 )

(0.7860)

(0.9109 )

(0.5552 )

0.6284

0.0713

0.6320
( 0.5001)

-0.2263

(07370.)

-0.0727
( 0.0238)

( 0.8677)

0.2170

0.1035

(0.0000)
-0.0897

(0.4700)

-0.1224

-0.1808

-1.1195

-0.7599

( 0.8652)

(0.3410)

( 0.6462)

( 0.7243)

(0.9170)

( 0.3617)

( 0.6615)

-0.0911

-0.3925

-0.4244

0.2388

-0.3307

0.5578***

(0.0910)

( 0.8429)

( 0.3856)

(0.1300)

( 0.3975)

( 0.3099)

(0.0000)

-0.3286
( 0.0007)

0.3735
( 0.0004)

0.4590

-0.6577

0.0120

0.0159

-0.1671

-0.1098

-0.3296

-0.2657

(0.2570)

( 0.2476)

( 0.9581)

(0.9590)

( 0.5805)

(0.7252 )

(0.1790)

( 0.3774)

-0.4389
( 0.0810)

*

-0.2842

***

-0.1717
( 0.0218)

***

***

*

0.1576

-0.8962

-0.4262

-0.0874

0.3964

0.1470

-0.4185

-0.4185

-0.4185

(0.7410)

( 0.3265)

( 0.4545)

(0.8480)

( 0.3351)

(0.8310 )

(0.6770)

( 0.6771)

( 0.6771)

0.1546

-0.1458

*

-0.0633

0.0491

-0.1606

-0.1654

( 0.2881)

(0.3910)

( 0.5293)

-0.2427
(0.0035 )

0.0690

(0.1200)

-0.1483
( 0.0949)

( 0.3974)

( 0.5952)

***

(0.7770)

R2

0.071

0.062

0.182

N. observ.

37997

25097

3676

Panel I: Accept more income inequality to provide incentives?
Dominant religion:

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others
2

Catholic

Protestant

Muslim

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

0.0430

-0.0215

-0.0592

-0.1625*

-0.0175

-0.0830

-0.0463

0.2804

-0.0713

(0.3850)

(0.6954 )

(0.3006 )

(0.1000)

(0.8415 )

(0.3594)

(0.9540)

(0.5271 )

(0.8267 )

-0.1694

-0.1080

0.1502

0.0685

0.0768

**

-0.5815

(0.2930)

( 0.5083)

( 0.3001)

(0.2200)

( 0.2354)

0.1966
( 0.0288)

-1.5222
( 0.0397)

-0.1534

0.3268

-0.9852

-0.1545

0.0817

(0.8540)

( 0.9853)

( 0.5004)

(0.7710)

-0.1035

-0.4495

0.4705

(0.8560)

( 0.5707)

( 0.5585)

**

(0.6890)

**

-0.8288
( 0.5620)

-2.7138

-0.5617

-2.4224

( 0.8597)

-1.1616
( 0.0439)

(0.3220)

( 0.7918)

( 0.4208)

-1.0102

0.3998

0.1319

-0.4514***

(0.1520)

( 0.5152)

( 0.8737)

(0.0000)

-0.5294
( 0.0002)

***

*

-0.2666
( 0.0703)

-1.0495

0.2702

-0.1749

1.4653

-0.5349

0.4739

-0.0686

0.2162

0.2498

(0.1410)

( 0.7828)

( 0.6624)

(0.4020)

( 0.4549)

( 0.5886)

(0.8700)

( 0.6743)

( 0.5538)

-0.7120

2.0342

-0.6609

-0.4101

-0.5138

-0.1553

1.8131

1.8131

1.8131

(0.3910)

( 0.2479)

( 0.5112)

(0.6610)

( 0.5090)

( 0.9135)

(0.2980)

( 0.2976)

0.2740

-0.0610

0.1265

-0.2055

0.0295

-1.0764***

(0.1240)

( 0.8020)

( 0.4169)

(0.1500)

0.3697
( 0.0118)

( 0.8567)

(0.0060)

-1.1981
( 0.0002)

**

***

R

0.076

0.109

0.079

N. observ.

28956

16693

4803

65

( 0.2976)
***

-1.8094
( 0.0007)

Panel J: Private ownership should be increased?
Dominant religion:

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Catholic

Protestant

Muslim

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

-0.0503

**

***

0.1706
(0.0013 )

-0.1132

-0.0550

(0.2710)

0.1040
(0.0396 )

(0.2060)

(0.4854 )

0.1579
(0.0537 )

0.1406

0.1435

-0.0508

0.1298***

(0.3440)

( 0.3390)

( 0.7035)

(0.0100)

0.1692
( 0.0037)

0.1195

-0.6272

-0.3629

0.3934

0.6675

0.0892

(0.4270)

( 0.6212)

( 0.7966)

(0.1410)

0.7798

0.1583

0.8031

(0.1500)

( 0.8295)

0.6009

1.3444

(0.3490)

( 0.1275)

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

-0.7320

-0.0386

(0.3670)

(0.9322 )

-1.0111
(0.0025 )

1.1276

-0.9636

1.3960

( 0.1405)

(0.4480)

( 0.2027)

( 0.3394)

-0.0508

0.1958

-0.9106

-0.0438

( 0.8261)

( 0.9212)

(0.9440)

( 0.6754)

( 0.9886)

-0.9323

-0.8805

-1.1094

-0.2171*

0.0568

( 0.2672)

(0.1380)

( 0.1081)

( 0.1340)

(0.0560)

( 0.6960)

-0.4189
( 0.0051)

**

-1.1293

-0.5723

(0.4690)

( 0.3701)

-0.8386
( 0.0191)

***

*

**

-1.6348
( 0.0365)

***

***

0.4778

-0.0032

0.2157

(0.2730)

( 0.9951)

( 0.6193)

-0.1937

-0.5825

0.2054

-0.1913

-1.1990

1.3500

-0.9618

-0.9618

-0.9618

(0.7980)

( 0.7135)

( 0.8254)

(0.8220)

( 0.1008)

( 0.2898)

(0.5890)

( 0.5888)

(0.5888 )

-0.1817

-0.0916

0.0881

-0.2406*

-0.6109

-0.1329

-0.2521

(0.2620)

( 0.6862)

( 0.5390)

(0.0610)

( 0.3669)

(0.5320)

-0.9405
( 0.0040)

***

R2

0.100

(0.0000)
0.113

N. observ.

27293

16674

***

-0.1767
( 0.7474)

0.069
4890

Panel K: Competition is good
Dominant religion:

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Catholic

Protestant

Muslim

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Raised

Raised +
Currently

0.1797***
(0.0000)

0.1270
(0.0101 )

(0.0087 )

0.0868

0.0631

-0.0552

(0.5480)

( 0.6678)

( 0.6721)

(0.0060)

**

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

0.1352

-0.0270

0.1033

0.0133

0.2719

(0.7450)

(0.1589 )

(0.8610 )

(0.6780)

0.6721
(0.0582 )

0.1301***

0.1695
( 0.0019)

***

0.1404
( 0.0626)

0.5592

-0.1659

0.5721

(0.6290)

( 0.7783)

( 0.6154)

*

*

Raised+
Currently
+Actively
0.3677
(0.1580 )

-0.1024

0.2114

1.2025

0.5336

0.6104

0.4093

-1.1829

-0.3186

-0.0462

(0.8910)

( 0.7695)

( 0.3579)

(0.2210)

( 0.1128)

( 0.3974)

(0.5880)

( 0.8508)

( 0.9846)

-0.1834

-0.1340

-0.0433

-1.3036**

-0.5487

-0.3815

-0.4038***

-0.1800

-0.1701

(0.7250)

( 0.8503)

( 0.9539)

(0.0280)

( 0.2874)

( 0.5840)

(0.0000)

( 0.1141)

( 0.1457)

-0.6451

-0.9490
( 0.0074)

-0.7613

0.4366

-0.9935

-0.0374

-0.4398

0.1260

(0.3010)

-2.3619
( 0.0070)

(0.6040)

( 0.4676)

( 0.1769)

(0.9110)

( 0.2772)

( 0.7097)

-0.2553

0.8376

-0.9718

0.1238

0.2238

0.9623

-0.1892

-0.1892

-0.1892
( 0.8914)

***

***

(0.7310)

( 0.5949)

( 0.2802)

(0.8750)

( 0.7319)

(0.4228 )

(0.8910)

( 0.8914)

0.4214***

0.0194

-0.0974

0.0838

-0.1079

-0.2186

-0.3967

0.3826

0.2114

(0.0080)

( 0.9310)

( 0.4880)

(0.4840)

( 0.3838)

(0.1133 )

(0.2040)

( 0.1327)

( 0.6184)

R2

0.049

0.040

0.078

N. observ.

28450

16645

4871

66

Panel L: Thrift to be taught to children
Dominant religion:

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Catholic

Protestant

Muslim

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

0.0141**

***

0.0253
(0.0011 )

0.0009

0.0080

-0.0005

-0.1060

-0.0018

0.0344

(0.0360)

0.0233
(0.0020 )

(0.9450)

(0.5382 )

(0.9722 )

(0.4050)

(0.9796 )

(0.5104 )

0.0041

0.0326

-0.0015

0.0009

-0.0075

0.4149*

0.1246

(0.8470)

( 0.1507)

( 0.9375)

(0.9190)

0.0232
( 0.0184)

( 0.5449)

(0.0750)

( 0.2933)

0.8019
( 0.0005)

0.0202

0.0232

0.2575

-0.0419

-0.0463

-0.0386

0.3771

0.5313

-0.3958

(0.8580)

( 0.8395)

( 0.1617)

(0.5440)

( 0.5005)

( 0.6117)

(0.3910)

( 0.1192)

( 0.4117)

0.0194

0.0006

0.0632

-0.0048

-0.0830

0.0598***

(0.8080)

( 0.9953)

( 0.5701)

(0.9550)

( 0.3367)

-0.1791
( 0.0681)

0.0657
( 0.0037)

0.0312

0.0052

-0.0095

0.1497

0.1005

0.0967

0.0173

(0.7630)

( 0.9715)

( 0.8712)

(0.1150)

( 0.2777)

(0.3113 )

(0.7970)

-0.0317

-0.1068

-0.0738

0.2119

0.0788

0.0800

0.5063*

(0.7940)

( 0.6469)

( 0.6120)

(0.1300)

( 0.5322)

( 0.7047)

-0.0089

0.0282

-0.0373

0.0322

0.0213

-0.0243

(0.7270)

(0.4221 )

(0.1011 )

(0.1530)

( 0.3728)

( 0.3376)

(0.2460)

***

Raised

Raised +
Currently

**

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

*

Raised

Raised +
Currently

(0.0010)

***

*

0.1552
( 0.0566)
*

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

***

-0.0086
( 0.7107)
0.0544
( 0.4205)
*

(0.0700)

0.5063
( 0.0695)

0.5063
(0.0695 )

-0.0730

-0.0279

0.0786

( 0.5845)

(0.3571 )

R2

0.078

0.147

0.077

N. observ.

37635

25335

5010

Panel M: Poor are lazy
Dominant religion:

Catholic
Protestant
Jew
Muslim
Hindu
Buddhist
Others

Catholic

Protestant

Muslim

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Religious intensity

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

Raised

Raised +
Currently

Raised+
Currently
+Actively

-0.0057

0.0014

0.0043

0.0082

***

(0.1430)

(0.7343 )

(0.3259 )

(0.2760)

0.0249
(0.0014 )

0.0179
(0.0234 )

0.0074

0.0062

0.0135

0.0109**

***

(0.5380)

( 0.6303)

( 0.2163)

(0.0360)

0.0171
( 0.0037)

0.0312
(0.0000 )

0.0117

0.0381

0.1269

0.0165

0.0094

0.0003

(0.8560)

( 0.5611)

( 0.2246)

(0.6900)

( 0.8181)

( 0.9952)

-0.0534

-0.0257

0.0453

0.0410

(0.2390)

( 0.6927)

(0.3850)

**

0.1535
( 0.0152)

*

-0.2196*
(0.0710)

0.1721
(0.0062 )

-0.0818

-0.0687

0.0303

(0.6910)

( 0.3227)

( 0.8789)

0.0213

-0.1055

(0.9550)

( 0.7206)

0.9095
( 0.0293)

( 0.4355)

0.1042
( 0.0757)

0.0807***

***

***

(0.0000)

***

0.1192

***

Raised+
Currently
+Actively
0.0665
(0.1737 )

**

0.1114

***

0.1523**

(0.0000)
-0.0413

(0.0010)

0.1800
(0.0014 )

(0.0100)

( 0.5587)

0.1567
( 0.0080)

-0.0605

-0.0956

0.1067

0.1373

0.1373

0.1373

(0.6420)

( 0.6416)

( 0.6416)

0.0066

0.0124

-0.0045

(0.9090)

( 0.7907)

( 0.9558)

-0.0395

-0.0475

0.1825***

(0.0100)

( 0.6694)

( 0.1547)

-0.0014

-0.0061

0.1134

(0.9840)

( 0.9630)

(0.1966 )

-0.0054

0.0522
( 0.0098)

***

0.0284
( 0.0298)

(0.7110)

***

Raised +
Currently

0.1898
( 0.0005)

-0.1541**

**

**

Raised

(0.4640)

( 0.1984)

( 0.3915)

0.0441***

-0.0336
( 0.0188)

**

0.1038
( 0.0000)

(0.0010)

***

R2

0.278

0.273

0.093

N. observ.

37421

24562

4580

67

(0.0000)
***

Table 6. Post Concilium
Each panel reports the coefficients of an OLS regression, whose dependent variable is indicated at the top of the panel. dependent
variables are defined in the legend of Table 1. Regressions include (coefficients not reported) the same demographic controls as in Table
2 (health, male, age, education, social class, income), an indicator variable equal to 1 if a person answers no to the question “Do you
believe in God?”, country fixed effects, and survey-year dummies. *** indicate the coefficient is different from zero at the 1 percent
level, ** at the 5 percent level , and * at the 10 percent level.
Panel A: Attitudes toward others and the government

Trust
people
Raised Catholic
(Raised + Currently) Catholic
(Raised + Currently + Actively)
Catholic
Post concilium
Raised Catholic X Post
concilium
(Raised + Currently Catholic)
X Post concilium
(Raised + Currently + Actively
Catholic) X Concilium
Number of obs.
R squared

Average
Trust the
Intolerant Intolerant
intolerance government
toward
toward
other races immigrants

-0.0156*** 0.0041*** 0.0080*** 0.0083***
(0.0061)
(0.0044)
(0.0049)
(0.0034)
-0.0072
0.0084*
0.0053
0.0264***
(0.2645)
(0.0782)
(0.3161)
(0.0000)
***
0.0392*** 0.0099** 0.0034
0.0302***
(0.0000)
(0.0374)
(0.5301)
(0.0000)
-0.0192*** 0.0143*** 0.0091*** 0.0108***
(0.0051)
(0.0037)
(0.0040)
(0.0027)
***
***
-0.0057
-0.0190*** -0.0147***
0.0062
(0.0093)
(0.0067)
(0.0076)
(0.0052)
0.0076
0.0002
0.0052
-0.0111**
(0.4175)
(0.9734)
(0.4914)
(0.0333)
-0.0031
-0.0029
0.0177** -0.0188***
(0.7608)
(0.6970)
(0.0389)
(0.0014)
91656
89530
85614
84179
0.094
0.074
0.071
0.273

0.0014**
(0.0197)
0.1321***
(0.0000)
0.1314***
(0.0000)
0.0328**
(0.0136)
0.0106**
(0.0270)
-0.0084
(0.7331)
0.0955***
(0.0007)
47667
0.133

Trust the
police

Trust the
armed
forces

0.0081** -0.0435**
(0.0118)
(0.0120)
0.1372*** 0.1764***
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
***
0.2307
0.293***
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
0.0598*** 0.0408***
(0.0097)
(0.0099)
0.0619** 0.0846***
(0.0179)
(0.0181)
0.0122
0.0328*
(0.0671)
(0.5037)
0.0413** -0.0443**
(0.0342)
(0.0261)
87680
88124
0.172
0.198

Panel B: Attitudes toward women

Being a
Do you think
When jobs are
housewife is just
that women
scarce, men
as fulfilling as
should have
should have
more right to a children in order working for pay
job than women to be fulfilled
Raised Catholic
(Raised + Currently) Catholic
(Raised + Currently + Actively)
Catholic
Post concilium
Raised Catholic X Post
concilium
(Raised + Currently Catholic)
X Post concilium
(Raised + Currently + Actively
Catholic) X Concilium
Number of obs.
R squared

0.1054**
(0.0145)
0.0909***
(0.0000)
0.1641***
(0.0000)
0.0292**
(0.0113)
-0.0954**
(0.0213)
-0.0686***
(0.0004)
-0.1179***
(0.0000)
72186
0.139

0.0207***
(0.0062)
0.0736***
(0.0000)
0.1009***
(0.0000)
-0.0051***
(0.0051)
-0.0024***
(0.0094)
-0.018*
(0.0583)
-0.0312***
(0.0026)
88240
0.250

68

0.0870**
(0.0145)
0.1411***
(0.0000)
0.264***
(0.0000)
0.0293**
(0.0112)
-0.0912**
(0.0213)
-0.0615***
(0.0015)
-0.1238***
(0.0000)
68481
0.101

Both the
husband and
wife should
contribute to
household
income
0.0611**
(0.0180)
0.0448***
(0.0066)
0.0823***
(0.0000)
0.0516**
(0.0124)
-0.0989**
(0.0235)
-0.0388*
(0.0567)
-0.0847***
(0.0001)
38851
0.086

A university
education is
more important
for a boy than
for a girl
0.0267**
(0.0226)
0.0441**
(0.0322)
0.084***
(0.0000)
-0.0307**
(0.0155)
0.0093**
(0.0293)
0.0093
(0.7170)
0.0104
(0.7065)
38148
0.123

Panel C: Attitudes toward legal rules

Raised Catholic
(Raised + Currently) Catholic
(Raised + Currently + Actively)
Catholic
Post concilium
Raised Catholic X Post
concilium
(Raised + Currently Catholic)
X Post concilium
(Raised + Currently + Actively
Catholic) X Concilium
Number of obs.
R squared

Trust the Is it justified Is it justified Is it justified Is it justified
to buy a
to cheat on
to avoid a
legal system? to claim
stolen
taxes?
fare on
government
object?
public
benefits you
transport?
are not
entitled to?
0.0187**
-0.0398** -0.2140*** -0.1245*** -0.1362***
(0.0119)
(0.0309)
(0.0325)
(0.0338)
(0.0231)
-0.0473
-0.1941***
-0.1683***
-0.136***
0.1327***
(0.0000)
(0.1555)
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
***
***
***
-0.0814**
-0.3323
-0.3603
-0.2418***
0.2107
(0.0000)
(0.0144)
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
0.0484***
0.1347**
0.3127**
0.1268**
0.2423**
(0.0098)
(0.0259)
(0.0272)
(0.0283)
(0.0194)
0.0365**
-0.0881**
-0.0047**
-0.0640*
0.0073**
(0.0180)
(0.0469)
(0.0493)
(0.0513)
(0.0351)
-0.1287**
-0.0677*
-0.0176
-0.0006
-0.1715***
(0.3293)
(0.9901)
(0.0006)
(0.0128)
(0.0560)
-0.1038*
-0.2403***
-0.1693***
-0.0111
-0.1462***
(0.5720)
(0.0045)
(0.0553)
(0.0000)
(0.0000)
88157
0.092

86095
0.095

87224
0.126

86627
0.099

Is it
justified to
accept a
bribe?

-0.0468**
(0.0229)
-0.0319
(0.1979)
-0.0946***
(0.0001)
0.1422**
(0.0192)
-0.0945**
(0.0348)
-0.0377
(0.2819)
-0.1064***
(0.0054)

87356
0.073

87082
0.070

Panel D: Attitudes toward then market

Raised Catholic
(Raised + Currently) Catholic
(Raised
+
Currently
Actively) Catholic
Post concilium

+

Raised Catholic X Post
concilium
(Raised + Currently Catholic)
X Post concilium
(Raised + Currently + Actively
Catholic) X Concilium
Number of obs.
R squared

Inequality of income vs.
incentives

Private vs. public
ownership

Competition is good or
harmful

-0.0176**
(0.0482)
-0.0458
(0.3285)
-0.0375
(0.4249)
0.0914**
(0.0372)
0.0215*
(0.0721)
0.0237
(0.7199)
-0.0279
(0.7097)

0.0638**
(0.0466)
0.2776***
(0.0000)
0.443***
(0.0000)
0.1932**
(0.0354)
-0.2546*
(0.0696)
-0.3931***
(0.0000)
-0.5602***
(0.0000)

0.2218**
(0.0422)
0.228***
(0.0000)
0.265***
(0.0000)
0.0962**
(0.0324)
-0.1929*
(0.0630)
-0.2924***
(0.0000)
-0.3042***
(0.0000)

69016
0.095

66833
0.134

68177
0.066

69

Panel D: Attitudes toward thriftiness and market’s fairness

Raised Catholic
(Raised + Currently) Catholic
(Raised + Currently + Actively)
Catholic
Post concilium
Raised Catholic X Post
concilium
(Raised + Currently Catholic)
X Post concilium
(Raised + Currently + Actively
Catholic) X Concilium
Number of obs.
R squared

Thrift to be
encouraged

Individual vs.
government
responsibility

Hard work
improves life

Wealth can
grow for
everyone

Poor are lazy

0.0076***
(0.0063)
0.0131*
(0.0533)
0.008
(0.2402)
-0.0042***
(0.0052)
0.0011***
(0.0095)
0.0200**
(0.0377)
0.0214**
(0.0440)

-0.0145**
(0.0478)
0.1458***
(0.0017)
0.2133***
(0.0000)
0.0786**
(0.0371)
-0.0409*
(0.0700)
-0.1514**
(0.0177)
-0.1722**
(0.0142)

0.0419**
(0.0481)
0.2131***
(0.0000)
0.2900***
(0.0000)
0.1000**
(0.0370)
0.1145*
(0.0719)
0.0978
(0.1375)
0.1590**
(0.0334)

-0.0769**
(0.0474)
0.0304
(0.5080)
0.2633***
(0.0000)
-0.0097**
(0.0365)
0.0275*
(0.0707)
0.0714
(0.2697)
-0.0447
(0.5424)

0.0002***
(0.0038)
0.0129***
(0.0018)
0.0174***
(0.0000)
0.0215***
(0.0032)
-0.0159***
(0.0058)
-0.0189***
(0.0012)
-0.0267***
(0.0000)

88696
0.112

71970
0.159

69198
0.083

67327
0.045

86305
0.235

70

