NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

POLITICAL IDEOLOGY AND ENDOGENOUS TRADE
POLICY: AN EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION
Pushan Dutt
Devashish Mitra
Working Paper 9239
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9239
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002

We are indebted to Lawrence Broz, Marc Busch, Gary Engelhardt, Robert Feenstra, Jeffry Frieden, Gordon
Hanson, Cem Karayalcin, Philip Levy, Will Martin, Matthew Slaughter, Connie Smith, and Dimitrios
Thomakos for valuable comments and suggestions. We also thank seminar audiences at Baruch College, the
Canadian Economic Meetings (2002, Calgary), NBER Summer Institute 2002, Syracuse University, the
University of Alberta, the University of Calgary, the World Bank, and Yale University for useful discussions.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Pushan Dutt and Devashish Mitra. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

Political Ideology and Endogenous Trade Policy: An Empirical Investigation
Pushan Dutt and Devashish Mitra
NBER Working Paper No. 9239
October 2002
JEL No. F10, F11, F13
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we empirically investigate how government ideology affects trade policy.
The prediction of a partisan, ideology-based model (within a two-sector, two-factor Heckscher-Ohlin
framework) is that left-wing governments will adopt more protectionist trade policies in capital rich
countries, but adopt more pro-trade policies in labor rich economies than right-wing ones. The data
strongly support this prediction in a very robust fashion. There is some evidence, that this
relationship may hold better in democracies than in dictatorships though the magnitude of the
partisan effect seems stronger in dictatorships.

Pushan Dutt
Department of Economics
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Alberta
CANADA T6G 2H4
pdutt@ualberta.ca

Devashish Mitra
Department of Economics
The Maxwell School of Citizenship &
Public Affairs
Syracuse University
133 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244
and NBER
dmitra@maxwell.syr.edu

1

Introduction

Political ideology has been conceptualized in a number of ways giving rise to a multiplicity of
meanings and interpretations. One view is that it stands for the self-de¯ned notions of public
interest and altruistic goals of politicians and political parties, which form the basis for most of
economic policy making.1 Another view is that the interests of constituents and ideological preferences of politicians are interrelated, with the former probably determining the latter.2 However,
in between these two extremes, is the position that pure altruistic, public-interest motivations as
well as constituents' interests are both important in determining the ideological positions taken
by political parties and politicians.3

; 4

In this paper, we investigate how trade policy depends on the political ideology of the government (the party or the ruler in power). We look at how trade policy varies with the extent of the
government's leftist (pro-labor, as opposed to pro-capital) orientation. Our analysis is independent of which of the above de¯nitions of ideology one adopts. In other words, a left-wing party
adopts a pro-labor stance either because its constituents are workers whose support it needs in
terms of votes and political contributions, and/or they really place a high weight on egalitarianism.
Similarly, a right wing party might be taking care of their constituents, the capitalists, and/or
may truly believe in providing incentives for capital accumulation to foster growth and generate
1 This view has been held by Kau and Rubin (1979) and Kalt (1981). They ¯nd support for this view in their
empirical studies that show that congressional voting behavior can be explained primarily by such \ideological"
orientations rather than the economic interests of constituents.
2 See Peltzman (1984). He ¯nds empirical support for this position using Senate voting records across a wide
range of issues. Alt (1986) writes: \...class-party modelers from Kalecki to Hibbs say,...parties are policy-oriented,
ideological agents of their supporters..."
3 Kalt and Zupan (1984), de¯ne ideology as a set of normative statements that describe the best or most
preferred states of the world (in an altruistic and moralistic sense). Econometrically separating the e®ects of pure
`ideology' and the constituents' interests in Senate voting (on strip-mining controls), they ¯nd both to be fairly
important empirically.
4 There is also an informational aspect to ideology - a candidate can succinctly state her position on a host of
issues by presenting her views on all issues in simple one-dimesional terms (left vs. right, or liberal vs. conservative
for instance). Glazer and Grofman (1989) show that in the presence of imperfect information (less than fully
informed voters) a candidate who uses ideology merely as a label can often defeat a candidate who tries to specify
her position on each of the issues that defy any single ideological label. While a fully informed electorate would
presumably see a majority preferring the second candidate, costly information acquisition could see the former
victorious with ideology providing a default position on every possible issue. According to Arthur Downs (1957) as
well, ideology is a platform or position(s) adopted by parties seeking o±ce and an e±cient way for politicians to
summarize their position on a host of issues.

1

jobs. In our analysis, we just assume that a government that is more left-oriented places a higher
weight on the welfare of workers relative to that of capitalists, which can be consistent with any
or all of the above reasons. This is consistent with the ¯ndings of Hibbs (1977) who showed in his
empirical investigation of 14 major industrialized countries that countries with left-wing governments had lower unemployment and higher in°ation than others. He reaches similar conclusions
from the time series analysis of US and UK data.5 This is consistent with his \partisan theory"
according to which politicians are \partisan" - left-wing and right-wing governments have di®erent objective functions, the former attributing a higher cost to unemployment relative to in°ation
than the latter. Alesina (1987) develops his \rational partisan theory" using a two-party model in
which the left-wing party attaches a higher weight to unemployment relative to in°ation (and a
higher target in°ation rate) in its loss function than the right-wing party.6 Hibbs and Vasilatos
(1982) and Hibbs, Rivers and Vasilatos (1982), in di®erent studies of survey data for the US and
UK, show that the electorate's preferences and concerns about macroeconomic issues are classrelated, with blue-collar groups relatively more concerned about unemployment and white-collar
groups more concerned about in°ation.7 Magee, Brock and Young (1989) have also argued that
the low unemployment-high in°ation combination under Democratic presidents bene¯ts workers
(debtors) while the opposite combination under Republican presidents bene¯ts capitalists (creditors).8 Thus, it is fairly standard in the political economy literature to use left-wing (right-wing)
5

Also, see Alt (1985) who analyzes data from 14 western industrial nations between 1960 and 1983 and ¯nds that
unemployment falls (rises) following a change from a right-wing (left-wing) to a left wing (right-wing) government.
In arriving at this conclusion, Alt has to control for the constraint imposed by the world level of economic activity.
6

Alesina and Roubini (1992) ¯nd empirical support for the rational partisan model using OECD data.

7

For the US, they calculate the marginal rate of substitution between in°ation and unemployment for blue-collar
workers to be 1.5 and for white-collar workers to be 2.2. In other words, in order to maintain a given level of the
political approval index for blue-collar workers, a 1 percentage point increase in the in°ation rate would have to be
accompanied by a decrease of about 1.5 percentage points in the unemployment rate while for white-collar workers,
this number is 2.2 percentage points of unemployment. Thus, blue-collar workers do not care much about in°ation,
but care a lot more about unemployment. Therefore a small reduction in unemployment is enough to compensate
them for any given increase in in°ation. They ¯nd qualitatively similar results for the UK. In fact, for the UK,
they also ¯nd that, even after controlling for variations in responses to economic outcomes of governments under
di®erent parties, manual working-class voters are far more supportive of Labor governments than Conservative
governments.
8 This is the standard textbook argument in macroeconomics that a sudden increase in the in°ation rate bene¯ts
debtors at the expense of creditors, since the former will be paying back the latter a smaller amount of money in
real terms.

2

and pro-labor (pro-capital) interchangeably when describing political parties.9
In this paper, we use the political support function approach of Hillman (1989) within a twosector, two-factor (capital and labor) Heckscher-Ohlin framework.10 The government's objective
function, also called the political-support function, is a weighted sum of the welfare of workers and
capitalists.11 Maximization of this objective function yields the equilibrium tari®. In this model,
the e®ect of an increase in the leftist orientation of the government is studied by increasing the
weight on labor welfare relative to capital welfare in the government's maximand. This increase
in the labor-welfare weight results in policies that are more pro-labor and that make the domestic
terms of trade move in favor of the labor-intensive sector. In a capital-abundant country, the laborintensive good is the importable good and therefore, an increase in the leftist orientation of the
government will result in a rise in import protection. In a labor-abundant country, however, the
capital-intensive good is the importable and the labor-intensive good is the exportable. Therefore,
an increase in leftist orientation in such a country that calls for a change in the domestic price
ratio in favor of the labor-intensive exportable good will result in a decline in import protection.
It is exactly this prediction about cross-country variation in trade policy that we are able to
investigate empirically using cross-sectional data on government ideology (left, center, or right),
capital-abundance and diverse measures of trade restrictions and openness.
It is important to note here that in this kind of a Heckscher-Ohlin framework, a left-wing
(right-wing) government may want to make the import tari® negative in a labor-abundant (capital9

See for instance Magee, Brock and Young (1989) or Persson and Tabellini (2000).

10

There are other approaches to modeling endogenous trade policy. See, for instance, Feenstra and Bhagwati
(1982), Findlay and Wellisz (1982) and Rodrik (1986) for the tari®-formation function approach, Grossman and
Helpman (1994) for the political-contributions approach, Mitra (1999) for lobby formation using the politicalcontributions approach, Magee, Brock and Young (1989) for the campaign-contributions approach and Mayer
(1984) for the median-voter approach. The classi¯cation terminology is borrowed from Rodrik (1995) to which the
interested reader is referred for an excellent and comprehensive survey of the theoretical and empirical literature on
the political economy of trade policy. For an elegant analysis of the di®erent approaches within a uni¯ed framework,
see Helpman (1997). For an in-depth survey exclusively of the empirical literature in the political economy of trade
policy, see Gawande and Krishna (2001).
11 Grossman and Helpman (1994) use their political-contributions approach (based on the theory of menu auctions) to provide micro-foundations to the political-support function approach. In that sense, we are using a reduced
form approach. An increase in the weight on labor welfare in our framework can thus be, for instance, interpreted
as a switch in power from a right-wing government receiving contributions from the capital lobby to a left-wing
government that has the labor lobby contributing to it.

3

abundant) country if free-trade is considered the neutral situation (arising from equal weights on
labor and capital). However, in the real world there are possibly other components of the tari®
(arising from other factors or considerations) which are, in combination, always positive enough
to make the overall tari® levels, that we observe, positive in countries of all degrees of capital
abundance or scarcity, and with governments of all ideologies. Holding these other e®ects constant
with respect to ideology, the overall import tari® can rise or fall with left-wing ideology to the extent
that the positive or negative component that we focus on becomes more positive or more negative.
In carrying out our empirical analysis, we ¯rst represent political ideology using categorical
variables (treating ideology as ordinal), and then test if the political ideology variable can be
given a cardinal interpretation. Subsequently, we de¯ne our ideology variable as increasing in the
left orientation of the party in power, so that the variable takes the value one for a right-wing
government, two for a centrist government and three for a government that is classi¯ed as leftwing. In looking at the e®ects of ideology on protection, we allow these e®ects to change direction
and magnitude as the relative factor proportions change when we move across countries. We
perform our empirical investigation using three separate measures of relative factor endowments
(capital per worker), constructed using di®erent methods and under di®erent assumptions. Across
all measures of trade restrictiveness and using di®erent measures of the capital-labor ratio, we ¯nd
strong evidence in favor of the above-mentioned prediction of the impact of ideology on protection.
An increase in the left-wing ideology, holding constant the economy's overall relative endowments,
does in fact, raise trade barriers in capital-abundant economies and lower them in capital-scarce
economies.12 Further, this result is extremely robust to the use of controls, to the treatment of the
relative capital-labor endowments as endogenous to trade policy, to the correction of measurement
errors in the ideology measure and to controlling for di®erences in the endowments of other factors
of production.
12 In addition to using ideology as a variable, an interaction term between ideology and the capital-labor ratio
is used to endogenously determine from the data the threshold capital-labor ratio where the trade restrictivenessideology relationship changes sign or direction.

4

It is important to note here that our results are consistent with the results of econometric
studies (using micro-level survey data) on individual level trade policy preferences such as Balistreri
(1997), Beaulieu (2001), and Scheve and Slaughter (2001). These authors ¯nd that for both
Canada and the US in recent years, factor type has been the dominant determinant of support
for or opposition to trade barriers. Individuals owning proportionally more of the scarce factors
are in favor of trade barriers, while those owning proportionally more of the abundant factors do
not like trade restrictions.
The main theoretical proposition presented and investigated in our paper is driven by the
Stolper-Samuelson e®ect and therefore, our empirical results can be interpreted only in the context of this e®ect. Besides the above individual-level, revealed preference evidence for the StolperSamuelson theorem, there are papers that have found support for it using data on Political Action
Committee (PAC) contributions and congressional voting patterns. These studies speci¯cally ¯nd
support for the two-factor, capital-labor version of the Stolper-Samuelson e®ect, and thus, are specially relevant for our empirical investigation. Beaulieu (2000) ¯nds some evidence of congressional
voting patterns on trade policy in the US being a®ected by the factor-endowment composition
of constituencies. One of the interesting empirical regularities unravelled by his study is a negative relationship between the likelihood that a candidate votes in favor of the CUSTA, GATT or
NAFTA and the size of contributions from labor PACs. He also ¯nds a positive e®ect of contributions from capital (corporate) PACs on the likelihood of a favorable vote for CUSTA. In the case
of the GATT and the NAFTA, however, he ¯nds no e®ect of capital contributions. Kahane (1996)
¯nds that after controlling for state characteristics, the likelihood of voting against the NAFTA
in both the House and the Senate was increasing in contributions by labor PACs. Steagall and
Jennings (1996) ¯nd that the likelihood of a favorable House vote for the NAFTA was again decreasing in labor contributions, but also increasing in capital (corporate) contributions. However,
contributions are endogenous to political and other leanings of the candidate. Baldwin and Magee
(1998), after taking into account this endogeneity, ¯nd strong evidence that the likelihood of a
5

favorable vote for the NAFTA or the GATT cast in the House was decreasing in labor contributions but increasing in business contributions. Beaulieu and Magee (2000) determine industry
a±liation of these capital and labor PACs. They ¯nd that both the probability of a capital PAC
contributing money to a candidate and the size of its contribution to a candidate were higher if
he/she was a supporter of NAFTA, while the reverse was true for a labor PAC. Industry a±liation
of these PACs did not seem to matter in their contributions decisions in this NAFTA context.13
The contribution of our paper is two-fold. Firstly, our results uncover a robust empirical
regularity in the relationship between trade protection and political ideology, thereby adding to
the empirical literature on political economy of trade policy. Our ¯ndings suggest that a left-wing
government that is generally more interventionist and believes in state control of the economy
may, under certain conditions, have a preference for free trade. Secondly, the paper adds to the
empirical literature on cross-national variation in protection.14
In section 2, we present the theoretical framework and perform a comparative-static exercise
to derive the implications of an increase in the extent of left-wing ideology (the government's
weight on labor welfare) for trade policy determination. Section 3 describes the speci¯cation of
the econometric model and explains the various inferences that the model allows. Section 4 brie°y
discusses the data and the choice of regressors. In section 5, we discuss our empirical results and
¯nally, in section 6, we make some concluding remarks.
13

In contrast to the studies mentioned above, earlier studies (using older data) by Irwin (1994, 1996) and Magee
(1978) ¯nd that industry of employment was the major determinant of individual level trade policy preferences in
the British elections of the early twentieth century and in the testimonies of trade unions, management and industry
associations before the House Ways and Means Committee on the Trade Reform Act of 1973 in the US respectively.
However, Rogowski (1987) shows how coalitions formed in the US, Britain, and Germany in the nineteenth century
are those predicted by the Heckscher-Ohlin model.
14 See Rodrik (1995) for a discussion of the importance of (and the need for) empirical work on cross-country
variations in protection. To our knowledge, there are only two cross-country empirical studies on protection. Magee,
Brock and Young (1989, ch. 16) ¯nd that average tari® rates tend to decrease as capital-labor ratios increase.
Mans¯eld and Busch (1995) examine cross-national variation in average protection levels among 14 advanced
industrial countries pooled over two years, 1983 and 1986. They ¯nd that non-tari® barriers are increasing in
country size, unemployment rate and number of parliamentary constituencies, and are higher for countries that
use proportional representation as their electoral system. Also, there are three well known cross-industry studies
on protection in the US - Goldberg and Maggi (1999), Gawande and Bandyopadhyay (2000) and Tre°er (1993) all of which focus on the predictions of lobbying/political contributions models about cross-industry variation in
protection.

6

2

Theoretical Framework

Let us consider a two-factor, two-sector, small-open, Heckscher-Ohlin economy. We choose units
such that the world-price ratio of the two goods is one. Let t be the ad valorem import tari®.
Therefore, the tari®-inclusive domestic relative price of the importable good is ¿ = 1 + t: Both
goods require both capital and labor in their production which is carried out under constant returns
to scale. On the demand side, individual preferences are taken to be identical and homothetic.
An individual h's indirect utility function can, therefore, be written as ­h = V (¿)I h (¿ ) where I h
is her income:
For simplicity, we assume that there are two kinds of factor owners, workers (who only own
labor) and capitalists (who only own capital). Let us denote the set of all capitalists by K and
the set of all workers by L. Furthermore, we let K stand for the aggregate capital stock of the
economy, while L is the total labor endowment of the economy. The total incomes of all capitalists
and of all workers are given respectively by
I K (¿ ) = r(¿ )K + (¿ ¡ 1)ÁK (¿)M(¿ )

(1)

I L (¿ ) = w(¿ )L + (¿ ¡ 1)(1 ¡ ÁK (¿))M(¿)

(2)

where ÁK is the share of capitalists in the total tari® revenue (equal to their share in national
factor income by assumption) and M (¿ ) denotes total imports. w(¿ ) and r(¿ ) are the wage rate
earned by labor and rental on capital respectively, both being solely the functions of the domestic
price of the importable.
The government chooses the level of the import tari® to maximize its objective function which
is a weighted sum of the aggregate welfare of workers and capitalists. Thus, the government's
objective function is given by
­G (¿ ) = ®

X

­h (¿ ) + (1 ¡ ®)

h2L

7

X

­h (¿ )

h2K

(3)

Due to the homotheticity of preferences, the above objective function can be written as
­G (¿) = V (¿ )I G (¿ )
where I G is the weighted aggregate income given by
"
#
X
X
h
h
G
I (¿ ) + (1 ¡ ®)
I (¿ ) = L [®w(¿ ) + (1 ¡ ®)r(¿)k] [1 + ±(¿ ; k)]
I = ®
h2L

(4)

(5)

h2K

where k is the ratio of capital to labor endowment of a country and ±(:) is the ratio of total
tari® revenue to national factor income. Let IuG be the above weighted income for a country
of unit size, i.e., it is the value of I G at L = 1: The government maximizes LV (¿)IuG (¿ ) which
is the same as maximizing V (¿)IuG (¿ ): In other words, the endogenous tari® will depend on ®
and k and for given values of these parameters, not on the country size L: The government's
problem is equivalent to maximizing v(¿ ) + i(¿ ; ®; k) where v(¿) = ln V (¿ ) and i = ln IuG : It
is assumed that this objective function is strictly concave with respect to the domestic price
(second-order condition for a unique interior solution). Expanding the expression for i; we have
i = ln[®w(¿ )+(1¡®)r(¿ )k]+ln[1+±(¿; k)]: The ¯rst order condition of our maximization problem
gives us
v0 (¿ ) + @i=@¿ = 0

(6)

Let t¤ = ¿ ¤ ¡ 1 be the equilibrium tari® coming out of the government's maximization problem
described above. We now want to see how this tari® varies with the government's weight, ®; on
labor welfare: Di®erentiating our ¯rst order condition to perform comparative statics we obtain
@t¤
[r¶(¿ )w(¿ ) ¡ r(¿)w¶(¿)]k
=
@®
[®w(¿ ) + (1 ¡ ®)r(¿)k]2 [v00 (¿) + @ 2 i=@¿ 2 ]

(7)

Since an increase in the domestic price of the importable increases the reward to the scarce factor
and reduces that for the abundant factor, we have r¶(¿ ) < 0 and w¶(¿) > 0 for a capital-abundant
country, while r¶(¿) > 0 and w¶(¿ ) < 0 for a labor-abundant country. The denominator in (7)
is always negative due to the restriction of concavity imposed on the objective function. Thus,
the above derivative of t¤ with respect to ® is positive when the economy is capital abundant, so
8

that an increase in the left orientation leads to an increase in the equilibrium tari®. For a labor
abundant country, this derivative has a negative sign.
This result is very intuitive. An increase in left orientation always results in an increase
in redistribution through policies that would bene¯t labor. In a capital abundant country, the
importable is the labor intensive good and an increase in redistribution from capital to labor
would increase the bias of policies in favor of the importable sector. In a labor abundant economy,
the importable sector is the capital intensive sector and hence more redistribution towards labor
requires policies that are more biased against the importable sector. This leads us to the following
proposition whose empirical validity we test in this paper.
Proposition: Holding other things constant, an increase in the left orientation (prolabor bias) of the government leads to more restrictive or less open trade policies in
capital abundant countries, while it leads to less restrictive or more open trade policies
in capital scarce economies.
While the predictions are not as precise once we allow for more than two factors, we will
attempt to argue that the predictions stated in the above proposition are not as speci¯c to the
two-factor framework as they appear. First, let us assume that there are three factors - physical
capital (K), human capital or skills (H) and raw, unskilled labor (L). National income for a
country with unit size (L = 1) will depend on the physical capital to labor ratio (k) and the
human capital to labor ratio (h) and will equal rk + wH h + w where wH denotes the return
on human capital.15 Thus, in order to be rich (poor), countries have to be relatively abundant
(scarce) in K and H combined or relatively scarce (abundant) in L.16 Prolabor redistribution
15 Note that an increase in L, holding constant h and k, means an increase in both the other factors in the same
proportion.
16

Endowments of physical and human capital should be correlated (both at the country and individual levels),
as it is the marginal rate of time preference that determines the steady state levels of both in the absence of credit
market imperfections, while in the presence of such imperfections, the ownership of physical assets directly a®ects
the ability to acquire skills.

9

policies in rich (poor) countries, thus, lead to higher (lower) trade barriers.17

3

Econometric Methodology

As the comparative static result of the previous section shows, in countries with high (K=L) ratios,
left-wing ideology of the government and trade restrictiveness should be positively related, but
when (K=L) is low there is an inverse relationship between these two variables. A priori, we do
not know at what level of (K=L), this relationship changes sign. The following speci¯cation takes
care of this problem by allowing the data to tell us the exact location of this turning point:
T Ri = ®0 + ®1 Ideology i + ®2 Ideology i £ (K=L)i + ®3 (K=L)i + Xi ¯ + ²i

(8)

where T Ri is the extent of trade restrictions in country i, Ideology i is a measure of the extent
of the government's left-wing ideology, (K=L)i the capital-labor ratio and Xi is a row vector of
control variables18 ,19 . The inclusion of (K=L) as a separate variable (in addition to Ideology
and Ideology£(K=L)) allows

@T Ri
@(K=L)i

and the variable component of

@T Ri
@(Ideology)i

to di®er in sign.

Otherwise, they are restricted to having the same sign.
Taking the partial derivative of T Ri with respect to Ideology i , we have
@T Ri
= ®1 + ®2 (K=L)i
@(Ideology)i

(9)

17 If we go beyond three factors, our basic result qualitatively will still hold though it might be weakened a
bit. The higher dimensional version of the Stolper-Samuelson theorem implies that if a factor is \scarce enough"
(\abundant enough"), it will be helped (harmed) by trade barriers (See Leamer and Levinsohn, 1995). Consider a
continuum of types of skills (high level or high paying to low level or low paying) and types of physical assets (high
tech and high return like computers to low tech and low return like hammers, screw-drivers, etc). Rich countries
will be abundant in the higher end factors, while poor countries in the lower end factors. A redistribution from the
rich to the poor through trade policy will, thus, take the form of high (low) trade barriers in the very rich (poor)
countries.
18 We could not ¯nd any non-monotonicities with respect to K=L by including an additional term (K=L)2 . We
did not detect any non-linearities (at 15% and even higher levels of signi¯cance) in any of our variables (K=L,
ideology, their cross product and other control variables) when we performed the Ramsey Reset test for all our
regressions, both with and without controls.
19

In our estimation, we use the capital-labor ratios in natural logs (and not in levels). For the TARIFF regression,
we have only one outlier with logs but 19 outliers with levels. For the IMPORT DUTY regression, the numbers
are zero and 22 respectively, while for the (X + M)=GDP regression the di®erence is even more stark, 3 outliers
with logs and 43 with levels. The number of outliers are somewhat comparable in the case of the QUOTA, 24 with
logs and 32 with levels. Moreover, in the case of logs, the results are robust to the deletion of outliers. Thus, we
present results with K=L in logs throughout this paper.

10

The prediction of the comparative static exercise of the previous section is that ®1 < 0 and ®2 > 0
such that ®1 + ®2 (K=L)i ? 0 as (K=L)i ? (K=L)¤ where (K=L)¤ = ¡ ®1 =®2 is the turning point
capital-labor ratio determined endogenously from the data, given our estimating equation.20
Another requirement for the prediction to hold is that (K=L)¤ should lie within the range of
values of (K=L) in the dataset, i.e., (K=L)MIN < (K=L)¤ < (K=L)MAX :
We ¯rst run the basic (without controls) ordinal and cardinal versions (explained in detail in
subsection 5.1) of the above estimating equation. We then add controls such as democracy and
special dummies for East Asia, for Oil countries and for Sub-Saharan African countries to see
whether our results are robust to their inclusion.21 Hausman tests22 suggested the endogeneity
of the capital-labor ratio with respect to trade protection. We therefore, perform two-stage least
squares regressions to control for such endogeneity. We also take advantage of the fact that two
of our measures of protection have a time-series dimension to create a panel data set and validate
our results using a ¯xed-e®ects model with time-speci¯c and comprehensive region-speci¯c e®ects.
Furthermore, we investigate whether this model works better in democracies than in dictatorships
and where the magnitude of this predicted relationship is stronger.
We also perform a number of robustness checks. We try to experiment with some suggested
adjustments to the political ideology variable and we also try to control for region-speci¯c measurement errors in this variable (arising from region-speci¯c elements in the de¯nition of left
vs. center vs. right). In addition, we provide some indirect checks that test the quality of our
ideology variable. Finally, we try to control for di®erences in the land endowment across nations
20 We will ¯rst give ideology a categorical interpretation and subsequently check if it may be given a cardinal
interpretation as well. If ideology has an exclusively categorical (dummy variable) interpretation then the derivatives
shown here are not very meaningful. However, we can still ¯nd critical capital-labor ratios where the relationships
switch sign.
21 We have also tried using in addition to these controls a dummy for Latin America. The results remain
completely una®ected.
22 In a linear model, an easy way of implementing the Hausman test for exogeneity is to ¯rst run reduced form
regressions of each of the variables (in our case, K=L and Ideology¤K=L) that are suspected to be endogenous on all
the exogenous variables from our main regression and other exogenous variables which theory suggests might a®ect
any of these endogenous variables. The second step involves computing the residuals from each of these auxilliary
regressions and inserting them as additional right-hand side variables in our main estimating regression. If these
residuals are jointly signi¯cant, our plain OLS estimation of the model produces inconsistent estimates warranting
a 2SLS estimation.

11

and attempt to see whether land-owners generally form coalitions with capitalists or workers.

4

Data Sources and Some Basic Statistics

Our dependent variable is trade protection and our independent variables of interest are a measure
of ideological orientation (left, center and right wing), the capital-labor ratio, and indicators for
democracy and political rights. For the regional e®ects, we will be using region-speci¯c dummies.
Unless otherwise mentioned, the cross-sectional analysis averages all variables for the decade of
the 1980s and the panel analysis covers the time period 1980-1989.
To test for the robustness of our results, we use a variety of trade policy measures: total
import duties collected as a percentage of total imports (IMPORT DUTY), an average tari®
rate calculated by weighing each import category by the fraction of world trade in that category
(TARIFF)23 , a coverage ratio for non-tari® barriers to trade (QUOTA) and an indirect measure
of trade restrictions - the magnitude of trade °ows relative to GDP, de¯ned as (X + M )=GDP .
For tari® and quota we have only one observation per country, while for import duty and (X +
M )=GDP we use decade averages in the cross-country analysis. For the panel analysis, only
IMPORT DUTY and (X + M )=GDP are used since these are the only measures for which data
are available over time.
The data on political orientation are obtained from the Database of Political Institutions
(DPI) (Beck et al, 2001). The authors have created a large cross-country database of political
institutions that covers 177 countries over 21 years, 1971-1995. The database, among many other
things, also lists the political orientation of the chief executive (that of the chief executive's party
or when considered appropriate that of the chief executive himself/herself) and of the majority
party in the legislature as `Left', `Center' or `Right'. We use the ideological orientation of the
chief executive for political systems classi¯ed as presidential in the database, that of the largest
government party for systems classi¯ed as parliamentary, and the average of these two orientations
23

The variable is referred to as tari®s, although it includes all import charges, such as duties and customs fees.

12

for systems classi¯ed as assembly-elected president. We also veri¯ed the robustness of our results
by using the ideological orientation of the chief executive for political systems that are classi¯ed as
assembly-elected president instead of using an average measure. The results are robust to such a
variation. Similar data have been used by Hibbs (1977) and Alt (1985) who examined the partisan
e®ects of left vs. right-wing governments on unemployment and in°ation rates. They ¯nd that
left-wing governments are more labor-oriented, draw their support from the working-class and
attach far greater importance to issues such as unemployment and equalization of the income
distribution. In contrast, right-wing parties are business-oriented and attach low priority to labor
related issues such as unemployment while assigning high priority to price stability. Alesina and
Roubini (1992) use data on ideological orientation for more direct tests of rational partisan theory
(Alesina, 1987) and its implications for political business cycles.
The data on capital-labor ratios are obtained from Easterly and Levine who use aggregate
investment and depreciation data to construct capital per worker series for 138 countries. To check
for, and ensure the robustness of our results we also use the Easterly-Levine capital per worker
data that uses disaggregated sectoral investment data along with information on disaggregated
sector-level depreciation to arrive at more accurate measures. However, the country coverage is
much smaller than the aggregate Easterly-Levine capital-labor series.24
For a measure of democracy, we use the Freedom House (Gastil) measure of democracy that
provides a subjective classi¯cation of countries on a scale of 1 to 7 on political rights, with higher
ratings signifying less political freedom. Finally, as instruments, the additional variables used
are the natural logarithm of the savings rate and the population growth rate obtained from
the World Development Indicators. Note that the population growth rate and the savings rate
24 We also tried the Nehru-Dhareshwar data on capital in conjunction with the data on labor (de¯ned as population between ages 15 and 64), to calculate an alternative measure of capital-labor ratio. The data on capital
stock at 1987 domestic prices are converted into 1987 constant dollars using the 1987 exchange rate. However,
this results in a number of outliers (both in terms of unrealistically high capital-labor ratios for countries such as
Argentina and in terms of multivariate outlier tests) owing to appreciated exchange rates. The results (with and
without the inclusion of these outliers) here bear out our predictions as well, and are available from the authors
upon request.

13

are parameters in the Solow growth model in which the steady state per-capita capital stock is
determined endogenously.
For some additional regressions, we also use data on government and opposition fractionalization, also obtained from the DPI. The data on these variables are only available for countries with
parliaments or their equivalent.
The summary statistics for the main variables and the correlation matrix for our protection
measures are presented in tables 0.1 and 0.2 respectively.

5
5.1

Results
OLS Regressions (With and Without Controls)

We ¯rst show that our basic theoretical prediction is supported when we give ideology an exclusively ordinal or categorical (dummy variable) interpretation. Under this interpretation, our
estimating equation is
T Ri = ®0 + ®1 ¤ (K=L)i + ¯0 lef ti + ¯1 lefti ¤ (K=L)i + °0 ¤ centeri + °1 ¤ centeri ¤ (K=L)i + ²i (10)
where lefti = 1 (0 otherwise) if the ith country has a left-wing government and centeri = 1 (0
otherwise) if the ith country has a centrist government. Both ¯0 and °0 are predicted to be negative
whereas ¯1 and °1 are predicted to be positive. Also theory predicts that the ¯ 0 s are greater in
magnitude than the respective °'s. Next, we perform tests to check if, in fact, the ideology measure
can be treated as cardinal, where it takes the value 1 if the government is right-wing, 2 if it is
centrist, and 3 if it is left-wing. Under this interpretation, equation (8) is our estimating equation.
We check if the cardinal speci¯cation (a special case of the ordinal speci¯cation) is valid by testing
the following joint hypothesis
¯0 = 2°0 and ¯1 = 2°1
If we cannot reject this joint hypothesis, then there are e±ciency gains from treating ideology as
a cardinal measure, with equal distances between right and center and between center and left25 .
25

In the results that follow, all standard errors are White-corrected.

14

In table 1, we present our ¯rst set of cross-section results. In the ¯rst four regressions, we use
a single dummy variable that takes the value 1 for left wing governments (and zero otherwise) to
represent ideology. For the last four columns, we add another dummy for \center" that additionally
distinguishes countries with centrist governments from the rest. Classi¯cation of political ideology
was done as follows: The time period of our study is the decade of the 1980s. Any country
that had a left-wing (centrist/right-wing) government in o±ce for at least 6 years was coded
as `left'(`centrist'/`right'). There are three countries in our sample - Bolivia, New Zealand and
Norway, that had a left-wing and a right-wing government for exactly 5 years each during the
1980s, and one country - Ecuador - that had a left-wing and a right-wing government for exactly 4
years each, and a centrist-government for a year.26 These countries were classi¯ed as centrists.27
There was no other country whose political ideology split up into all three types (left, right
and center) for the decade of the 80's. As the ¯rst four columns of table 1 show, left wing
governments are more protectionist in capital-abundant countries but less protectionist in laborabundant countries.28 The critical capital-labor ratio varies from 9.6 for (X + M )=GDP to 10.6
for QUOTA, not far from the mean and median capital-labor ratios. While the result for import
duty is somewhat weak in terms of the signi¯cance of the individual coe±cients, the model as a
whole is signi¯cant. The R2 's in the ¯rst four regressions range from 0.15 to 0.35.
In the next four columns, we further partition the non-left countries into centrist and rightwing by using two dummies - one for `left' and one for `center'.We interact both these two dummies
with the capital-labor ratio. Our results do not change qualitatively from the ¯rst four columns.
Generally, we ¯nd that left wing governments are more protectionist than governments classi¯ed as
right-wing in capital-abundant countries but less protectionist in labor-abundant countries. This
26

For Ecuador, we have data for only 9 out of 10 years in the decade of the 80s.

27

To check for the robustness of this classi¯cation, we tried the following permutations: a) classifying these
countries as left-wing; b) classifying them as right-wing; and c) dropping them from the sample. Our results are
robust to all such variations.
28 We have similarly performed regressions where we look at right versus non-right nations, where we ¯nd that
right wing governments are more protectionist than left wing ones in labor-abundant countries. The relationship is
reversed for capital-abundant countries. The results are as strong as the ones reported in the paper for left versus
non-left, and are available from the authors upon request.

15

result also holds for centrist versus right-wing governments with QUOTA and (X + M)=GDP
as dependent variables. There are two critical capital-labor ratios (one for right vs. center and
another for right vs. left) per regression because of which we do not show them in the table. These
critical values are all very close to 10, again very close to the mean and median values of (K=L).
As before, the model as a whole is signi¯cant and here the R2 's ranges from 0.19 to 0.35.
Importantly, we see here that we cannot reject the hypothesis that ideology can be treated
as cardinal (i.e., the joint hypothesis that ¯0 = 2°0 and ¯1 = 2°1 ) for all measures except
(X + M )=GDP . In other words, we can replace these ideology dummy variables with a cardinal
measure of ideology and obtain more e±cient parameter estimates. Therefore, for most of the rest
of the paper we will treat ideology as cardinal. As mentioned before, we recoded the ideological
orientation of the government of each country for each year as follows - 3 for left, 2 for center, and
1 for right. For our cross-sectional regressions, we take the average of this variable for the 80's.
Therefore, our ideology variable in the regressions is best interpreted as the extent to which the
policy and decision-making authority can be considered left-wing with higher numbers signifying
a more leftist orientation. Apart from being a cardinal variable that will yield more e±cient
estimates (because the cardinality hypothesis cannot be rejected), this variable through decadewide averaging, in our cross-sectional regressions, also captures the variation in the proportion of
years a country had regimes that di®er in their ideological orientations (which our ordinal variables
do not).
Tables 2 and 3 present the regression results (with and without controls) for our main estimating equation (equation (8) in section 3 of this paper) with the cardinal measure of ideology.
Table 2 corresponds to the Easterly-Levine aggregate capital-labor ratio (our main measure due to
more extensive country coverage), and table 3 to the Easterly-Levine disaggregated capital-labor
ratio. The sample size which ranges from 35 to 89, depends on the country coverage of the data
on the di®erent variables used.
In table 2, all our regression models as a whole are signi¯cant at the 5% level. In addition,
16

as predicted, we obtain a negative sign for ideology and a positive sign for the interaction term
for tari®s, quotas and import duty where these coe±cients are individually as well as jointly
signi¯cant. For (X + M)=GDP (a measure of openness) as predicted the signs are reversed and
signi¯cant. The table also reports the critical capital-labor ratio at which the relationship between
trade protection and left-wing ideology switches from negative to positive. The critical capitallabor ratio at which the relationship between trade protection and left-wing ideology switches
from negative to positive, ranges from 9 (for (X + M )=GDP without controls) to 10.5 (for quota
without controls). These values are very close to the median and mean capital-labor ratios in the
sample.

29

The R2 ranges from 0.2 (in the case of quota without controls) to 0.38 (in the case of

tari®s with controls). The results are the strongest and most robust for tari®s and quotas, which
are the most direct measures of trade restrictions.
Even though our model can explain less than 40% of the cross-country variation in protection,
we still are able to analyze the magnitudes of some of the partial derivatives of protection with
respect to ideology. For example, let us consider two capital-scarce countries, Bangladesh (K=L =
7:34) and Senegal (K=L = 7:17). While Bangladesh had a right-wing government (Ideology = 1),
Senegal had a left-wing government (Ideology = 3) in the 80's. At the average of the two K=L ratios
(K=L = 7:255), from our tari® regression without controls, we have @T ariff =@Ideology = ¡0:1:
Bangladesh had a tari® of 0.41 and Senegal had a tari® of 0.19, a di®erence of 0.22, resulting in a
slope of the tari® with respect to ideology of about -0.11 which is very close to the estimated slope
from our regression. Let us now compare two capital abundant countries, Canada (K=L = 11:12)
and USA (K=L = 11:2): While the US had Ideology = 1:2 (average for the 80's), Canada had
Ideology = 1:8. At the average of the two K=L ratios (K=L = 11:16), from our tari® regression
without controls, we have @T arif f=@Ideology = 0:05: Canada had a tari® of 0.046 and the US
had a tari® of 0.02, a di®erence of 0.026, resulting in a slope of the tari® with respect to ideology
29 Of course, it must be noted that the critical capital-labor ratio is itself an estimate and has a standard error.
However, for most of our regressions, the 2 standard error con¯dence interval around this estimate includes the
median and mean capital-labor ratios. Thus the capital-labor ratio according to which countries are classi¯ed as
labor and capital abundant emerges endogenously from our analysis.

17

of 0.043 which is very close to the estimated slope from our regression. Brazil, Korea, Algeria,
Costa Rica, Jamaica and Guyana that have capital-labor ratios close to the critical values also
have roughly similar tari® rates even though the political ideologies of their governments are quite
di®erent.
In table 3, which uses the disaggregated capital-labor ratio, our estimates (ideology, K=L; and
the interaction term) are signi¯cant, except for the import duty regressions where ideology and
the interaction term are insigni¯cant30 (even in which case they do have the correct signs and the
model as a whole is signi¯cant at the 5% level and accounts for upto 45% of the cross-country
variation without controls and upto 55% when we add controls). The R2 ranges from 0.28 for the
(X + M )=GDP without controls to 0.55 for the import duty regression with controls.
In table 4, using the tari® regression without controls presented in table 2, we categorize the
countries in our sample into those that exhibit a negative relationship between protection and leftwing ideology (those with a low capital-labor ratio) and those that exhibit a positive relationship
(those with a high capital-labor ratio). The critical (turning point) capital-labor ratio in this case
is roughly 9.9 which is slightly lower than the capital-labor ratio for Ecuador. Adding controls
increases the number of countries that exhibit a negative relation between left-wing ideology and
trade protection and diminishes the number of countries that exhibit a positive relation.
A partial derivative of trade restrictions with respect to the capital-labor ratio (using equation
(8)) in the regressions yields
@T Ri
= ®3 + ®2 (Ideology i )
@(K=L)i

(11)

Our regression results show that ®3 < 0 and ®2 > 0 and that their estimates are statistically
signi¯cant. Substituting the values of Ideology i into the expression for the above partial derivative,
we ¯nd a negative sign for all countries in our sample. These results are in line with the ¯ndings
of Magee et al. (1989). Tari®s are a dependable and important source of revenues in developing
30 Notice that the country coverage for the disaggregate capital-labor ratio is nearly half that of the aggregate
capital-labor ratio.

18

countries (countries with a low capital labor ratio). Moreover, developing countries have used
infant-industry reasoning to justify protecting domestic industries.
We now look at the coe±cients of our control variables in tables 2 and 3. Our controls are
an inverse index of democracy (the Gastil index of political rights)31 , and regional e®ects using
regional dummies. The inclusion of democracy is motivated by several factors. First, if we believe
the evidence that openness stimulates economic growth, dictatorships which are more concerned
with the size of the pie rather than its distribution, are more likely to be open. Second, since
unemployment is a major issue in most elections, democracies are also more likely to provide
import protection to ine±cient domestic ¯rms and to public sector ¯rms in particular, that may
not survive foreign competition. Furthermore, Fernandez and Rodrik (1991) show that in the
presence of individual-speci¯c uncertainty regarding the costs of moving to the export sector,
trade reforms that are bene¯cial to the majority ex-post may require a dictator to implement
them in the ¯rst place.32 However, as tables 2 and 3 show, we fail to ¯nd any evidence that
democracies are more protectionist. The relationship between democracy and the partisan model
is addressed in greater detail in later sections. Finally, in terms of regional e®ects all we ¯nd is
that quota coverage is lower for East Asian countries and that quotas and import duties are higher
for sub-Saharan African countries.

5.2

Two Stage Least Squares

In a dynamic context (for example in a multi-sector Solow model), the capital-labor ratio may
be endogenous with respect to trade policy. Protection, by a®ecting the production structure,
can a®ect accumulation and the steady state level of the capital stock. Because of the possible
endogeneity of the capital-labor ratio and the interaction term, we performed a two-stage least
31

Note that this index increases with the extent of dictatorship and decreases with the degree of democracy

32

Also, Rodrik (1997) has argued that rising labor demand elasticities, brought about by more open trade, may
hurt workers (the majority of the population) by shifting the wage or employment incidence of non-wage labor
costs towards labor and away from employers, by triggering more volatile responses of wages and employment to
labor demand shocks and by bargaining power over rent distribution in ¯rms away from labor and towards capital.
This may generate some demand for protection, to which democracies may be more responsive.

19

square estimation where we instrument the suspected endogenous terms by the log of the population growth rate and the log of the savings rate. In the case of the cardinal regressions we
have two endogenous terms (K=L) and Ideology¤(K=L) and so these two instruments are enough
to ensure that the estimating equation is identi¯ed. For the ordinal regressions, there are three
endogenous terms and so we use both the ¯rst order and second order terms in the saving rate
and the population growth rate (levels, squares, and the cross-product) as instruments to ensure
the identi¯cation of the equation.33
As table 5 shows across all measures of protection, the prediction of the partisan model is
supported. The relevant terms are all signi¯cant and the critical capital-labor ratios are again
very close to the mean and the median. These results are also robust to the inclusion of controls.

5.3

Panel Regressions

We also test our model using cross-sectional time series data available for two measures of protection - import duty and (X +M )=GDP . We use a ¯xed-e®ects model with time and comprehensive
region-speci¯c e®ects.34 In general, time speci¯c shocks seem more reasonable because historically
the world as a whole has exhibited a pattern, where either all countries have tended to become
more protectionist (e.g., the inter-war years), or less protectionist (the mid 1990s following the
Uruguay Round). Further, there has been a tendency for countries within a region to organize
themselves into free trade areas or customs unions - an e®ect that should be captured by our
comprehensive region-speci¯c e®ects. Finally, due to the endogeneity of capital-labor ratio with
respect to tari®s, we use instrumental variables - the log of the savings rate and log of the popula33 In fact with the levels, squares and the cross-product of the saving rate and the population growth rate, the
estimating equation is overidenti¯ed. However, it allows us to check the quality of our instruments by performing
the appropriate tests for the overidentifying restrictions. We are unable to reject those restrictions. Even for our
cardinal regressions, we perform this test by including the second-order terms as instruments and we are unable
to reject the overidentifying restrictions. Thus, our instruments are valid and of good quality. The 2SLS cardinal
results with the extra second-order terms are very similar to the ones with only the levels as instruments.
34 A ¯xed e®ects model with country-speci¯c e®ects on the other hand, will not be able to identify the estimates
for some of our variables that do not vary within groups over time - for instance, the regional dummies. Moreover, with 50-60 countries in each regression, such an approach uses up large degrees of freedom and results in
high multicollinearity between the country-speci¯c e®ects and some of the right-hand side variables, making the
interpretation of the coe±cients di±cult.

20

tion growth rate. Even though one would expect that the preferences of the government (and/or
those of the interest groups in°uencing it) would take time to a®ect the level of protection, our
predictions are borne out here as well in the case of the import duty measure. This is reassuring
especially since import duty is the only direct measure of protection for which we have data over
time. The following panel regression result with time-speci¯c and very comprehensive regionspeci¯c e®ects (with (K=L) and ideology¤(K=L) instrumented by the log of the saving rate and
the log of the population growth rate) has the expected signs for the relevant variables whose
coe±cients are signi¯cant at the 1% level:
Imp Duty = ¡63:35 ¤¤¤ ideology + 6:31 ¤¤¤ ideology(K=L) ¡ 19:84¤¤¤ (K=L) + f ixed ef fects
(12:82)

(1:26)

(3:79)

R2 = 0:23; N = 610
The asterisks represent signi¯cance levels as in the tables with the standard errors in parentheses.
The critical (K=L) ratio is 10, again very close to the mean and the median value. A left versus
non-left regression based on the ordinal measure also gives us similar results:
Imp Duty = ¡105:26¤¤¤ left + 10:42¤¤¤ left(K=L) ¡ 11:08¤¤¤ (K=L) + f ixed ef fects
(19:63)

(1:93)

(1:94)

R2 = 0:27; N = 610
Note that in a regression with additional \center" intercept and interaction slope dummy we are
unable to reject the hypothesis that a centrist government is no di®erent from a right-wing one at
any given level of (K=L): The coe±cient estimates of the \left" dummy and its interaction with
(K=L) are similar to the above estimates in sign, magnitude, and signi¯cance. Again, as in the
case of our cross-sectional regressions, we cannot reject the hypothesis that ideology has a cardinal
interpretation.
Our other measure that has a time dimension is (X + M )=GDP which is an indirect, inverse
measure of protection. This measure produces the correct signs but the coe±cient estimates are
not statistically signi¯cant.
21

5.4

Dictatorship vs. Democracy

Next we investigate in this paper whether partisan concerns are more important in democracies
or in dictatorships. Democratic governments, to ensure their re-election, may adopt policies that
bene¯t their electoral base (groups that provide large blocks of votes and/or provide campaign
contributions) - capitalists (business groups) for right-wing parties and labor (trade unions) for
left-wing parties. Dictatorships on the other hand face few such incentives. On the other hand,
dictatorships are less constrained in their redistributive attempts. Thus, we have an important
empirical question at hand, namely whether the partisan model performs better for democracies
than for dictatorships or vice-versa. We investigate two possible considerations: (a) whether the
partisan model ¯ts the data better for democracies than for dictatorships, and (b) whether the
predicted relationship between trade policy and ideology is stronger (larger in magnitude) for
democracies than for dictatorships.
We investigate (a) by generating residuals from our main regressions and then regressing the
absolute values of these residuals on the democracy/dictatorship (political rights) variable. As we
can see from the regression results below, for all our direct measures of trade policy (tari®, quota
and import duty), we do ¯nd that these absolute residuals are higher for dictatorships suggesting
that our model ¯ts better for democracies: jT arif f Residual j=0:026 ¤¤ +0:006 ¤¤¤ (Dictatorship
(0:014)

Measure), jQuota Residual j=0:115

¤¤¤

(0:028)

0:516

¤¤¤

(0:0:228)

+0:015

¤¤¤

(0:007)

(0:003)

(Dict. Measure), jImp Duty Residual j= 3:05 ¤¤ +
(0:71)

(Dict: Measure).

Next, we generated predicted values of protection from our regressions without controls and
found their correlation with the actual values separately for the dictatorship sample (Gastil measure above 4) and the democracy sample (the rest). The correlation coe±cients shown in the
matrix below indicate that the ¯t is superior for the sample of countries that can be classi¯ed as

22

democracies.

2

T ariff
6
6
6
6 Democracies
0:70
6
6
4
Dictatorships
0:18

Quota Imp Duty
0:58

0:71

0:25

0:35

The comparisons are very similar with controls.

3

(X + M)=GDP 7
7
7
7
0:54
7
7
5
0:23

Finally, we run regressions with additional interaction terms (ideology¤democracy and ideology¤(K=L) ¤ democracy)35 to investigate the hypothesis (b) whether the demand for prolabor
redistribution through trade policies is stronger in democracies or in dictatorships. Both the interaction terms are signi¯cant at the 5% level for tari®s, import duty and (X + M )=GDP but not
for the quota regressions: Here we ¯nd that in democracies the magnitude of the partisan e®ects
are weaker. For the regression with controls, the cross-partial derivative is36
@ 2 [import duty]
@ 2 [tariff ]
= 0:04 ¡ 0:004(K=L);
= 3:01 ¡ 0:322(K=L);
@democracy@ideology
@democracy@ideology
@ 2 [(X + M )=GDP ]
= ¡6:4 + 0:814(K=L)
@democracy@ideology
so that dictatorships reinforce the negative (positive) relationship between ideology and trade
protection in capital scarce (abundant) countries, predicted by the partisan model. Even in these
regressions the critical capital-labor ratio (where the relationship between ideology and trade
protection switches from negative to positive) is close to the median capital-labor ratio.
Thus the partisan model ¯ts the data better for democracies but the magnitude of the e®ects
are smaller in democracies. Dictators who have consolidated their position may not face any
electoral threats and may have fewer incentives to formulate trade policies according to their
ideological a±nities. However, if they do decide to favor their \core" constituent groups they are
likely to face lesser constraints in implementing redistributive trade policies. Thus we may observe
that the magnitude of partisan e®ect is larger in absolute terms even if the partisan model as a
whole is a better ¯t for democracies.
35

Here we calculated the democracy variable as (8 ¡ polrights ) for ease of interpretation.

36

The results are similar if we use regressions without controls.

23

5.5

Fractionalized vs. uni¯ed opposition

Next we examined if the partisan model works better where there is a single uni¯ed opposition
(such as a two-party system as in the US). A fractionalized opposition is likely to pose fewer threats
to the ruling party/executive, giving them lesser incentives to consolidate their electoral base by
pursuing partisan objectives. The more fragmented are opposition parties, the more di±cult
it is for them to cooperate strategically and pose a threat to the ruling party. For instance,
Cox and Niou (1994) showed that a highly fractionalized opposition in Japan contributed to the
consolidation of power by the ruling party (the Liberal Democratic Party) in Japan and explains
its long tenure in power. DPI includes a variable that captures the extent of fractionalization of
the opposition. This variable measures the probability that two random draws from all opposition
legislators will produce members belonging to distinct parties.37
First, we divided our sample into those countries where opposition fractionalization is greater
than 0.5 and those less than 0.5 and estimated separate models for each of these sub-samples. The
partisan model seems to work for both uni¯ed and fractionalized oppositions. Even the critical
capital-labor ratios seem indistinguishable. Second, we calculated the correlation between the
predicted and actual values of protection for distinct samples (using the 0.5 opposition fractionalization value as the cuto®) much the same as we did for democracy and dictatorship. Again,
there is no indication that the model ¯t is superior for either sample. Next, we generated and
regressed the absolute value and the square of the residuals on opposition fractionalization. Only
for the quota coverage ratio we ¯nd that the residuals are signi¯cantly higher in countries where
the opposition parties are highly fractionalized. This suggests that at least for quotas, the partisan model better ¯ts countries that have a uni¯ed opposition. Finally, we interacted opposition
fractionalization with ideology and ideology ¤ (K=L). Only in the case of tari®s and import duty
37 Note that this probability is calculated and reported in the database only for countries that have parliaments
or their equivalent. Thus, our regressions in this subsection are restricted to such countries.

24

were these coe±cients signi¯cant at the 5% level. The cross-partial derivative is as follows
@ 2 [tarif f]
= 0:481 ¡ 0:057 ¤ (K=L);
@ideology@opp

@ 2 [mduty]
= 32:83 ¡ 3:404 ¤ (K=L)
@ideology@opp

so we ¯nd that a fractionalized opposition weakens the e®ect of ideology on trade policies in both
capital and labor abundant countries.

5.6

Coalition vs. single-party governments

We also investigated how the predictions of the partisan voter model fares in the presence of a
coalition government. A single party government has been shown to be more stable (Taylor and
Herman, 1971) and can pursue its goals and objectives more e±ciently. A coalition government
on the other hand may be constrained in the pursuit of its ideological objectives. We use data on
government fractionalization to investigate this issue. However, we do not ¯nd any evidence that
government fractionalization matters. The ideological model ¯ts both single party and coalition
governments, and additional interaction terms of government fractionalization are individually
and jointly insigni¯cant. The only result we discover is that for (X + M )=GDP; when we regress
the absolute values of the residuals on government fractionalization, the latter has a positive and
signi¯cant coe±cient at the 10% level. We cannot read too much into this since (X + M)=GDP
is an indirect measure of trade policy and may depend on a host of extraneous variables.

6
6.1

Robustness Checks
International comparability of the DPI ideology measure

It may be argued that the comparability of the ideology measure across nations is problematic.
For instance, one may argue that a political party (and its ideology) that is regarded as left-wing
in one country may be regarded as centrist or right-wing in another country. More precisely, leftist
and rightist orientations may be relative to the center in each country where the center itself is
country-speci¯c. This could raise questions about the validity of our cross-sectional results. While
a country-speci¯c dummy (along with the instrumentation of the capital-labor ratio and its in-

25

teraction with the ideology variable using the saving rate and the population growth rate) would
take care of this criticism, this is clearly an impossible goal for the cross-sectional regressions. Accordingly, as a ¯rst robustness check, we created 9 very comprehensive region-speci¯c dummies,38
since we consider it very plausible that countries from the same region have a common notion
of a center around which party/government ideologies are classi¯ed. As before, we instrumented
the capital-labor ratio and its interaction with the ideology variable. (The instrumentation of the
product of K=L and Ideology also corrects for the measurement error in this interaction term.)
Our results remain qualitatively unchanged in terms of the sign and the signi¯cance of coe±cients.
Even the critical capital-labor ratio remains roughly in the same range, around 10.
As a second robustness check, we examined whether and how our results were altered after
making certain adjustments to the data on political ideology. These adjustments re°ect country
and region speci¯c variations in the ideology de¯nition. Based on discussions with various regional
experts, we decided to experiment with the following adjustments. We increased the magnitude of
the scale, 1 being the most right-oriented and 5 the most left-oriented. For the US, the Republicans
and Democrats remained at 1 and 3 respectively as before. For Latin America, right was recoded
as 1, center as 3 and left as 5. The left-wing government of China was recoded as 5. For Europe
(excluding Ireland and the UK for which we retained the original coding), right, center and left were
recoded as 2, 3 and 4 respectively. Again our results survive this adjustment. We experimented
with a few other perturbations to the data on ideology as well. We did not ¯nd any substantial
qualitative change in our results in terms of the signs of coe±cients, their statistical signi¯cance
and the critical capital-labor ratios.
We also veri¯ed the quality of the DPI ideology measure by checking whether it was a good
predictor of inequality after controlling for the Kuznets e®ect (captured by the per capita GDP
and its square). We found a negative and highly signi¯cant coe±cient for the ideology variable.
38 For our region-specifc e®ects we use the following regional categories: East Asia, Rest of Asia, Oceania, Eastern
Europe, Western Europe, North America, Latin America (excluding Mexico), Oil producing countries and Africa.

26

Since the Kuznets e®ect is a long-run relationship, and since our data are decade-wide averages,
we believe that ¯nding this relationship clearly shows that our measures are fairly comparable
across countries. We also ¯nd that the ideology measure is a good predictor of public health and
education expenditure as a proportion of GDP after controlling for per capita GDP which can be
seen from the following regression:
HE = ¡ 4:46 ¤¤¤ + 0:48 ¤¤¤ ln(GDP per capita) + 0:23 ¤¤¤ Ideology; R2 = 0:47
(0:61)

(0:06)

(0:10)

where HE is the combined measure (using the principal-components method)39 of the healthGDP and education-GDP ratios. Adding a square term in per capita GDP leaves the sign,
signi¯cance and even the magnitude of the coe±cient estimate of ideology unchanged. We also
experimented with a measure constructed (again using the principal-components analysis) with
the residuals from the regressions of the health-GDP and education-GDP ratios on per capita
GDP. This measure, which we denote as HER, can be considered to be a very rough measure of
the revealed leftist orientation of the government. Using this measure instead of ideology, we were
able to obtain the following result :
T arif f = 0:59 ¤¤¤ ¡ 0:05 ¤¤¤ (K=L) ¡ 0:279¤¤¤ HER + 0:024¤¤¤ HER ¤ (K/L); R2 = 0:46
(0:10)

(0:01)

(0:10)

(0:01)

In the above regression, the coe±cients of HER and its interaction with the K/L ratio have the
signs predicted by our theory. In addition, we cannot reject the hypothesis even at the 15% level
of signi¯cance that the critical capital-labor ratio equals the median capital-labor ratio.

6.2

Controlling for the endowments of other factors of production

Next we control for the size of the endowment of land. We introduce the land-labor ratio and the
interaction of ideology and the land-labor ratio as additional variables. Our original results with
39 We created a linear composite of the two variables - health and education expenditure as a percentage of GDP.
Only components whose eigenvalues were greater than one were retained. This led to a single principal component
being retained, which accounts for 79% of the variation in the two variables. The weights used were the eigenvectors
associated with the eigenvalues of the correlation matrix of these two variables.

27

respect to capital-labor ratio and its interaction with ideology remain qualitatively una®ected.
For example, for the tari® measure we have

T ariff = 1:59 ¤¤¤ ¡ 0:13 ¤¤¤ (K=L) + 0:05 ¤¤¤ (T=L) ¡ 0:43 ¤¤¤ Ideology
(0:30)

(0:03)

(0:02)

(0:12)

+ 0:035¤¤¤ Ideology(K=L) ¡ 0:02 ¤¤¤ Ideology(T =L);
(0:01)

(0:01)

N = 64; R2 = 0:39
Note that T =L denotes the land-labor ratio in natural logs (and is negative for most countries),
while K=L as before is the capital-labor ratio in natural logs. Computing the derivative of the
tari® measure with respect to ideology from the above regression results in a fairly even split
between countries with a negative derivative and those with a positive derivative. However, the
derivative moves in opposite directions with respect to capital abundance and land abundance.
While for capital-abundant (capital-scarce) countries, there is a tendency for countries to be
more protectionist (open) as the government becomes more left-oriented, the reverse is the case
with land-abundance. This goes to show that the government's weight on land relative to other
factors combined generally increases as the government becomes more left-oriented.40 For all
our direct protection measures (tari®, quota and import duty), we get these results with the
same signs and with very similar statistical signi¯cance and magnitudes, while for our indirect
measure (X + M )=GDP , some of the coe±cient estimates are not statistically signi¯cant. We
also run several regressions where we include only the capital-land ratio and its interaction with
the ideology variable (in addition to the ideology variable itself) and some others where we have
the land-labor ratio in place of the capital-labor ratio. All these regressions seem to indicate that
there is a possibility that land and labor tend to form coalitions against capital and that left-wing
40 We also tried inserting separately capital, labor and land (in place of the land-labor and capital-labor ratios)
and their interactions. We did not ¯nd these variables to be individually signi¯cant even though they were highly
signi¯cant jointly. Since we measure all the factors in logs, the version with land-labor and capital-labor ratios is a
special case of the version with land, labor and capital. In fact, we are unable to reject the joint restrictions that
give us this special case.

28

governments tend to place a higher weight on land-labor coalitions relative to capital than do
right-wing ones.
Finally, instead of using the capital-labor ratio and/or the land-labor ratio in the regressions,
we use the per capita GDP (by itself and its interaction with ideology). The results are very similar
to the ones obtained with the K=L ratio, thereby indicating that in countries that are abundant
(scarce) in productive assets, a more left wing (right wing) government raises protection. This
seems to be more or less true with all our direct protection measures. For example, for our tari®
measure we have
T arif f = 1:05 ¤¤¤ ¡ 0:2
(0:19)

¤¤¤

(0:08)

Ideology + 0:02 ¤¤¤ Ideology(per capitaGDP ) ¡ 0:1
(0:01)

¤¤¤

(0:02)

(per capitaGDP );

N = 63; R2 = 0:42

7

Conclusion

In this paper, we empirically investigate how the ideology of the government in power a®ects trade
policy. Government's ideology is a combination of the preferences of their constituent groups that
vote for them and provide them with political contributions, as well as, their beliefs about what is
good for the country's citizens. The prediction of such a partisan, ideology-based model (within a
two-sector, two-factor Heckscher-Ohlin framework) is that left-wing governments will adopt more
protectionist trade policies in capital rich countries, but adopt more pro-trade policies in labor
rich economies. The data strongly support this prediction in a very robust fashion. There is
some evidence, that this relationship may hold better in democracies than in dictatorships though
the magnitude of the partisan e®ect seems stronger in dictatorships. We also ¯nd that while
fractionalization within the government does not seem to matter much, the fractionalization of
the opposition does matter. Our results suggest that partisan considerations are more important
in the presence of a uni¯ed opposition.
Of late, economic policy reforms that foster growth, reduce inequality and alleviate poverty

29

have been attracting increasing attention from both academicians and policymakers. Simultaneously, there is a growing recognition that political institutions matter for these economic goals
as well. To design e®ective economic policies to achieve these goals, it is critical that we have a
thorough understanding of the interrelationship between policy variables and political institutions.
While the theoretical and empirical results in this paper are positive rather than normative, this
paper takes a step in this direction by delineating the role of political ideology for trade policies.

References
Alesina, A., 1987, \Macroeconomic Policy in a Two Party System as a Repeated Game,"
Quarterly Journal of Economics 102, 651-678.
Alesina, A. and Roubini, N., 1992, \Political Cycles in OECD Economies," Review of Economic Studies 59, 663-688.
Alt, J., 1985, \Political Parties, World Demand and Unemployment: Domestic and International Sources of Economic Activity," American Political Science Review 79, 1016-1040.
Alt, J., 1986, \Party Strategies, World Demand, and Unemployment: The Political Economy
of Economic Activity in Western Industrial Nations," American Economic Review (AEA
Papers & Proceedings) 76(2), 57-61.
Baldwin, R. and C. Magee, 1998, \Is Trade Policy for Sale? Congressional Voting on Recent
Trade Bills," NBER Working Paper # 6376.
Balistreri, E., 1997, \The Performance of the Heckscher-Ohlin-Vanek Model in Predicting
Endogenous Policy Forces at the Individual Level," Canadian Journal of Economics 30(1),
1-17.
Beaulieu, E., 2000, \The Stolper-Samuelson Theorem Faces Congress," Review of International Economics, forthcoming.
Beaulieu, E., 2001, \Factor or Industry Cleavages in Trade Policy? An Empirical Analysis of
the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem," mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Calgary
Beaulieu, E. and C. Magee, 2000, \Campaign Contributions and Trade Policy: Simple
Tests of Stolper-Samuelson," mimeo, Department of Economics, University of Calgary and
Department of Economics, Bard College.
Beck, T; Clarke, G; Gro®, A. and P. Keefer, 2001, \New Tools and New Tests in Comparative Political Economy: The Database of Political Institutions," forthcoming, World Bank
Economic Review.
Cox, Gary W. and Emerson Niou. 1994. \Seat Bonuses under the Single Non-Transferable
Vote System: Evidence from Japan and Taiwan," Comparative Politics, 26(2), pp. 221-236.
Downs, Arthur, 1957, An Economic Theory of Democracy, New York: Harper Collins, 1957.
Fernandez, R. and D. Rodrik, 1991, \Resistance to Reform: Status-Quo Bias in the Presence
of Individual-Speci¯c Uncertainty," American Economic Review 81(5), 1146-1155.
30

Feenstra, R. and J. Bhagwati, 1982, \Tari® Seeking and the E±cient Tari®," in: J. Bhagwati,
ed., Import competition and response (The University of Chicago Press).
Findlay, R. and S. Wellisz, 1982, \Endogenous tari®s, the political economy of trade restrictions and welfare," in: J.N. Bhagwati, ed., Import competition and response (The University
of Chicago Press), 223-234.
Gawande, K. and P. Krishna, 2001, \The Political Economy of Trade Policy: Empirical
Approaches," in J. Harrigan (ed.), Handbook of International Economics, forthcoming.
Gawande, K. and U. Bandopadhyay, 2000, \Is Protection for Sale? A Test of the GrossmanHelpman Theory of Endogenous Protection," Review of Economics & Statistics 82(1), 139152.
Glazer, A and B. Grofman, 1989, \Why Representatives are Ideologists though Voters are
not," Public Choice 61(1), 29-39.
Goldberg, P. and G. Maggi, 1999, \Protection for Sale: An Empirical Investigation," American Economic Review 89(5), 1135-1155.
Grossman, G. and E. Helpman, 1994, \Protection for Sale," American Economic Review,
September 1994, 833-850.
Harrigan, J., 1993, OECD Imports and Trade Barriers in 1983, Journal of International
Economics 35(1), 91-111.
Helpman, E., 1997, \Politics and Trade Policy," in D. Kreps and K. Wallis (eds.), Advances
in Economics and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Volume II, Cambridge University
Press (Cambridge, UK).
Hibbs, D., 1977, \Political Parties and Macroeconomic Policy," The American Political
Science Review 7, 1467-1487.
Hibbs, D. and N. Vasilatos, 1982, \Economic Outcomes and Political Support for British
Governments among Occupational Classes: A Dynamic Analysis, "The American Political
Science Review, 76(2), 259-279.
Hibbs, D.; Rivers, D. and N. Vasilatos, 1982, \The Dynamics of Political Support for American Presidents Among Occupational and Partisan Groups," American Journal of Political
Science, 26(2), 312-332.
Hillman, A., 1989, The Political Economy of Protection (Harwood Academic, London and
New York), 1989.
Irwin, D., 1994, \The Political Economy of Free Trade: Voting in British General Election
of 1906," Journal of Law and Economics 37, 75-108.
Irwin, D., 1996, \Industry or Class Cleavages over Trade Policy? Evidence from the British
General Election of 1923," in: R. Feenstra, G. Grossman and D. Irwin, eds., The Political
Economy of Trade Policy: Papers in Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati (MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA), 53-75.
Kahane, L., 1996, \Congressional Voting Patterns on NAFTA; An Empirical Analysis,"
American Journal of Economics and Sociology 55, 395-409.
Kalt, J. and M. Zupan, 1984, \Capture and Ideology in the Economic Theory of Politics,"
American Economic Review 74(3), 279-300.
31

Kau, J. and P. Rubin, 1979, \Self Interest, Ideology and Logrolling in Congressional Voting,"
Journal of Law and Economics 22(2), 365-384.
Leamer, E., 1990, \The Structure and E®ects of Tari® and Non-tari® Barriers" in 1983, in:
R. Jones and A. Krueger, eds., The Political Economy of International Trade: Essays In
Honor of Robert E. Baldwin (Basil Blackwell, Cambridge, MA), 224-260.
Leamer, E. and J. Levinsohn, 1995, \International Trade Theory: The Evidence," in: G.
Grossman and K. Rogo®, eds,. Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 3. Amsterdam:
North-Holland, 1339-94.
Magee, S., 1978, \Three Simple Tests of the Stolper-Samuelson Theorem," in: P. Oppenheimer, ed., Issues in International Economics (Oriel Press, Stock¯eld).
Magee, S., Brock, W., and L. Young, 1989, Black Hole Tari®s and Endogenous Policy Theory
(Cambridge University Press, Cambridge and New York).
Mans¯eld, E. and M. Busch, 1995, \The Political Economy of Nontari® Barriers: A CrossNational Analysis," International Organization 49(4), 723-49.
Mayer, Wolfgang. \Endogenous Tari® Formation." American Economic Review, December
1984, 74(5), pp. 970-85.
Mitra, D., 1999, \Endogenous Lobby Formation and Endogenous Protection: A Long Run
Model of Trade Policy Determination," American Economic Review 89(5), 1116-1134.
Peltzman, S., 1984, \Constituent Interest and Congressional Voting," Journal of Law and
Economics 27(2), 181-210.
Persson, T and Tabellini, G. 2000, Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy MIT
Press, August 2000.
Rodrik, D., 1986, \Tari®s, Subsidies, and Welfare with Endogenous Policy," Journal of
International Economics, November 1986, 21(3/4), 285-299.
Rodrik, D., 1995, \Political Economy of Trade Policy," in: G. Grossman and K. Rogo®,
eds,. Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 3. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1457-1494.
Rodrik, D., 1997, Has Globalization Gone Too Far?, (Institute for International Economics,
Washington, D.C.).
Rogowski, R., 1987, \Political Cleavages and Changing Exposure to Trade," American Political Science Review 81(4), 1121-1137.
Sachs, Je®rey D. and Warner, Andrew M., 1995, \Economic Reform and the Process of
Global Integration", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 1-118.
Scheve, K. and M. Slaughter, 2001, \What Determines Individual Trade Policy Preferences?," Journal of International Economics, 54(2), pp. 267-292.
Steagall, J. and K. Jennings, 1996, \Unions, PAC Contributions and the NAFTA Vote,"
Journal of Labor Research 17, 515-521.
Taylor, Michael and Herman, V.M., 1971, \Party Systems and Governmental Instability,"
American Political Science Review, 56, March: pp. 28-37.
Tre°er, D., 1993, \Trade Liberalization and the Theory of Endogenous Protection," Journal
of Political Economy 101, 138-160.

32

Table 0.1: Summary Statistics
Variable

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

tariff

67

0.15

0.12

0.01

0.48

quota coverage ratio

66

0.19

0.24

0

0.87

import duty (1980-89, avg.)

65

10.31

8.29

0.01

29.78

(X+M)/GDP

88

33.27

30.06

4.51

171.01

log capital-labor ratio (Easterly-Levine, agg)

92

9.36

1.54

5.71

11.43

ideology (1=Right, 2=Center, 3=Left)

92

2.11

0.83

1

3

govt. fractionalization

82

0.18

0.27

0

1

opposition fractionalization

70

0.44

0.23

0

1

dictatorship (Gastil)

91

3.58

2.20

1

7

log of savings rate

85

2.77

0.82

-1.95

3.72

log of population growth rate

90

0.15

1.06

-3.47

1.25

Panel Variables (1980-1989)

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

import duty

670

9.46

7.62

0

39.77

(X+M)/GDP

730

35.70

38.52

4.03

570.87

ideology

820

2.11

0.94

1

3

log capital-labor ratio (Easterly-Levine, agg)

820

9.48

1.52

5.63

11.52

Table 0.2: Correlation Matrix for measures of protection
Tariff

Quota Import Duty(X+M)/GDP

Tariff

1

Quota

0.2969

1

Import Duty

0.7203

0.2663

1

(X+M)/GDP

-0.4615

-0.2584

-0.3596

1

Table 1: Easterly-Levine (aggregate)- Regression with dummies
Left vs. Non-Left
Left & Center vs. Right
Tariff
left -0.574***
left*capital-labor ratio

Quota

Import Duty (X+M)/GDP

No. of observations
R

2

F-statistic
critical capital-labor ratio
Joint test for cardinality (F-statistic)

Import Duty

(X+M)/GDP

-12.075

114.692***

-0.734***

-1.51***

-13.189

75.762*

(0.181)

(0.477)

(10.204)

(48.577)

(0.194)

(0.553)

(11.507)

(49.907)

0.055***

0.115***

1.247

-11.914***

0.072***

0.142***

1.365

-7.972*

(0.017)

(0.045)

(1.011)

(5.183)

(0.018)

(0.053)

(1.17)

(5.441)

-0.365

-1.526***

-4.092

-164.819*

(0.373)

(0.644)

(24.58)

(111.235)

0.039

0.141***

0.406

15.904

(0.034)

(0.06)

(2.287)

(11.451)

center*capital-labor ratio

constant

Quota

-1.225***

center

capital-labor ratio

Tariff

-0.08***

-0.116***

-3.645***

18.432***

-0.097***

-0.143***

-3.762***

14.49***

(0.014)

(0.042)

(0.736)

(4.974)

(0.016)

(0.05)

(0.934)

(5.237)

0.952***

1.391***

45.217***

-144.551***

1.112***

1.676***

46.331***

-105.621***

(0.155)

(0.45)

(7.604)

(47.31)

(0.169)

(0.529)

(9.194)

(48.644)

67

66

65

88

67

66

65

88

0.32

0.15

0.35

0.32

0.34

0.19

0.35

0.35

14.07***

2.7***

12.9***

13.88***

12.6***

1.8*

7.58***

8.45***

10.4

10.6

9.7

9.6
0.38

0.62

0.55

1.32*

Standard errors in parantheses; *** - significant at 5% level, ** - significant at 10% level * - significant at 15% level

Table 2: Easterly-Levine (aggregate)- Regression with and without controls
Tariff

Quota

Import Duty

(X+M)/GDP

Tariff

Quota

Import Duty

(X+M)/GDP

-0.783***

-10.011*

58.493***

-0.36***

-0.93***

-9.938*

47.005**

(0.095)

(0.263)

(6.22)

(25.975)

(0.113)

(0.307)

(6.49)

(25.921)

0.04***

0.073***

1.043*

-6.209***

0.035***

0.087***

1.027*

-4.857**

(0.009)

(0.025)

(0.652)

(2.819)

(0.011)

(0.029)

(0.679)

(2.806)

-0.221***

-5.327***

25.228***

-0.138***

-0.253***

-5.014***

23.041***

(0.07)

(1.543)

(8.022)

(0.025)

(0.076)

(1.53)

(7.988)

0.003

-0.001

-0.216

-3.8***

(0.009)

(0.02)

(0.604)

(1.224)

-0.054

0.031

2.353

21.47***

(0.063)

(0.127)

(3.016)

(7.972)

ideology -0.394***
ideology*capital-labor ratio

capital-labor ratio -0.138***
(0.023)
political rights (Gastil)
sub-saharan africa
east asia
oil
constant

No. of observations
R

2

F-statistic
critical capital-labor ratio

-0.067

-0.238**

1.694

5.671

(0.043)

(0.136)

(2.506)

(5.006)

0.076**

-0.094

2.498***

5.955

(0.044)

(0.066)

(1.437)

(16.591)

1.518***

2.5***

61.389***

-206.722***

1.531***

2.87***

58.587***

-180.358***

(0.242)

(0.745)

(15.12)

(75.454)

(0.266)

(0.818)

(15.598)

(75.306)

67

66

65

88

66

65

64

87

0.34

0.2

0.36

0.31

0.38

0.25

0.36

0.4

22.47***

3.52***

12.31***

11.22***

11.34***

2.06***

6.48***

7.47***

9.9

10.7

9.6

9.4

10.3

10.7

9.7

9.7

Standard errors in parentheses; *** - significant at 5% level, ** - significant at 10% level * - significant at 15% level

Table 3: Easterly-Levine (disaggregated)- Regression with and without controls
Tariff

Quota

Import Duty

(X+M)/GDP

Tariff

Quota

Import Duty

(X+M)/GDP

-0.996***

-9.448

91.587**

-0.392***

-1.634***

-12.703

66.465

(0.165)

(0.514)

(11.526)

(47.726)

(0.166)

(0.438)

(9.178)

(48.571)

0.042***

0.095**

0.98

-10.144**

0.041***

0.157***

1.245

-7.401

(0.017)

(0.051)

(1.179)

(5.293)

(0.017)

(0.044)

(0.954)

(5.373)

-0.277**

-6.498***

38.141***

-0.129***

-0.389***

-4.795**

33.349***

(0.147)

(2.832)

(14.502)

(0.047)

(0.156)

(2.692)

(14.879)

0.008

-0.009

0.368

-5.608***

ideology -0.392***
ideology*capital-labor ratio

capital-labor ratio -0.154***
(0.037)
political rights (Gastil)
sub-saharan africa
east asia
oil
constant

No. of observations
R2
F-statistic
critical capital-labor ratio

(0.013)

(0.03)

(0.708)

(1.784)

0.073

0.303***

9.142***

28.573**

(0.075)

(0.128)

(4.368)

(16.101)

0.034

-0.352**

-0.337

13.598**

(0.051)

(0.191)

(2.074)

(7.968)

0.086***

-0.093**

6.068***

-24.318***

(0.032)

(0.05)

(1.674)

(7.587)

1.588***

3.005***

70.507***

-313.06***

1.315***

4.166***

53.413**

-258.669**

(0.369)

(1.499)

(28.044)

(133.005)

(0.488)

(1.604)

(27.268)

(137.695)

37

36

38

44

36

35

37

43

0.43

0.3

0.45

0.28

0.46

0.5

0.55

0.39

11.8***

2.83**

7.63***

4.93***

18.79***

11.08***

14.18***

4.39***

9.3

10.5

9.6

9

9.6

10.4

10.2

9

Standard errors in parentheses; *** - significant at 5% level, ** - significant at 10% level * - significant at 15% level

Table 4: Countries (Tariff-Ideology Relationship)
Negative Relationship

Positive Relationship

Madagascar

Uruguay

Ethiopia

Taiwan

Uganda

Portugal

Mozambique

Algeria

Sierra Leone

Mexico

Burkina Faso

Argentina

Angola

Cyprus

Guinea

Trinidad & Tobago

Tanzania

Greece

Senegal

Venezuela

Bangladesh

United Kingdom

Benin

Ireland

Pakistan

Japan

China

Spain

Congo

Denmark

Sri Lanka

Austria

Zimbabwe

Sweden

El Salvador

New Zealand

Papua New Guinea

Canada

Thailand

Belgium

Zambia

Netherlands

Guatemala

Italy

Mauritius

United States

Nicaragua

France

Paraguay

Finland

Bolivia

Germany

Tunisia

Norway

Jamaica

Luxembourg

Colombia

Switzerland

Guyana
Turkey
Costa Rica
Barbados
Peru
South Korea
Brazil
Chile
Ecuador
Partition based on tariff regression without controls in table 2

Table 5: Easterly-Levine (aggregate)- 2 SLS Regression cardinal and ordinal
Cardinal Interpretation
Ordinal Interpretation
Tariff

Quota

Import Duty

(X+M)/GDP

Tariff

Quota

Import Duty

(X+M)/GDP

-1.493***

-45.591***

165.015***

(0.417)

(0.581)

(19.793)

(73.004)

0.109***

0.147***

4.773***

-17.23***

(0.044)

(0.061)

(2.133)

(7.739)

-0.41***

-15.795***

(0.153)

(4.963)

55.277***

-0.214***

-0.312***

-11.177***

35.183***

(19.917)

(0.058)

(0.107)

(3.520)

(12.180)

-2.141***

-3.267***

-90.469***

285.685***

(0.658)

(1.292)

(41.017)

(142.102)

left*capital-labor ratio

0.218***

0.321***

9.396***

-29.445***

(0.067)

(0.135)

(4.291)

(14.895)

center

-1.456*

-4.062***

-61.115

208.762

(0.956)

(1.332)

(62.491)

(228.266)

0.150**

0.393***

6.390

-20.899

(0.092)

(0.131)

(6.072)

(22.003)

ideology -1.057***
ideology*capital-labor ratio

capital-labor ratio -0.315***
(0.107)
left

center*capital-labor ratio
constant

No. of observations
R

2

F-statistic
critical capital-labor ratio

3.239***

4.347***

162.79***

-501.897***

2.266***

3.333***

118.340***

-309.886***

(1.034)

(1.504)

(47.407)

(192.246)

(0.583)

(1.074)

(34.296)

(119.224)

64

63

62

79

64

63

62

79

0.27

0.18

0.3

0.26

0.25

0.17

0.25

0.24

9.75***

3.93***

16.74***

13.07***

4.48***

2.65***

6.88***

6.25***

9.7

10.2

9.6

9.6

The R-square's reported in this table are the coefficients of determination between the actual and the predicted values of the dependent variable.
The instruments used for the cardinal regressions are the natural logs of the saving rate and the population growth rate, while in the case of the ordinal
regression the squares and the cross product of the log of saving rate and the population growth rate are also additionally used as instruments.
Standard errors in parentheses; *** - significant at 5% level, ** - significant at 10% level * - significant at 15% level

