NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION, SELF-SELECTION,
AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF WAGES: EVIDENCE FROM
MEXICO AND THE UNITED STATES
Daniel Chiquiar
Gordon H. Hanson
Working Paper 9242
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9242
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002

We thank Kate Antonovics, Julian Betts, Richard Carson, Gary Ramey, James Rauch, Christopher Woodruff
and seminar participants at El Colegio de Mexico, the NBER, Stanford University, UC Berkeley, UC San
Diego, the University of Toronto, and Yale University for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Daniel Chiquiar and Gordon H. Hanson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

International Migration, Self-Selection, and the Distribution of Wages:
Evidence from Mexico and the United States
Daniel Chiquiar and Gordon H. Hanson
NBER Working Paper No. 9242
October 2002
JEL No. F2, J0
ABSTRACT

In this paper, we use data from the Mexico and U.S. population censuses to examine who
migrates from Mexico to the United States and how the skills and economic performance of these
individuals compare to those who remain in Mexico. We test Borjas’ negative-selection hypothesis
that in poor countries the individuals with the strongest incentive to migrate to rich countries are
those with relatively low skill levels. We find that 1) Mexican immigrants, while much less
educated than U.S. natives, are on average more educated than residents of Mexico, and 2) were
Mexican immigrants in the United States to be paid according to current skill prices in Mexico they
would tend to occupy the middle and upper portions of Mexico’s wage distribution. These results
are inconsistent with the negative-selection hypothesis and suggest, instead, that in terms of
observable skills there is intermediate or positive selection of immigrants from Mexico. The results
also suggest that migration abroad may raise wage inequality in Mexico.

Daniel Chiquiar
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093

Gordon H. Hanson
IR/PS
University of California, San Diego
9500 Gilman Drive
La Jolla, CA 92093
and NBER
gohanson@ucsd.edu

1. Introduction
During the last three decades, the United States has experienced rising levels of
immigration from poor countries.1 This has made the U.S. labor force larger, younger,
and less-educated than it otherwise would have been (Smith and Edmonston, 1997;
Borjas, 1999). The shift in the composition of immigrants appears to be due in part to
changes in U.S. policy embodied in the 1965 Immigration Act, which relaxed longstanding country-of-origin restrictions on immigrant admissions.
More open immigration policies have allowed a wider cross-section of individuals
to move to the United States. In an important strand of literature, Borjas (1987) argues
that who migrates to the United States from a particular country will depend on that
country’s wage distribution. In poor countries, where the returns to education and the
dispersion of wages are thought to be relatively high, there will be a “negative selection”
of immigrants. Those with the greatest incentive to migrate to the United States will tend
to be individuals with below-average skill levels in their home countries. In other rich
countries, where returns to education and wage dispersion are thought to be relatively
low, there will be “positive selection” of immigrants. Those with the greatest incentive to
migrate will tend to be individuals with above-average skill. In support of this selection
hypothesis, Borjas (1987, 1995) finds that as sources for U.S. immigration have shifted to
poor countries, the economic performance of new immigrants has deteriorated. Relative
to earlier cohorts, recent immigrants earn lower wages compared to natives at time of
arrival and take longer for their earnings to converge to native levels.2 These findings

1

Europe has also had rising immigration from poor countries. See Boeri, Hanson, and McCormick (2002).
Identifying changes in the average quality of immigrant cohorts is complicated by a confluence of shocks.
Over time, unobserved cohort quality may change, immigrants may through assimilation improve their
economic performance relative to natives, and labor-market disturbances may have non-uniform effects on
2

1

counter an earlier belief that, irrespective of the country of origin, immigrants tend to be
individuals with high potential for earnings growth (Chiswick, 1978).3
In another strand of literature, there have been attempts to link recent changes in
the level and composition of immigration to rising U.S. wage inequality. Many studies
have found that across U.S. regions immigration inflows are only weakly negatively
correlated with wage changes for low-skilled U.S. natives, suggesting that immigration
has had little impact on the U.S. wage structure (LaLonde and Topel, 1997; Smith and
Edmonston, 1997; Borjas, 1999). Borjas, Freeman, and Katz (1997) argue that cross-area
wage regressions of this type identify the wage impact of immigration only under
restrictive assumptions. Using factor-content calculations, they find larger effects of
immigration on the wages of very low-skilled U.S. natives, but this approach too has
been criticized (Deardorff, 2000; Leamer, 2000). While the prior of many observers is
that U.S. immigration has raised wage inequality, the evidence remains in dispute.
Largely missing in the discussion of the causes and consequences of U.S.
immigration is evidence from source countries. Does evidence on who migrates from
poor countries to the United States support the negative-selection hypothesis? Has this
migration tended to narrow or widen the distribution of wages in source countries?
In this paper, we use data from the 1990 Mexico population census and data on
Mexican immigrants in the 1990 U.S. population census to examine who in Mexico
migrates to the United States and how their observable skills and wages compare to those
individuals at different points in the wage distribution. See LaLonde and Topel (1992, 1997), Borjas
(1999) and Butcher and DiNardo (2002) for differing approaches in how to deal with this issue.
3
Chiswick (1978) finds that immigrant wages tend to converge to and surpass native wages relatively
quickly, but Borjas (1987, 1999) criticizes this use of cross-section data to ask time-series questions. There
is other evidence of positive selection of migrants in the form of brain drain from poor countries (Beine et
al., 2001; Carrington and Detragiache, 1998) and the internal migration patterns of more and less skilled
workers (Borjas, Bronars, and Trejo, 1992; Bound and Holzer, 2000).

2

who remain at home. Mexico is the largest source country for U.S. immigrants. During
the 1990’s, the country accounted for 31.3% of U.S. immigration. By 2000 the 7.9
million Mexican immigrants in the United States accounted for 27.7% of the U.S.
foreign-born population and were equal to 7.8% of Mexico’s total population. Relative
to the United States, Mexico has high returns to education and high wage dispersion,
making it an ideal candidate in which to look for negative selection of migrants.
There is descriptive literature on Mexican immigrants in the United States that
tends to support negative selection. Much of this work is based on surveys at the U.S.Mexico border or in Mexican villages that send farm laborers to the United States
(Massey et al., 1994). Durand et al. (2001), for instance, find that migrants going to the
United States have low education levels relative to the average Mexican resident. These
survey data, however, are subject to two types of sample selection:

the surveyed

communities tend to be in rural Mexico, where average schooling is low, and the
surveyed migrants are those who have chosen to return to Mexico from abroad.4 Little
work has used nationally representative samples of Mexican residents and emigrants.5
To preview our results, we have three sets of findings.

First, Mexican

immigrants, while much less educated than U.S. natives, are on average more educated
than residents of Mexico. Mexican individuals with 12 to 15 years of schooling are the

4

Durand et al. (2001) find that the characteristics of Mexican immigrants in the United States have been
stable over time. Using alternative survey data, Cornelius and Marselli (2001) find instead that over time
Mexican immigrants have become younger, more likely to be female, more educated, more urban, and
more likely to settle in the United States on a permanent basis. The contrast in results from different
surveys suggests that sample selection issues are important in the analysis of Mexican immigration.
5
One exception is Feliciano (2001), who summarizes average schooling levels for Mexican residents and
Mexican immigrants in the United States over the last several decades. She finds that in years prior to
1990, as well, average years of schooling were higher for Mexican immigrants than for Mexican residents.

3

education group most over-represented in the United States. This is initial evidence
against the negative-selection hypothesis for Mexico-to-U.S. migration.
Second, wage differences between the United States and Mexico are decreasing in
the age and education of the individual. That U.S.-Mexico wage differentials decrease in
education and the probability of Mexico-to-U.S. migration increases with education (over
a range of values) suggests that migration costs play a pivotal role in determining who
migrates. These costs appear to be lower for the more educated, who may be better able
to manage the U.S. immigration process or may be less subject to credit constraints.
Third, under existing patterns of wage setting, Mexican immigrants would tend to
fall disproportionately in the middle and upper portions of Mexico’s wage distribution.
To obtain these results, we extend DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux’s (1996) framework for
constructing counterfactual wage densities. We project the wage distribution that would
obtain were Mexican immigrants in the United States paid according to Mexico’s current
wage structure (adjusting for a possible U.S. undercount of illegal immigrants). Our
findings show evidence against negative selection and suggest instead there is
intermediate or positive selection of Mexican immigrants in terms of observable skills.
By removing workers from the middle of Mexico’s wage distribution, Mexico-to-U.S.
migration may raise wage dispersion in Mexico. Combined with the Borjas, Freeman,
and Katz (1997) result that immigration lowers wages for low-skilled U.S. natives, international migration may raise wage inequality in both sending and receiving countries.
The paper has four additional sections. In section 2, we present a simple model of
migrant selection.

In section 3, we describe the characteristics and economic

performance of residents of Mexico and Mexican immigrants in the United States. In

4

section 4, we use counterfactual wage densities to test for the positive or negative
selection of migrants from Mexico. In section 5, we present concluding remarks.

2. Theory
To motivate the empirical analysis, we present a simple model of migration.
Borjas (1987, 1991) uses the Roy (1951) model to show that in poor countries migrants
tend to be negatively selected (i.e., they are drawn primarily from the lower half of the
skill distribution in their home country). This analysis is based on the assumption that
time-equivalent migration costs are constant across individuals. In this case, high returns
to schooling and high wage dispersion in poor countries give individuals with below
average skills the strongest incentive to migrate abroad. In this section, we show that if
migration costs are decreasing in the skill level, migrants from poor countries may be
either negatively or positively selected in terms of skill, depending on the magnitude of
migration costs and the shape of the skill distribution.
Individuals from Mexico, indexed by 0, choose whether or not to migrate to the
United States, indexed by 1. For simplicity, we treat this as a one-time decision, though
the extension to a dynamic setting is straightforward (see Sjaastad, 1962; Borjas, 1991).
Residents of Mexico face a wage equation given by
ln(w0 ) = µ 0 + δ 0 s

(1)

where w0 is the wage in Mexico, µ0 is the base wage in Mexico, s is the level of
schooling, and δ0 is the return to schooling in Mexico. We focus on migrant selection in
terms of observable skills and, in particular, in terms of schooling.

Implicitly, we

imagine s to be a random variable (and that there are random components to wage

5

determination), but for simplicity we leave these features of migration behavior in the
background. The appendix adds these details to the analysis. If the population of
Mexicans were to migrate to the United States, they would face the wage equation
ln( w1 ) = µ1 + δ 1 s

(2)

where w1 is the U.S. wage for a migrant from Mexico, µ1 is the base wage for migrants,
and δ1 is the return to schooling for migrants. Consistent with the fact that Mexico has a
relatively scarce supply of skill, we assume that δ0 > δ1, or that the return to schooling is
higher in Mexico than in the United States.
Let C be migration costs and let π=C/w0 be migration costs in time-equivalent
units (the number of labor hours needed to migrate to the United States). Combining (1)
and (2), a resident of Mexico will migrate to the United States if
ln(w1 ) − ln(w0 + C ) ≈ ln(w1 ) − ln(w0 ) − π > 0 .

(3)

Borjas (1987, 1999) assumes that π is constant, implying that all individuals
require the same number of labor hours in order to migrate to the United States. This
assumption simplifies the analysis, but may not be an accurate reflection of reality. We
assume that time-equivalent migration costs decrease with schooling, such that
ln(π ) = µπ − δ π s

(4)

Why might this be the case? First, individuals migrating legally to the United
States must satisfy many bureaucratic requirements, involving extensive paperwork and
repeated interactions with U.S. immigration authorities. More-educated individuals may
be able to meet these requirements more easily.6 Second, a large service industry of
6

Over 90% of legal Mexicans immigrants in the United States are admitted under family reunification
provisions of U.S. immigration law. U.S. admissions criteria give primary status to immediate relatives of
U.S. citizens, secondary status to immediate relatives of U.S. legal residents, tertiary status to more distant

6

lawyers and other specialists exists to help migrants manage the U.S. admissions process.
Given the cost of these services is more or less fixed, the time-equivalent cost of
migration will be lower for individuals with higher hourly wages. There is also a large
service industry oriented towards illegal immigrants (Orrenius, 1999). To enter the
United States successfully, an illegal entrant must cross the border, find transport to a
safe location in the United States, and obtain counterfeit residency documents (or hire a
smuggler to provide these services). These costs are also fixed, implying higher-wage
individuals require fewer effective labor hours to migrate to the United States. Third,
credit constraints may raise migration costs for low-income individuals, who are also
likely to be less educated. Individuals may have to borrow to cover migration costs. If
lower-income individuals face higher borrowing costs, due to a higher expected
probability of default, they will face higher migration costs.7
Combining (3) and (4), Figure 1 shows ln(w0) and ln(w1)-π, which defines the
cutoff schooling level that determines who migrates to the United States in the case
where δπ=0 and µ 1 − µ 0 > e µπ . Here, time-equivalent migration costs are constant and
small, which corresponds to the assumptions in Borjas (1987).

He focuses on

unobservable skills but the analogy to observable skills is straightforward. In Figure 1,
there is negative selection of migrants: individuals with schooling less than s* migrate
from Mexico to the United States and individuals with schooling greater than s* remain in
Mexico. Individuals with relatively high levels of schooling are less likely to migrate to
the United States due to the fact that the return to schooling in higher in Mexico.
relatives of U.S. citizens, etc. While obtaining legal assistance cannot change an individual’s priority status
for admissions, it can help an individual clear the queue for legal admission more quickly.
7
A related possibility is that more-educated individuals may face less uncertainty with regards to the U.S.
wages they would earn, making them more likely to migrate for any given wage differential.

7

Figure 2 shows an alternative case in which δπ>0 and µ 1 − µ 0 < e µπ .8 Here,
time-equivalent migration costs are decreasing in schooling and are large. Individuals
with schooling in the interval (sL, sU) migrate from Mexico to the United States and those
with schooling outside this interval remain in Mexico. The selection of migrants in terms
of observable skills depends on the distribution of schooling in Mexico. There are three
possible cases: (a) negative selection: if the mass of the schooling distribution is above
sL, migrants will primarily be individuals with low schooling relative to those who remain
in Mexico, (b) positive selection: if the mass of the schooling distribution is below sU,
migrants will primarily be individuals with relatively high schooling, or (c) intermediate
selection: if the schooling distribution has mass both below sL and above sU, migrants
will primarily be individuals with intermediate schooling. In case (c), fixed migration
costs preclude those with low schooling from migrating and high returns to schooling in
Mexico dissuade those with high schooling from migrating.

Individuals with

intermediate schooling thus have the strongest incentive to migrate to the United States.
In the absence of data on the model’s parameters, we cannot a priori determine which
case is relevant for Mexico. We leave it to the empirical analysis to resolve the issue.
One important caveat is that our analysis addresses observable skills, only. If the
correlation between observable skills and unobservable skills is positive and sufficiently
strong, we expect that our results would apply to migrant selection in terms of
unobservable skills, as well. See the appendix for discussion.

If µ 1 − µ 0 > e µπ (migration costs are small), then even if migration costs are decreasing in schooling
there is still an unambiguous prediction for the negative selection of migrants. An additional assumption
8

needed to obtain Figure 2 is that ∂ (ln w 1 − π) / ∂s = δ1 + δ π e µ π −δ πs > δ 0 for small s.

8

3. Data and Preliminary Evidence
To compare economic outcomes of residents of Mexico to those of immigrants
from Mexico, we need information on worker characteristics in both Mexico and the
United States. We use the 1% sample of individuals from the 1990 General Census of
Population and Housing for Mexico and the 5% PUMS (public use microdata sample)
from the 1990 Census of Population and Housing for the United States.
We are interested in which Mexican individuals choose to migrate to the United
States and in how these individuals would perform in Mexico relative to the performance
of non-migrants. For the sample of Mexican immigrants in the United States, we focus
on recent immigrants, defined as those who migrated within the last 10 years. They
reflect the composition of individuals admitted under current U.S. immigration policy.
One important measurement issue is whether we have random samples of
individuals in each country. In the United States, a large fraction of immigrants from
Mexico are in the country illegally. In 1990, out of the 4.3 million Mexican-born
individuals in the United States recorded in that year’s census, 1.0 million were estimated
to be illegal immigrants (Costanzo et al., 2001). Might we be concerned that illegal
immigrants are under-represented in the U.S. population census? Costanzo et al. (2001)
estimate that of the 19.8 million foreign-born individuals enumerated in the 1990 U.S.
population census, 3.8 million were illegal immigrants. They further approximate that
the 1990 census undercounted illegal immigrants by 15-20%.9 This matters for our
analysis if the labor-market characteristics of these individuals differ systematically from

9

In 2000, the U.S. Census Bureau estimates that of the 31.1 million foreign-born individuals enumerated in
the census for that year, 7 million were illegal immigrants (Robinson, 2001). It approximates that the 2000
census undercounted illegal immigrants by 15%.

9

those of immigrants in the sample. In section 4, we conduct sensitivity analysis to assess
the potential impact of an illegal immigrant undercount on our results.

3.1 Summary Data
We begin the data summary by considering the magnitude of migrant outflows
from Mexico to the United States. While the size of the Mexican immigrant population
in the United States is well documented, the size of this population relative to the
population of Mexico is perhaps less appreciated. Table 1 shows Mexican immigrants in
the United States as a percentage of the population of Mexico by age cohort for males
and females. The sample is all individuals 16-65 years of age. Among males 25-34 years
old, the 1990 stock of Mexican immigrants in the United States was equivalent to 12.0%
of that age cohort in Mexico. For females, this figure is 8.2%. The size of the Mexican
immigrant population relative to the population of Mexico is smaller for younger and
older cohorts. The within-decade outflows of individuals from Mexico are also large.
Among males 25-34 years old, the accumulated net outflow of Mexican migrants to the
United States during the 1980’s was equal to 6.5% of this cohort’s 1990 population in
Mexico. For females, this figure is 4.3%. Again, the magnitude of migrant outflows
relative to the population of Mexico is smaller for younger and older cohorts. Overall,
the accumulated outflows of Mexican migrants appear large enough to have substantial
labor-market consequences in Mexico.
Tables 2a and 2b show means for age, educational attainment, labor-force
participation, and hourly wages for residents of Mexico, all Mexican immigrants in the
United States, recent Mexican immigrants in the United States, and, for comparison,

10

other U.S. immigrants and U.S. natives. We choose education categories that permit
direct comparisons between U.S. and Mexico census data.10 These categories correspond
roughly to modes for high grade of schooling completed in Mexico, which occur at grade
6 (primary education), grade 9 (secondary education), and grade 12 (preparatory
education). Some immigrants arrive in the United States as children and continue their
schooling. They may have moved to the United States as a result of decisions made by
other family members and not by their own choice. Their level of schooling may reflect
U.S. educational opportunities and so be endogenous to having migrated. To focus on
migrants who attended school in Mexico and who made their own migration decisions,
we exclude from the migrant sample individuals under age 17 at time of U.S. entry.11
Tables 2a and 2b reproduce the familiar facts that when compared to other U.S.
residents Mexican immigrants in the United States are younger, are much less educated,
and have much lower hourly wages.12 In 1990, 72.3% of all Mexican immigrant men and
68.2% of recent Mexican immigrant men had completed 11 or fewer years of school,
compared to only 19.0% of U.S. native men. However, Mexican immigrants, and recent
immigrants in particular, compare favorably when we examine educational attainment in
Mexico. In 1990, 81.0% of male residents of Mexico had 11 or fewer years of schooling.

10

A natural comparison of educational attainment in Mexico and the United States would be the simple
means of schooling years completed. Unfortunately, for individuals with less than 9 years of schooling, the
1990 U.S. Census only reports educational attainment as zero schooling, 1-4 years of schooling, or 5-8
years of schooling. Given the large mass of Mexican immigrants in the United States with less than 9 years
of schooling, it is difficult to calculate the simple mean of schooling for this group.
11
The results are unaffected by raising the cutoff age to 19 or 21 years, suggesting the Mexican immigrants
most likely to continue their education in the United States are those that arrive as children. Adult
immigrants appear likely to continue their education after arriving in the United States. Betts and Lofstrom
(1998) find that school enrollment rates for adult immigrants are higher than for adult U.S. natives.
However, the same does not appear to hold for immigrants from Mexico (Borjas, 1996; Trejo, 1997).
12
For Mexico, average hourly wages are calculated as monthly labor income/(4.5*hours worked last week);
for the United States, average hourly wages are calculated as annual labor income/(weeks worked last
year*usual hours worked per week).

11

Relative to male residents of Mexico, Mexican immigrant men are less likely to have 11
or fewer years of education, more likely to have 12-15 years of education, and less likely
to 16 plus years of education. A similar pattern holds for women.
Table 2 gives preliminary evidence against the negative-selection hypothesis. In
terms of observable skills, it is the more educated, not the least educated, who are more
likely to migrate. One concern is that recent Mexican immigrants may tend to have high
levels of schooling in part because they are relatively young and educational attainment
in Mexico has been rising over time. To control for the effects of age on schooling,
Table 3 shows average schooling for 25-34 year old Mexican residents and Mexican
immigrants in the United States. For this age cohort, which is the largest among Mexican
immigrants in the United States, we again see that Mexican immigrants have high
education levels relative to Mexican residents.
Returning to Tables 2a and 2b, there appear to be differences in labor-force
participation rates between residents of Mexico and Mexican immigrants in the United
States. To examine this issue further, Tables 4a and 4b report the fraction of the 1990
population of Mexican residents and of recent Mexican immigrants in the United States
with positive labor earnings by age and schooling cells. This definition of labor-force
participation reflects the sample of individuals for which we have wage observations.
For males 25-55 years of age with more than four years of education, labor-force
participation rates in the two countries are quite similar. Participation rates are higher for
Mexican immigrant males in the youngest cohort (16-24 years), the oldest cohort (55-65
years), and with little schooling (0-4 years). To minimize selection issues related to the
labor-force participation, we focus the analysis on males aged 25-65.

12

Labor-force participation rates for women, however, differ markedly between
migrants and non-migrants.

Among women with 11 or fewer years of education,

immigrants are much more likely to have positive labor earnings. This could be due to
more elastic female labor supply, in which case higher wages in the United States would
induce higher rates of labor-force participation. Also, women who are more likely to
work at any wage level may be more likely to self-select into migration. In either case,
Mexican immigrant women in the United States who work may differ from the
subpopulation of these women that would work were they to return to Mexico.13
This is a problem for our later empirical analysis. In constructing counterfactual
wage densities, we will want to examine a population of Mexican migrants that would be
likely to participate in the labor force were they to return to Mexico. The fact that
participation rates differ considerably between migrants and non-migrants, and that these
differences are larger for specific age and education groups, may affect the pattern of
migrant self-selection that we uncover from data on wage-earning individuals and, in
particular, may bias the results towards finding negative selection. This potential bias is
larger in the case of females, for whom we observe large differences in labor-force
participation rates. We return to this issue in section 4.

3.2 Returns to Education and Mexico-U.S. Wage Differentials
To examine the incentive to migrate, we report evidence on differences in wage
outcomes for residents of Mexico and Mexican immigrants in the United States. As an
initial indication, Figures 3a and 3b show kernel density estimates for the distribution of
wages from the samples of Mexican immigrants and Mexican residents.
13

Not

See Baker and Benjamin (1997) for further discussion of immigrant male and female labor supply.

13

surprisingly, wages in Mexico are on average much lower and exhibit greater dispersion,
as compared to wages for Mexican immigrants in the United States.
To summarize differences in returns to observable skills in the two countries, we
estimate OLS wage regressions for five samples of individuals: residents of Mexico,
recent Mexican immigrants in the United States, all Mexican immigrants in the United
States, other immigrants in the United States, and U.S. natives. Tables 5a and 5b report
the results. The regressors are dummy variables for seven categories of educational
attainment, age, age squared, a dummy variable for marital status, a dummy variable for
residence in a metropolitan area, dummy variables for race, and, for immigrants, dummy
variables for year of entry into the United States.
The estimated returns to education for residents of Mexico are substantially
higher than for Mexican immigrants or other groups in the United States.14 Completing
12 years of schooling is associated with an increase in hourly wages of 66.2 log points for
men in Mexico but only 12.4 to 18.2 log points for Mexican-born men in the United
States. A similar pattern holds for women. The base wage, as shown by the constant
term, is substantially higher in the United States than in Mexico. This difference in the
base wage appears to account for the large wage differences between the two countries.15

14

The coefficient estimates of these wage regressions may be affected by several factors. Estimates of the
returns to schooling may be biased by correlation between unobserved ability and schooling. Also, the
self-selection of individuals into the labor force or into migration may introduce further biases. This is of
particular concern when comparing migrant and non-migrant wage equations. In unreported results, we
attempted to address self-selection related to migration. We estimated wage regressions for Mexican-born
individuals in Mexico and in the United States, including as an additional regressor the inverse Mills ratio
derived from a probit model of the migration decision. However, we have concerns about these estimates.
Since we lack an instrument that affects migration but not wages, identification of the coefficient on the
inverse Mills ratio is achieved only through the non-linear way in which the other regressors enter into the
inverse Mills ratio and so depends entirely on distributional assumptions. Despite these concerns,
correcting for self-selection into migration has little effect on the coefficient estimates.
15
We exercise caution in interpreting the constant term as it captures differences across countries in mean
returns to unobserved skills as well as in returns to raw labor. Given education, age, and age squared are
included as regressors, the constant term would algebraically correspond to the log wage of an individual

14

Table 5 also confirms previous results that estimated U.S. returns to education are lower
for recent immigrants and Mexican immigrants relative to other immigrants and for
immigrants overall relative to U.S. natives (Borjas, 1996 and 1999).
Who migrates to the United States from Mexico is determined in part by expected
wage differences between the two countries. Using the estimated returns to observed
characteristics, we calculate the predicted difference in log wages at each age and
education level.16 While this is a crude indication of the incentive to migrate, it is useful
for generating approximate binational wage differences at a point in time. One issue in
constructing these differences is whether to adjust predicted wages for differences in the
cost of living between the two countries.

If migrants move to the United States

permanently, then we would want to make such an adjustment. In fact, many migrants
remit a portion of their earnings to family members in Mexico (Woodruff and Zenteno,
2002) or return to Mexico for extended visits (Massey et al., 1996). For these migrants,
the relevant price level may be that in Mexico, in which case the nominal difference in
U.S.-Mexico wages is the appropriate one to consider. In the interest of producing more
conservative estimates of binational wage differences, we adjust Mexican hourly wages
to achieve purchasing power parity with the United States, using PPP adjustment factors
reported in the Penn World Tables.17
Figure 4 shows predicted U.S.-Mexico hourly wage differences by age and
education level. Wage differences are largest for the young and for the least educated,
with schooling and age equal to zero. Zero schooling is an appropriate reference point, but zero age is not.
Using the estimated coefficients, the predicted log wage for a Mexican-born male who is 25 years old and
has zero schooling is -0.93 if the individual resides in Mexico and 1.50 if the individual is in the United
States and migrated in the last ten years. This is a smaller difference in U.S. and Mexico base wages than
what is implied by the constant terms in Table 5a. A similar comment applies to results for females.
16
The regressions we use to calculate predicted wages in the United States and Mexico include a complete
set of interactions between educational attainment, age, and age squared.

15

but are quite large in absolute value for all groups. For a 30-year old male, the predicted
real U.S. wage premium is $4.07 per hour for an individual with 5-8 years of schooling,
$3.52 for an individual with 12 years of education, and $2.60 for an individual with 16 or
more years of education.18 Results for women are similar. Wage differences fall with
age in most cases due to the fact that in the United States the returns to age tend to be
constant across age levels while in Mexico they rise with age.
That U.S.-Mexico real wage differences appear to be large and positive for all age
and education levels suggests that migration costs, broadly defined, are what determine
who migrates to the United States. If migration costs were a constant fraction of an
individual’s wage (i.e., constant in time-equivalent units), then we would expect
migration rates to be highest for the least educated. But Table 2 shows that this is not the
case. Migration rates are highest for Mexican-born individuals with relatively high levels
of education (12-15 years of schooling). To reconcile U.S.-Mexico wage differences that
fall with the level of education with migration rates that rise with the level of education
(at least up to 15 years of schooling), we need migration costs to be a lower fraction of
hourly wages for more-educated individuals.
In this section, we have seen evidence that Mexican immigrants in the United
States have high education levels relative to residents of Mexico, that the returns to
education for Mexican-born individuals are higher in Mexico than in the United States,
and that projected U.S.-Mexico wage differentials for a Mexican-born individual are
large for all age-education cohorts and decline with age and schooling. We turn next to

17

In 1990, Mexico’s PPP adjusted price level was 43.3% of the price level for the United States.
Stated in percentage terms, these wage differences are, or course, larger (114 log points for an individual
with 9 years of schooling, 83 log points for an individual with 12 years of education, and 55 log points for
and individual with 16 or more years of education).

18

16

see what the observed differences in the composition of Mexican immigrants and
residents of Mexico imply about the distribution of wages for these two groups.

4. Migration Abroad and the Distribution of Wages in Mexico
In this section, we compare wage distributions for residents of Mexico and
Mexican immigrants in the United States under common skill prices and labor-force
participation behavior. This exercise allows us to determine more formally whether there
is positive or negative selection of immigrants from Mexico. It also sheds light on how
migration abroad might impact the distribution of wages in Mexico. We begin with a
simple comparison of wages for Mexican residents and wages for Mexican immigrants in
the United States, using predicted values from OLS wage regressions. We then estimate
semi-parametrically the distribution of wages that would obtain for Mexican immigrants
were their wages set according to skill prices prevailing in Mexico and were they to
participate in the labor force in a manner similar to Mexican residents.
Several important qualifications apply to our results. The framework we use does
not address how the distribution of unobserved characteristics might influence the
distribution of wages. If, holding age and education constant, Mexican immigrants in the
United States have low levels of unobserved ability relative to residents of Mexico, then
our framework will tend to understate the extent of negative selection. Our framework
also fails to address how Mexico-to-U.S. migration affects skill prices in either country.
Such general-equilibrium considerations are beyond the scope of this paper. In section 5,
we discuss these and other qualifications in more detail.

17

4.1 Preliminary Evidence
The first exercise involves the following steps:

1) we estimate OLS wage

regressions for male and female residents of Mexico, 2) we use the estimated coefficients
to predict wages for wage earners in Mexico and we find the quintiles for this sample, 3)
we use the estimated coefficients for residents of Mexico to predict the wages that
Mexican immigrants in the United States would earn in Mexico, given their observed
characteristics, and 4) we use the predicted wages for Mexican immigrants to calculate
the fraction of Mexican immigrants that would occupy each of the wage quintiles for
Mexican residents. This exercise is a preliminary attempt to determine whether there is
negative or positive selection of Mexican immigrants. If Mexican residents and Mexican
immigrants have the same distribution of observed characteristics, then roughly 20% of
Mexican immigrants will occupy each of the Mexican-resident wage quintiles. If, on the
other hand, Mexican immigrants tend to be negatively selected in terms of observable
skills, then immigrants will be over-represented in the lower wage quintiles of Mexican
residents and under-represented in the upper wage quintiles.
Table 6 shows how Mexican immigrants in the United States are distributed
across wage quintiles for residents of Mexico when we predict their wages using OLS
wage equations for Mexican residents. We present results for all Mexican immigrants
and for recent immigrants. For men, Mexican immigrants are relatively concentrated in
the third and fourth highest wage quintiles and recent immigrants are relatively
concentrated in the fourth highest quintile.

Mexican immigrant men, and recent

immigrants in particular, would appear to fall disproportionately in the upper half of the
wage distribution for Mexican residents. This finding goes against the negative-selection

18

hypothesis. In terms of predicted wages, the relative youth of Mexican immigrant men is
more than compensated for by their higher education levels.
For women, Mexican immigrants are concentrated in the two lower wage
quintiles, which would appear to support the hypothesis that immigrants are negatively
selected in terms of observable skills.

This is surprising, given the high levels of

schooling for Mexican immigrant women relative to Mexican resident women in Table
2b. What may account for low predicted wages for Mexican immigrant women is that
women with low schooling are much more likely to work in the United States than in
Mexico. The same is not true for men. This results in female Mexican wage earners in
the United States being younger and less educated relative to female wage earners in
Mexico, even though in the total population immigrant women are more educated.
The results suggest that when projecting wages that Mexican immigrants would
earn in Mexico, we should control for differences in labor-force participation between the
two countries. If, as in Table 6, we make no such adjustment, then we end up with a
sample of Mexican immigrant workers selected on the basis of who is willing to work at
U.S. skill prices and a sample of Mexican resident workers selected on the basis of who is
willing to work at Mexican skill prices. For the comparison of wage distributions in the
two countries to be meaningful, individuals should be selected on the basis of a common
labor-force participation criterion. We address this issue in the next section.

4.2 Counterfactual Wage Densities
Wage distributions for Mexican immigrants in the United States and for residents
of Mexico may differ because of differences in the distribution of skills between the two

19

groups or because of differences in the prices of skills in the two labor markets. To
examine differences in the distribution of skills between Mexican residents and Mexican
immigrants, we compare wage distributions for Mexican migrants and Mexican residents
under a common set of skill prices. We compute the counterfactual wage density of
Mexican immigrants in the United States, assuming they are paid according to Mexico’s
wage structure, and compare it to the actual distribution of wages in Mexico. This
involves applying techniques developed by DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996). In
practice, their technique requires taking Mexico’s actual wage distribution and reweighting it according to the observed characteristics of immigrant workers.
The analysis in section 4.1 suggests that the distribution of skills may differ in
part between Mexican immigrant workers and Mexican resident workers because
different skill prices in the two countries create different patterns of labor-force
participation. To compare wage distributions in the two countries, it is necessary to hold
constant both skill prices and how skill prices influence labor-force participation. To do
so, we extend the techniques in DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux. We begin with Mexico’s
actual wage density, which corresponds to Mexico’s wage structure integrated over the
distribution of resident-worker characteristics. Then, we re-weight this distribution
according to the observed characteristics of all Mexican immigrants (and not just those
who earn positive wages). This simulates the wage distribution that would prevail given
immigrant characteristics and Mexican skill prices and labor-force participation rates.
Let f i(w|x) be the density of wages w in country i, conditional on a set of
observed characteristics x.

Also, let Di be an indicator variable equal to 1 if the

individual is in the labor force and equal to zero otherwise. We further define

20

h(x|i=Mex,Di=1) as the density of observed characteristics among wage earners in
Mexico, and h(x|i=US,Di=1) as the density of observed characteristics among wageearning Mexican immigrants in the United States. The observed density of wages for
individuals working in Mexico is

g ( w | i = Mex, Di = 1) = ∫ f

Mex

( w | x)h( x | i = Mex, Di = 1)dx

(5)

Likewise, the observed density of wages for Mexicans working in the U.S. is
g ( w | i = US , Di = 1) = ∫ f US ( w | x)h( x | i = US , Di = 1)dx
Differences in f

Mex

(6)

( w | x) and f US ( w | x) capture differences in skill prices in the

two countries.19 Differences in h(x|i=Mex,Di=1) and h(x|i=US,Di=1) capture differences
in the distribution of observed characteristics for Mexican immigrant workers and for
Mexican resident workers. The differences in the h(·) functions are due in part to
differences in the characteristics of Mexican immigrants and Mexican residents and in
part to differences in who participates in the labor force in the two countries.
Consider the density of wages that would prevail for Mexican immigrant workers
in the United States if they were paid according to the prices of skills in Mexico:
Mex
g US
( w) = ∫ f

Mex

( w | x)h( x | i = US , Di = 1)dx

(7)

This corresponds to the distribution of wages for Mexican residents in (5), except that it
is integrated over the skill distribution for working Mexican immigrants in the United
States. While this distribution is unobserved, we can rewrite it as

19

When the conditional expectation is linear in the observed characteristics, these terms are closely related
to the regression equation for wages on observable characteristics (Butcher and DiNardo, 2002).

21

Mex
g US
( w) = ∫ f

Mex

= ∫θ f

( w | x )h( x | i = US , Di = 1)
Mex

h( x | i = Mex, Di = 1)
dx
h( x | i = Mex, Di = 1)

(8)

( w | x )h( x | i = Mex, Di = 1)dx

where

θ=

h( x | i = US , Di = 1)
h( x | i = Mex, Di = 1)

(9)

The key insight of DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) is that a counterfactual
density as in (7) can be estimated by taking an observed density (e.g., for wage earners in
Mexico) and re-weighting it (e.g., to reflect the distribution of characteristics of Mexican
immigrant workers) as in (8). To compute the weights, use Bayes’ Law to write,
h( x ) =

h( x | i = US , Di = 1) Pr(i = US , Di = 1)
Pr(i = US , Di = 1 | x)

(10)

h( x ) =

h( x | i = Mex, Di = 1) Pr(i = Mex, Di = 1)
Pr(i = Mex, Di = 1 | x)

(11)

and,

Combining (10) and (11) we can obtain an expression for θ that is a function of the ratio
of the probability that a Mexican-born individual works in Mexico (conditional on x) to
the probability that a Mexican-born individual works in the United States (conditional on
x).

DiNardo, Fortin, and Lemieux (1996) suggest estimating these probabilities

parametrically, using the estimates to calculate θ, and then applying the estimated θ’s to
standard kernel density estimators to obtain a counterfactual wage density as in (8).
But the counterfactual density in (8) is not what we desire, precisely. The weight,
θ, as seen in (9), adjusts for differences in the distribution of skills between Mexican
immigrants and Mexican residents, conditional on Mexican immigrants working in the
United States and Mexican residents working in Mexico. In order to compare wage

22

distributions for the two groups, we want to condition on common labor-force
participation behavior. This requires modifying the weight we use to construct the
counterfactual wage density. First, note that it is possible to write the joint probability of
migration and labor-force participation, conditional on x, as the product of the conditional
distribution of the participation outcome and the marginal of the migration outcome:
Pr(i = US , Di = 1 | x) = Pr( Di = 1 | i = US , x) Pr(i = US | x)

(12)

Pr(i = Mex, Di = 1 | x) = Pr( Di = 1 | i = Mex, x) Pr(i = Mex | x)

(13)

Given (9)-(13), we can write:

θ=

Pr( Di = 1 | i = US , x) Pr(i = US | x) Pr(i = Mex, Di = 1)
Pr( Di = 1 | i = Mex, x) Pr(i = Mex | x) Pr(i = US , Di = 1)

(14)

Next, note that Pr(i = Mex, Di=1)/Pr(i = US, Di=1) is a constant given by the
sample proportions of Mexican resident and Mexican immigrant workers. Since θ is
scaled to sum to one, we can without loss of generality set Pr(i = Mex, Di=1)/Pr(i = US,
Di=1) = 1. Thus, the weight θ can be written as the product of two ratios:

θ = θ Pθ M

(15)

where:
 Pr( D = 1 | i = US , x) 

 Pr(i = US | x) 

i
 and θ M = 

θ P = 
Pr(
D
1
|
i
Mex
,
x
)
=
=
 Pr(i = Mex | x) 
i



(16)

The first ratio – the probability of a Mexican-born individual working, conditional on
being in the United States, over the probability of a Mexican-born individual working,
conditional on being in Mexico – adjusts Mexico’s wage density in (8) to reflect U.S.
labor-force participation rates for each realization of x. The second ratio – the probability
of a Mexican-born individual being in the United States over the probability of a

23

Mexican-born individual being in Mexico – corrects the wage density of Mexican
residents to reflect the characteristics of Mexican immigrants.
Clearly, the second ratio, θM, is the appropriate weight to construct our desired
counterfactual wage density. In (15) and (16), we see that the full weight, θ, adjusts for
differences in observed characteristics between Mexican immigrants and Mexican
residents and for differences in labor-force participation. The density we desire should
adjust only for the former set of differences. In (8), we replace θ with θM, which yields
the wage distribution that would obtain if immigrants were paid according to Mexican
skill prices and participated in the labor force as do residents of Mexico.20
To compute θM, we estimate Pr(i=US | x) parametrically by running a logit on the
probability of a Mexican adult being in the United States using the full sample of
Mexican immigrants and Mexican residents (and not just wage earners).

Once we

estimate this model, we can compute Pr(i=Mex | x) = 1 - Pr(i=US | x) and construct the
relevant weight θ jM for each observation j in the sample.
Having computed these weights (and normalized them to sum to one), we
estimate the counterfactual wage density non-parametrically. A kernel density estimator
applied to the sample of wage earners in Mexico, but using the weights described above,
would yield an estimate of the desired counterfactual density. We adapt the RosenblattParzen kernel density estimator to the case in which observations have sample weights,

For males, θ and θM are close in value (labor-force participation rates among males are similar in the two
countries, making θP close to one). Using either θ or θM to construct the counterfactual wage densities
yields similar results. For females, labor-force participation rates differ in the two countries. The
counterfactual wage density for females using θ as the weight places greater emphasis on the earnings of
women with low levels of schooling and so is more supportive of negative selection (in contrast to the
results that we report below using θM as the weight). This finding is qualitatively similar to the results in
Table 6 and highlights the importance of holding labor-force participation constant.
20

24

n

ĝ( w ) = ∑

θM
j

j =1

 w −Wj
K 
h  h






(17)

where we use j = 1,…,n sampled workers in Mexico with wages Wj. In this expression K
corresponds to a kernel function, and h is the selected bandwidth.
This methodology detects differences in the wage distributions of Mexican
residents and Mexican immigrants attributable to differences in observed characteristics.
If observable characteristics understate differences in the true distribution of skills, then
the results may underestimate the actual difference in corresponding wage densities.

4.3 Main Results

We apply the methodology to our combined sample of Mexican residents and
recent Mexican immigrants in the United States (individuals born in Mexico who are 2565 years of age). To construct counterfactual wage densities, we estimate a logit model
for Pr(i=US | x), using the full sample of individuals. The model links the choice of
migrating to the United States to the age and age squared of the individual, dummy
variables for schooling and marital status, and interactions of these variables. In the case
of females, the model also includes the number of children born to an individual.
Predicted probabilities for the logit model are shown in Figure 5.21

The

probability of migrating to the United States is non-monotonic in age and education. It
first rises with age, peaking at 25 to 30 years, and then declines. This is consistent with
the idea that the young, who would enjoy high relative earnings abroad over more years,

21

The graphs include predicted probabilities using data for individuals with ages from 16 to 65 years of
age. This is done to produce a more complete picture of how migration probabilities change with age. The
counterfactuals below are based on logit models using data for individuals 25 to 65 years of age. The
resulting predicted probabilities do not differ from those shown in the graphs.

25

have the most to gain from migration. From zero schooling, the migration probability
declines with education up to nine years of schooling and then rises, peaking for
individuals with 12 years of schooling, and then declines again. The high migration
probability for individuals with zero schooling may reflect the large presence of migrant
farm workers among Mexican immigrants in the United States. Farm workers tend to be
older and are the occupation group most likely to have zero schooling.

The low

likelihood of the very educated to migrate may be explained by the fact that differences
in returns to education for Mexican immigrants and residents of Mexico are largest for
this schooling group. They appear to have the least to gain from migration.
Having estimated logit models for males and females and computed the weights,

θM, we use the sample of wage-earning Mexican residents to construct kernel density
estimates for the hourly wages of individuals residing in Mexico and the counterfactual
kernel densities for Mexican immigrants in the United States, assuming they are paid
according to Mexican skill prices and they follow the same labor-force participation
behavior as Mexican residents. In these estimates, the choice of bandwidth is determined
by starting with small values and increasing them gradually until a relatively smooth plot
of the estimate is achieved. When comparing densities, the same bandwidth is applied to
each. All estimates are based on a Gaussian kernel function.22
The results for Mexican males are in Figure 6a. Although the counterfactual
density for Mexican immigrants is fairly close to the actual density of Mexican residents,

22

We first used Silverman’s (1986) optimal bandwidth, which minimizes the mean integrated squared error
if the data are Gaussian and a Gaussian Kernel is used. However, the resulting densities appeared to be
excessively smoothed and could in fact suffer from bias if the data do not conform to the Gaussian
assumption. In order to avoid large bias in our estimates, we instead started with a bandwidth of 0.03 log
wage units, and sequentially increased it until the resulting densities looked relatively smooth. This usually
implied bandwidths in our final estimates of around 0.07 log wage units.

26

some clear differences are apparent. Contrary to the negative-selection hypothesis, it is

not the lowest-wage males who exhibit a disproportionately high tendency to migrate to
the United States.

Under the negative selection hypothesis, we would expect the

counterfactual density to exhibit a larger mass in the lower tail and a smaller mass in the
upper tail, when compared with the actual wage distribution of Mexico residents. In
contrast, the counterfactual wage density we estimate shows that, for wages up to the
peak of Mexico’s wage distribution, the counterfactual is very close to the actual
Mexican wage density. Moreover, the counterfactual has a larger mass for wage values
at the peak of the distribution and above. It is not until high wages are reached that the
counterfactual density falls below the actual density of resident males.

Thus, the

counterfactual tends to support an intermediate selection pattern. The negative-selection
hypothesis appears to explain only the comparative behavior of medium and high-wage
males. The latter are more likely to stay in Mexico than the former.
It appears that the men with the highest likelihood to migrate abroad would have
medium-to-high wage levels in Mexico and that those least likely to migrate would have
very high wage levels in Mexico. Were Mexican immigrant males in the United States to
return to Mexico and be paid according to Mexico’s current wage structure, they would
tend to fall disproportionately in the middle and upper half of Mexico’s wage
distribution. This suggests that migration abroad, by taking mass away from the middle
of Mexico’s wage distribution, may raise wage inequality in the country.
The results for females appear to be even less supportive of negative selection. In
Figure 6b, we see that up to the peak of the wage distribution for females in Mexico, the
counterfactual density for immigrant females is consistently below the actual density for

27

female residents of Mexico. To the right of the peak, the counterfactual density is above
the actual density for a large range of wage values and practically never falls below the
actual density of Mexico residents. Women who migrate from Mexico to the United
States appear to be positively selected from the wage distribution. Comparing this with
the results in Table 6 suggests that the apparent over-representation of immigrant females
in the lowest wage quintiles in Mexico is a result of the different labor-force participation
patterns in the two countries and is not indicative of negative selection of female
immigrants. This comparison makes clear the importance of assuming common laborforce participation behavior for our exercise.
Summarizing our results, it appears that, for both men and women, those most
likely to migrate to the United States are from the middle and upper portions of Mexico’s
wage distribution. This is inconsistent with negative selection hypothesis. In terms of
observable skills, males exhibit behavior consistent with intermediate selection and
females exhibit behavior consistent with positive selection.

4.4 Correcting for the Undercount of Illegal Immigrants

As discussed in section 3, the U.S. census may undercount illegal immigrants by
as much as 20%.

This may matter for our results, since the undercounted illegal

immigrants may have observable characteristics that differ systematically from other
Mexican immigrants.

One group of illegal immigrants that appear likely to be

undercounted by the census are undocumented farm workers, who tend to have very low
education levels. If there are enough undercounted migrants and they have low enough
education levels, then our results could be biased against finding negative selection of

28

migrants.

We cannot remedy this problem directly, since we lack data on which

immigrants are illegal within our sample. However, we do have data from other sources
on the characteristics of likely illegal immigrants. We use these data to examine the
sensitivity of our results to the potential undercount of illegal immigrants.
We repeat the exercises from the previous section, but now modify the immigrant
sample so that the sampling weights for the logit analysis used to construct the
counterfactuals correspond to those of a synthetic sample in which there is no undercount
of illegal immigrants. We re-weight the original sample so that: i) the new weights
reflect an increase in the total Mexican immigrant population in the United States,
corresponding to the estimated number of undercounted illegal immigrants, and ii) the reweighting procedure increases the population size to a greater extent for education groups
in which out-of-sample evidence suggests that illegal immigrants are more concentrated.
The sample re-weighting procedure draws on data from Costanzo et al. (2001)
who estimate that, out of the 4.3 million Mexican-born individuals included in the 1990
U.S. census, around 1 million individuals were illegal immigrants. Thus, if we assume a
20% undercount rate, the total number of Mexican-born illegal immigrants in the United
States in 1990 was of around 1.25 million.23,24 Under this assumption, the census should
have recorded around 250,000 more Mexican-born individuals, implying an increase of
around 6% in the Mexican-born population actually recorded. Thus, we re-weight the

23

Costanzo et al. (2001) consider both a low undercount rate of 15% and a high rate of 20%. We chose the
high rate to maximize the possible impact undercounted migrants could have on our results.
24
This figure may seem too low. Borjas, Freeman and Lang (1991) estimate a total of 1.8 million illegal
Mexican aliens in 1980. The U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service estimates that in 1996 there
were 2.7 Mexican illegal immigrants in the United States (U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service,
1998). However, it is important to recall that more than 2 million undocumented Mexican immigrants were
legalized under the 1986 Immigration Reform and Control Act. Costanzo et al. (2001) consider this effect
in computing their estimates for 1990. Taking legalization into account, other authors have constructed
estimates of the illegal immigrant population that are similar to the figure above (Fix and Passel, 1994).

29

original sample so that the represented population is increased by this percentage.25 In
order to make this increased population have the characteristics of illegal immigrants, we
adjust the weights by schooling group. The “new” population is assumed to follow the
distribution of immigrants by schooling group presented in Orrenius (1999), which is
reproduced in Table 7. This distribution is based on the “Mexican Migration Project”, a
household sample conducted in rural communities in the states of Mexico where
migration to the United States has been traditionally high (see Durand et al., 1996;
Massey et al., 1994). A high fraction of the migrants in this sample reported entering the
United States illegally. The schooling levels of this group are much lower than those of
Mexican immigrants counted in the U.S. census or of residents of Mexico.26
Figures 7a and 7b show the results of this exercise. For both males and females,
we use the methodology described in the previous section, so that the immigrant
counterfactual assumes the same labor-force participation rates as those of residents of
Mexico. The resulting counterfactual density estimates are very similar to those obtained
without the illegal undercount correction and have the same qualitative implications. In
particular, they still reflect the intermediate selection pattern for males and the positive
selection pattern for females found before. This suggests that census undercounts of
illegal immigrants do not matter materially for our results. We would need to assume
implausibly high undercount rates in order to change qualitatively our main findings.

25

We perform this procedure separately for males and females. There is an implied increase in the
population of males by 4.2% and of females by 8.0%.
26
One drawback of using this distribution is that it corresponds to male heads of household between 15 and
65 years of age. In order to adjust the female migrant sample we need to assume the distribution of
schooling is similar to that for males (in census data, mean schooling for males and females is similar).
Also, mean schooling for this sample is lower than for other samples with high proportions of illegal
migrants (Cornelius and Marselli, 2001; Durand, Massey and Zenteno, 2001). By using this sample, we
increase the potential effect of the exercise on our results.

30

Other results based on samples in which illegal immigrants are over-represented
tend to support our findings. Orrenius and Zavodny (2001) use survey data on rural, lowskilled illegal migrants in Mexico and find that among this group migrants tend to come
from the middle of the schooling distribution. The least educated tend not to migrate to
the United States. They also show that a worsening of economic conditions in Mexico
tends to increase the skill levels of immigrants, perhaps due to credit constraints
becoming more severe for less skilled individuals during downturns.

4.5 Robustness Checks

We have argued that it is important to hold constant how skill prices affect laborforce participation when comparing wage distributions across workers in different
countries. So far, we have used skill prices and labor-force participation in Mexico as the
basis for these comparisons. This is a natural choice, in that we are interested in the
potential effects of migration abroad on Mexican wages.

For purposes of evaluating

whether immigrants are negatively or positively selected, it is no less valid to use laborforce participation in the United States as the basis for comparison. As a consistency
check on our previous results, we estimate the distribution of wages that would obtain if
residents of Mexico were paid according to U.S. skill prices and participated in the labor
force as do Mexican immigrants and then compare this to the actual wage distribution for
Mexican immigrants. If immigrants from Mexico are negatively selected in terms of
observable skills, then we would expect the counterfactual wage density for Mexican
residents to be right shifted relative to the actual density for Mexican immigrants.

31

Following the analysis in section 4.2, the counterfactual wage density we wish to
estimate is the wage structure for Mexican immigrants in the United States integrated
over characteristics of Mexican residents, or
g US
Mex ( w )= ∫

1

θ

M

f US ( w | x )h( x | i = US , Di = 1 )dx

(18)

where the appropriate weight is the inverse of θM, the weight defined in equation (16).
This inverse is the probability of a Mexican-born individual being in Mexico over the
probability of a Mexican-born individual being in the United States, where both
probabilities are conditional on x. Thus, we can obtain the desired counterfactual wage
density by taking the actual wage density of Mexican immigrants in the United States and
re-weighting it by the characteristics of all Mexican residents. To estimate this density,
we perform the same steps described earlier, which entails estimating a logit for the
probability that a Mexican-born individual is in the United States, using the logit results
to estimate the weight 1/θM, and then applying the weights to estimate non-parametrically
a kernel density for Mexican immigrant wages.
Figures 8a and 8b report the results. For neither males nor females is there
support for the hypothesis that Mexican immigrants are negatively selection in terms of
observable skills. For males, the results mirror those in Figure 6a. The actual wage
density for immigrants is similar to the counterfactual density for residents.

The

differences that do appear are in the upper half of the wage densities. Compared to the
actual density for immigrants, the counterfactual density for resident males shows less
mass in the region just to the right of the peak and more mass in the upper tail. Resident
males appear to be slightly under-represented in the upper middle portion of the
immigrant wage distribution and slightly over-represented in the upper tail. This is

32

consistent with modest intermediate selection of male immigrants in terms of observable
skills. Differences in the actual and counterfactual wage densities in Figure 8a are
smaller than those in Figure 6a in part because U.S. returns to education are lower than
those in Mexico.

This compresses any differences in wage distributions between

immigrants and residents that are due to differences in educational attainment. For
women, Figure 8b mirrors Figure 6b, with differences in the actual and counterfactual
wage densities also being less pronounced. Compared to the actual wage density for
immigrants, the counterfactual density for resident females shows more mass to the left
of the peak of the distribution and less mass to the right of the peak. This is consistent
with modest positive selection of immigrant females in terms of observable skills.

5. Discussion

In this paper, we combine two representative samples of Mexican-born
individuals, one of residents of Mexico and another of immigrants in the United States.
We use these data to test Borjas’ (1987) negative-selection hypothesis that in poor
countries the less-skilled are those most likely to migrate to rich countries.
Our results are inconsistent with the negative selection of Mexican immigrants in
the United States. For Mexican-born males, there is evidence of intermediate selection
and for Mexican-born females there is evidence of positive selection. Those most likely
to migrate are young adults with moderately high levels of schooling. Were these
immigrants to return to Mexico, they would tend to fall disproportionately in the middle
or upper portions of Mexico’s wage distribution. This suggests that migration to the

33

United States may reduce the relative supply of middle and upper-middle wage earners in
Mexico, contributing to a widening of earnings inequality in the country.
To arrive at these results, we construct counterfactual wage densities for Mexican
immigrants in the United States, in which we use their observed characteristics to project
the wages they would earn were they to return to Mexico and be paid according to current
patterns of wage determination in the country. These counterfactuals assume that the
labor-force participation of immigrants mimics that of residents of Mexico. The results
appear robust to a possible undercount of illegal immigrants in the U.S. census.
There are several important caveats to our results. First, we cannot say how the
return of Mexican immigrants in the United States would affect Mexico’s wage structure.
This is a complicated general-equilibrium question that we do not address. We construct
counterfactual wage densities to test Borjas’ selection hypothesis for Mexico and to
gauge from where in Mexico’s wage distribution migrants bound for the United States
are most likely to be drawn. Second, our findings against negative selection and in favor
of intermediate or positive selection are in terms of observable characteristics only. We
cannot say whether the unobserved skills of Mexican immigrants in the United States are
high or low relative to those who remain in Mexico. Still, it is natural to expect that
education is positively correlated with individual ability. In this case, accounting for
unobserved skill would be unlikely to change our results drastically.
That immigrants from Mexico appear to be relatively high-wage individuals is
surprising. Projected U.S.-Mexico wage differentials are largest for the least educated,
suggesting that it is low-wage individuals from Mexico who would have most to gain
from migrating to the United States. We appeal to heterogeneity in migration costs as a

34

way to reconcile migration probabilities that rise with education (at least over a range of
schooling levels) with binational wage differentials that fall with education.
The more educated may be better able to negotiate the process of migrating
abroad, they may have better access to migration networks that would help them get
established in the United States, or they may be less subject to credit constraints in
financing migration. It may also be the case that higher discount rates or greater risk
aversion among low-skilled individuals make migration abroad relatively less attractive
for this group. Finally, a “Washington apples” effect (Alchian and Allen, 1964) may also
contribute to positive selection of migrants. Given long queues for U.S. legal admission,
two-thirds of Mexican-born individuals entering the country appear to do so illegally on
their first attempt.

Enforcement against illegal immigrants may act as a head tax,

disproportionately penalizing the less skilled. If more-skilled and less-skilled illegal
immigrants compete for jobs in the United States, it will be efficient, given fixed
migration costs, to fill jobs with more skilled individuals first. While it is plausible that
more-educated individuals face lower migration costs, we are unaware of data that would
allow us to test this idea. We leave this for future research.

35

Appendix

This appendix reinterprets the model in the text in terms of Roy (1951).
Residents of Mexico face a wage distribution in country i=0 (Mexico), 1 (U.S.) given by
ln( wi ) = µ i + δ i s + ε i
(A1)
where wi is the wage in country i, µi is the zero-schooling mean wage in i, s is the level of
schooling, δi is the return to schooling in i, and εi captures deviations from mean earnings
(e.g., returns to unmeasured ability) in i and has distribution N(0, σ i2 ). ε0 and ε1 have
correlation coefficient ρ01>0 (employers in both countries value similar characteristics).
Schooling is a random variable with distribution
s = µs + ε s
(A2)
where µs is mean schooling and εs ~ N(0, σ s2 ).
Combining (A1)-(A2), a resident of Mexico will migrate to the United States if
w1
(A3)
ln(
) ≈ ( µ1 − µ 0 − π ) + µ s (δ 1 − δ 0 ) + (ε 1 − ε 0 ) + ε s (δ 1 − δ 0 ) > 0
w0 + C
where C is migration costs and π=C/w0 is time-equivalent migration costs. Redefining π
slightly relative to the model presented in the text, we assume that time-equivalent
migration costs are a random variable with distribution
π = µπ + ε π
(A4)

where µπ denotes mean migration costs and επ ~ N(0, σ 2π ), as in Borjas (1991). The
correlation coefficient for επ and εi is ρiπ, i=0,1,s. By (A4), the probability that an
individual migrates to the United States is given by
Pr(v > −[ µ1 − µ 0 − µπ + µ s (δ 1 − δ 0 )]) = 1 − Φ ( z )
(A5)
where Φ(z) is the standard normal distribution function, v = (ε1-ε0 - επ )+εs(δ1-δ0) and z =
-[µ1-µ0-µπ+µs(δ1-δ0)]/σv. The probability above gives the Mexico-to-U.S. migration rate.
Will migrants from Mexico to the United States tend to be individuals with
relatively high or low education levels? Given (A1)-(A5) and letting v ′ = v / σ v , the
expected level of schooling for a Mexican migrant in the United States is
σ 2

σ σ
E( s | v ′ > z ) = µ s + E( ε s | v ′ > z ) = µ s +  s (δ 1 − δ 0 ) − π s ρ sπ λ ( z )
(A6)
σv
σv

where λ(z) denotes the inverse Mills ratio φ(z)/[1-Φ(z)], with φ(z) being the standard
normal density function. Migrants from Mexico will have above (below) average
schooling relative to residents of Mexico if the term in the brackets on the right of (A6) is
positive (negative). Given (δ1-δ0)<0, migrants will have below-average schooling if ρsπ,
the correlation between schooling and time-equivalent migration costs, is not too
negative, and above-average schooling if ρsπ is negative and large in absolute value
relative to |δ1-δ0|. While we cannot sign the term in brackets in (A6), evidence presented
in the text suggests that there is a plausible case to be made for ρsπ being negative and so
for migrants having above-average education levels. Positive selection of migrants is
more likely the stronger is the negative correlation between observable skill and
migration costs and the smaller are the excess returns to education in the source country.

36

By conditioning wages on observable correlates of skill, the analysis above can be
extended to account for self-selection in terms of unobservable skills. The implications
are similar to those of the model described above. In particular, if earnings dispersion is
wider in Mexico than in the United States, as it is apparently the case, this would tend to
cause migrants to be negatively selected in terms of unobservable skills. However,
positive selection emerges if individuals with higher unobserved skills have lower timeequivalent migration costs and this correlation is sufficiently strong.
References

Alchian, Armen, and William Allen. 1964. University Economics. Belmont, CA.
Wadsworth.
Baker, Michael, and Dwayne Benjamin. 1997. “The Role of the Family in Immigrants’
Labor-Market Activity: An Evaluation of Alternative Explanations.” American
Economic Review 87: 705-729.
Boeri, Tito, Barry McCormick, and Gordon H. Hanson. 2002. Immigration Policy and
the Welfare State. Oxford: Oxford University Press, forthcoming.
Beine, Michel, Frederic Docquier, and Hillel Rapoport. 2001. “Brain Drain and
Economic Growth.” Journal of Development Economics 64(1): 275-289.
Betts, Julian and Magnus Lofstrom. 1998. “The Educational Attainment of Immigrants:
Trends and Implications.” NBER Working Paper No. 6757.
Borjas, George J. 1987. “Self-Selection and the Earnings of Immigrants.” American
Economic Review 77(4): 531-553.
Borjas, George, J. 1991. “Immigration and Self-Selection.” In John Abowd and Richard
Freeman, eds., Immigration, Trade, and the Labor Market. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press, pp. 29-76.
Borjas, George J. 1995. “Assimilation and Changes in Cohort Quality Revisited: What
Happened to Immigrant Earnings in the 1980s?” Journal of Labor Economics 13(2):
201-245.
Borjas, George J. 1996. “The Earnings of Mexican Immigrants in the United States.”
Journal of Development Economics 51: 69-98.
Borjas, George J. 1999. “The Economic Analysis of Immigration.” In Orley C.
Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Amsterdam: NorthHolland, pp. 1697-1760.
Borjas, George J., Stephen G. Bronars, and Stephen J. Trejo. 1992. “Self-Selection and
Internal Migration in the United States.” Journal of Urban Economics 32(2): 159-185.

37

Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 1997. "How Much Do
Immigration and Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes?" Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity 1: 1-90.
Bound, John, and Harry J. Holzer. 2000. “Demand Shifts, Population Adjustments, and
Labor Market Outcomes during the 1980s.” Journal of Labor Economics 18(1): 20-54.
Butcher, Kristin F. and John DiNardo. 2002. “The Immigrant and Native-Born Wage
Distributions: Evidence from United States Censuses.” Industrial and Labor Relations
Review, forthcoming.
Carrington, William J. and Detragiache, Enrica. 1998. “How Big is the Brain Drain?” IMF
Working Paper WP/98/102.
Chiswick, Barry. 1978. “The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-born
Men.” Journal of Political Economy 86(5): 897-921.
Costanzo, Joe, Cynthia Davis, Caribert Irazi, Daniel Goodkind and Roberto Ramirez. 2001.
“Evaluating Components of International Migration: The Residual Foreign Born
Population.” U.S. Bureau of the Census, Division Working Paper No. 61.
Cornelius, Wayne A. and Enrico A. Marselli. 2001. “The Changing Profile of Mexican
Migrants to the United States: New Evidence from California and Mexico.” Latin
American Research Review, forthcoming.
Deardorff, Alan V. 2000. “Factor Prices and the Factor Content of Trade Revisited:
What’s the Use?” Journal of International Economics 50(1): 73-90.
DiNardo, John, M. Fortin, and Thomas Lemieux. 1996. “Labor Market Institutions and
the Distribution of Wages, 1973-1992: A Semiparametric Approach.” Econometrica
64(5): 1001-1044.
Durand, Jorge, William Kandel, Emilio Parrado and Douglas S. Massey. 1996.
“International Migration and Development in Mexican Communities.” Demography
33(2): 249-264.
Durand, Jorge, Douglas S. Massey, and Rene M. Zenteno. 2001. “Mexican Immigration
in the United States.” Latin American Research Review 36(1): 107-127.
Feliciano, Zadia. 2001. “The Skill and Economic Performance of Mexican Immigrants
from 1910 to 1990.” Explorations in Economic History 38: 386-409.
Fix, Michael and Jeffrey Passel. 1994. “Immigration and Immigrants: Setting the Record
Straight”. Urban Institute.

38

Hanson, Gordon H., and Antonio Spilimbergo. 1999. "Illegal Immigration, Border
Enforcement and Relative Wages: Evidence from Apprehensions at the U.S.-Mexico
Border," American Economic Review, 89: 1337-57.
LaLonde, Robert and Robert Topel. 1992. "The Assimilation of Immigrants in the U.S.
Labor Market." In George J. Borjas and Richard Freeman, eds, Immigration and the
Work Force: Economic Consequences for the United States and Source Areas, (Chicago,
IL: University of Chicago Press): 67-92.
LaLonde, Robert and Robert Topel. 1997. “Economic Impact of International Migration
and Migrants.” In Mark R. Rosenzweig and Oded Stark, eds., Handbook of Population
and Family Economics, (Amsterdam: Elsevier Science): 799-850.
Leamer, Edward E. 2000. “What’s the Use of Factor Contents?”
International Economics 50(1): 17-50.

Journal of

Massey, Douglas S., L. Goldring, and Jorge Durand. 1994. “Continuities in
Transnational Migration: An Analysis of Nineteen Mexican Communities.” American
Journal of Sociology 99(6): 1492-1533.
Orrenius, Pia M. 1999. “Family Networks, Coyote Prices, and the Rural Economy in
Migration from Western Mexico: 1965-1994.” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Orrenius, Pia M. and Madeline Zavodny. 2001. “Self-Selection among Undocumented
Immigrants from Mexico.” Mimeo, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
Robinson, J. Gregory. 2001. “ESCAP II: Demographic Analysis Results.” U.S. Census
Bureau, http://www.census.gov/dmd/www/ReportRec2.htm.
Roy, A.D. 1951. “Some Thoughts on the Distribution of Earnings.” Oxford Economic
Papers 3: 135-146.
Silverman, B. 1986. Density Estimation for Statistics and Data Analysis. London,
Chapman and Hall.
Sjaastad, Larry. A. 1962. "The Costs and Returns of Human Migration." Journal of
Political Economy, 70(1), pp. 80-93
Smith, James and Barry Edmonston. 1997. The New Americans: Economic, Demographic
and Fiscal Effects of Immigration. National Academy Press: Washington, D.C.
Trejo, Stephen J. 1997. “Why do Mexican Americans Earn Low Wages?” Journal of
Political Economy 105(6): 1235-1268..
Woodruff, Christopher and Rene M. Zenteno. 2001. “Remittances and Microenterprises
in Mexico.” Mimeo, UC San Diego.

39

Table 1: Share of U.S. Immigrants from Mexico in Population of Mexico, 1990
(percent)

Age

All Mexican Immigrants
Males
Females

Arrivals 1981-1990
Males
Females

Arrivals 1986-1990
Males
Females

16-24

7.53

4.88

5.79

3.32

3.92

2.26

25-34

12.02

8.18

6.46

4.27

2.92

2.10

35-44

10.17

8.16

2.55

2.02

1.21

0.90

45-54

7.57

6.99

1.56

1.40

0.79

0.70

55-65

5.96

6.11

0.83

1.06

0.44

0.56

Notes: This table shows Mexican immigrants in the United States (either all immigrants
or immigrants that arrived during the period 1981-1990) as a percentage of the 1990
population of Mexico by age and sex categories.

40

Table 2a: Summary Statistics for Males, 1990

Mexico
Residents
32.7

Variable
Age
Highest Grade
of Schooling
Completed
(%)

0
1 to 4
5 to 8
9
10 to 11
<12
12
13 to 15
16+

U.S. Residents
Recent Mex. All Mex.
Other
Immigrants Immigrants Immigrants
29.3
35.0
40.5

U.S.
Natives
37.2

11.6
19.1
28.6
13.9
7.7
81.1
6.5
4.7
7.7

11.9
10.7
29.0
9.4
7.2
68.2
19.9
8.5
3.5

12.8
14.6
30.9
7.9
6.1
72.3
17.0
7.8
2.9

3.8
2.7
9.2
2.9
4.7
23.2
24.1
21.5
31.2

0.6
0.5
3.9
3.3
10.7
19.0
32.4
27.7
20.9

Wage Earners (%)
Hourly wage
(standard dev.)

66.1
1.45
(2.5)

83.0
6.95
(5.73)

83.7
8.12
(6.6)

78.6
13.92
(12.0)

80.9
14.18
(12.3)

N

211,133

36,119

66,660

189,237

708,727

Notes: The sample is all individuals 16-65 years old. Residents of Mexico are a 1%
random sample of the XII Censo General de Poblacion y Vivienda, 1990; Mexican and
other immigrants are drawn from the 1990 5% U.S. PUMS; and U.S. natives are drawn
from the 1990 1% U.S. PUMS. Immigrants in the United States are restricted to be
individuals 17 years or older at time of entry into the country. Recent immigrants from
Mexico are individuals who entered the United States during the period 1981-1990.
Schooling variables show the percentage of individuals whose high grade completed is
that indicated and wage earners shows the percentage of individuals with positive labor
earnings in 1990. Wage levels are in 1990 U.S. dollars. Average wages in Mexico are
for those individuals with average hourly earnings greater than $0.1 and less than $20 and
in the United States are for those individuals with average hourly earnings greater that $1
and less than $100. The sample size is all individuals (not just those with valid wages).

41

Table 2b: Summary Statistics for Females, 1990

Mexico
Residents
32.7

Age
Highest Grade
of Schooling
Completed
(%)

0
1 to 4
5 to 8
9
10 to 11
<12
12
13 to 15
16+

U.S. Residents
Recent Mex. All Mex.
Other
Immigrants Immigrants Immigrants
31.0
37.1
41.9

U.S.
Natives
37.7

15.6
19.6
28.1
12.3
7.4
83.3
7.6
4.5
4.6

12.3
12.0
30.0
8.5
6.1
68.9
19.5
8.2
3.4

12.8
14.6
32.6
7.3
5.3
72.6
17.3
7.5
2.6

4.4
3.3
10.2
3.1
4.9
25.8
30.3
22.2
21.7

0.5
0.3
3.1
2.9
10.5
17.2
35.6
29.6
17.5

Wage Earners (%)
Hourly wage
(standard dev.)

20.7
1.33
(2.1)

44.7
6.05
(5.38)

48.2
6.62
(5.8)

60.5
10.15
(8.4)

70.3
9.47
(7.4)

N

228,964

26,643

51,918

213,020

737,267

Notes: See notes to Table 2a.

42

Table 3: Educational Attainment for Mexico-Born 25-34 Year Olds, 1990

Age
Highest Grade
of Schooling
Completed
(%)

N

0
1 to 4
5 to 8
9
10 to 11
<12
12
13 to 15
16+

Mexico
Residents
Males

Recent Mex.
Immigrants
Males

Mexico
Residents
Females

Recent Mex.
Immigrants
Females

29.1

28.8

29.2

28.5

7.8
16.0
29.2
13.4
6.0
72.5
8.4
6.4
12.7

10.7
9.7
29.3
8.6
6.6
64.9
20.7
10.1
4.2

10.9
18.5
30.2
11.4
5.5
76.8
9.1
6.2
7.9

10.2
10.2
31.7
8.7
5.6
66.3
19.6
9.6
4.5

61,018

12,317

55,436

16,713

Notes: This table shows the fraction of 25-34 year-old individuals who have completed
given levels of schooling for residents of Mexico and recent Mexican immigrants in the
United States (individuals who arrived during the period 1981-1990). See notes to Table
2a for more details on the sample.

43

Table 4a: Labor-Force Participation Rates, Males in 1990

Residents of Mexico
Years of
Age Category
Schooling 16-24 25-34 35-44 45-54 55-65
0
1 to 4
5 to 8
9
10 to 11
12
13 to 15
16+

63.0
70.9
66.3
62.3
31.1
52.5
32.5
51.4

72.5
80.4
82.7
85.7
86.6
85.2
82.4
84.4

73.9
80.8
84.2
85.9
88.8
88.8
90.3
91.6

71.8
76.6
79.8
80.5
79.4
83.9
84.5
87.1

62.5
64.7
61.8
61.6
63.5
62.0
64.0
69.2

Recent U.S. Immigrants from Mexico
Age Category
16-24 25-34 35-44 45-54 55-65
76.2
80.5
83.1
80.8
79.2
82.7
83.3
77.6

85.4
89.0
89.9
89.1
89.5
90.2
91.6
89.7

85.9
89.3
88.8
89.7
87.6
90.3
91.4
93.6

84.4
84.3
86.8
83.4
83.9
88.4
84.6
88.3

71.3
73.8
72.5
69.8
75.8
72.1
81.0
89.7

Notes: This table shows the percentage of the population that reported positive labor
earnings in 1990 by age category and by highest year of schooling completed for
residents of Mexico and for recent Mexican immigrants in the United States (individuals
who arrived in the country during the period 1981-1990). Immigrants are individuals
aged 17 years or older at time of entry in the United States.
Table 4b: Labor-Force Participation Rates, Females in 1990

Residents of Mexico
Years of
Age Category
Schooling 16-24 25-34 35-44 45-54 55-65
0
1 to 4
5 to 8
9
10 to 11
12
13 to 15
16+

9.7
13.3
18.7
27.5
17.9
37.2
27.3
47.8

9.1
10.6
16.3
27.4
35.4
47.1
55.2
58.9

9.8
11.5
19.3
30.2
40.1
48.1
57.6
61.5

9.1
9.9
16.8
26.9
34.8
42.0
51.0
54.5

7.3
7.4
10.5
12.1
16.9
22.5
27.3
32.9

Recent U.S. Immigrants from Mexico
Age Category
16-24 25-34 35-44 45-54 55-65
34.8
33.2
38.5
40.5
40.4
46.9
49.8
41.7

41.6
46.5
48.7
50.0
48.5
52.1
55.4
55.0

48.8
54.3
52.5
55.1
50.3
57.9
58.0
65.1

39.5
45.6
48.7
54.5
63.0
50.2
60.7
54.9

15.4
25.5
29.2
37.6
38.3
27.4
41.6
34.4

Notes: See notes to Table 4a.

44

Table 5a: OLS Wage Regressions for Men, 1990
Mexican Mexican Immigrants
Other
U.S.
Residents Recent
All
Immigrants Natives
-1.748
1.228
1.033
0.959
0.198
(0.039)
(0.080)
(0.057)
(0.034)
(0.021)

Variable
Constant

High
Grade
Completed

1 to 4

0.123
(0.009)
0.267
(0.009)
0.420
(0.011)
0.547
(0.014)
0.662
(0.013)
0.857
(0.014)
1.133
(0.011)

0.041
(0.012)
0.101
(0.018)
0.052
(0.020)
0.124
(0.014)
0.198
(0.018)
0.391
(0.026)

0.068
(0.008)
0.142
(0.012)
0.124
(0.014)
0.182
(0.010)
0.266
(0.012)
0.471
(0.022)

0.028
(0.010)
0.043
(0.014)
0.106
(0.012)
0.183
(0.009)
0.307
(0.009)
0.637
(0.009)

0.051
(0.016)
0.143
(0.017)
0.184
(0.016)
0.328
(0.015)
0.438
(0.015)
0.716
(0.016)

Age

0.044
(0.002)

0.015
(0.004)

0.021
(0.003)

0.044
(0.002)

0.068
(0.001)

Age2/100

-0.045
(0.002)

-0.017
(0.005)

-0.027
(0.003)

-0.048
(0.002)

-0.066
(0.001)

0.122
(0.009)

0.123
(0.009)
0.256
(0.009)
0.349
(0.011)
0.430
(0.015)
0.503
(0.017)
0.112
42,514

0.094
(0.005)
0.212
(0.006)
0.321
(0.007)
0.395
(0.008)
0.473
(0.008)
0.244
134,403

0.213
450,756

5 to 8
9
10 to 11
12
13 to 15
16+

Imm.
Cohort

1981-84
1975-80
1971-74
1965-70
pre 1965

R Sqd.
N

0.235
98,139

0.045
19,940

45

Table 5b: OLS Wage Regressions for Women, 1990
Mexican Mexican Immigrants
Other
U.S.
Residents Recent
All
Immigrants Natives
-1.684
1.350
1.213
1.328
0.835
(0.069)
(0.130)
(0.083)
(0.036)
(0.025)

Variable
Constant

High
Grade

1 to 4

0.092
(0.019)
0.217
(0.017)
0.459
(0.020)
0.615
(0.023)
0.758
(0.019)
0.906
(0.020)
1.078
(0.019)

0.002
(0.017)
0.046
(0.026)
0.039
(0.030)
0.111
(0.020)
0.176
(0.027)
0.355
(0.039)

0.030
(0.011)
0.080
(0.017)
0.084
(0.022)
0.154
(0.013)
0.253
(0.017)
0.446
(0.031)

0.011
(0.010)
0.026
(0.013)
0.057
(0.012)
0.146
(0.008)
0.338
(0.009)
0.625
(0.009)

-0.019
(0.021)
0.002
(0.022)
0.041~
(0.020)
0.214
(0.020)
0.396
(0.020)
0.736
(0.020)

Age

0.043
(0.003)

0.002
(0.007)

0.008
(0.004)

0.013
(0.002)

0.034
(0.001)

Age2/100

-0.044
(0.004)

0.000
(0.009)

-0.009
(0.005)

-0.016
(0.002)

-0.033
(0.001)

0.060
(0.013)

0.064
(0.013)
0.146
(0.014)
0.216
(0.016)
0.245
(0.020)
0.272
(0.023)
0.061
20,560

0.113
(0.006)
0.221
(0.007)
0.282
(0.007)
0.319
(0.008)
0.335
(0.008)
0.182
117,187

0.176
404,792

5 to 8
9
10 to 11
12
13 to 15
16+

Imm.
Cohort

1981-84
1975-80
1971-74
1965-70
pre 1965

R Sqd.
N

0.230
29,193

0.032
8,689

46

Notes to Table 5:
Reported coefficients are for OLS regressions using the log average hourly wage as the
dependent variable. Heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors are in parentheses.
The samples are individuals 25-65 years of age who are residents of Mexico (column 1),
Mexican immigrants in the United States who arrived during the period 1981-1990
(column 2), all Mexican immigrants in the United States (column 3), other (non-Mexicoborn) immigrants in the United States (column 4), or native-born U.S. residents (column
5). Immigrant samples exclude individuals aged 16 years or less at time of entry in the
United States. The Mexican-resident sample excludes individuals with hourly wages less
than $0.10 or greater than $20 and U.S.-resident samples exclude individuals with hourly
wages less than $1 or greater than $100 (monetary units are 1990 dollars). Additional
regressors (not shown) are dummy variables for marital status and residence in a
metropolitan area (all columns), dummy variables for race (columns 4 and 5), and
dummy variables for year of entry in the United States (columns 2-4).

47

Table 6:
Predicted Wages for Mexican Immigrants and Wage Quintiles in Mexico

Wage Quintile for
Residents of Mexico
1

% of Mex. Immigrants with Predicted Wages in Quintile
Men
Women
All
Recent
All
Recent
Immigrants Immigrants Immigrants Immigrants
18.6
19.1
19.3
23.1

2

17.2

17.8

29.6

28.5

3

21.8

20.2

20.3

19.0

4

23.2

26.4

17.5

19.2

5

19.2

16.5

13.3

10.2

This table shows how Mexican immigrants in the United States would be distributed
across wage quintiles for residents of Mexico, where the quintiles go from lowest to
highest earnings. Quintiles are constructed using an OLS wage equation estimated on
residents of Mexico to predict within sample wages. The same OLS wage equation is
then used to predict wages for Mexican immigrants in the United States. See the text for
details on the estimation.
Table 7: Distribution of the Mexican Migration Project Sample by Schooling

Schooling (%)
0-1 years
2-4 years
5-6 years
7-9 years
10-12 years
13 or more years
% of trips to U.S. involving illegal entry

Migrants

Non-migrants

27.1
32.6
23.1
8.9
4.3
4.1

23.3
22.1
22.5
11.7
8.1
12.3

60.8

---

Notes: This table is reproduced from Orrenius (1999). The sample consists of head of
household males between 15 and 65 years of age, surveyed between 1987-1995 in 35
communities in western Mexico.

48

Figure 1

lnw

µ 0 + δ 0s
µ1 + δ1s − e µ π

µ1 − e µ π
µ0

s*

s

Figure 2

49

µ 0 + δ 0s

lnw

µ1 + δ1s − e µ π − δ π s

µ0
µ1 − e µ π

sL

sU

s

50

Figure 3a: U.S. and Mexico Wage Distributions 1990, Males
Actual density: Mex Imm in US

Actual density: Mex Residents

1
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
0
-3

-2

-1

0

1
lnw

2

3

4

5

Figure 3b: U.S. and Mexico Wage Distributions 1990, Females
Actual density: Mex Imm in US

Actual density: Mex Residents

1
.9
.8
.7
.6
.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
0
-3

-2

-1

0

1
lnw

2

3

4

5

51

Figure 4: Predicted U.S.-Mexico Hourly Wage Differentials, 1990
(1990 U.S. dollars)
Males, 9 years of school

Males, 12 years of school
Males, 16+ years of school
5

4

4

US Wage - Mexico Wage

US Wage - Mexico Wage

Males, 5-8 years of school
Males, 10-11 years of school
5

3

2

3

2

1

1
25

35

45

Age

Females, 5-8 years of school
Females, 10-11 years of school

25

55

35

Females, 9 years of school

45

Age

Females, 12 years of school
Females, 16+ years of school

5

5

4

4

US Wage - Mexico Wage

US Wage - Mexico Wage

Males, 13-15 years of school

3

2

55

Females, 13-15 years of school

3

2

1

1
25

35

45

Age

25

55

35

45

Age

55

Figure 5: Predicted Probability of Migration, 1990
Grade 0, males
Grade 5-8, males

Grade 1-4, males
Grade 9, males

Grade 10-11, males
Grade 13-15, males

.14

.14

.12

.12

.1

.1

.08

.08

.06

.06

.04

.04

.02

.02

0

Grade 12, males
Grade 16+, males

0
15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

45

Grade 0, females
Grade 5-8, females

50

55

60

15

65

Grade 1-4, females
Grade 9, females

20

25

30

35

40
Age

45

Grade 10-11, females
Grade 13-15, females

.1

.1

.08

.08

.06

.06

.04

.04

.02

.02

0

50

55

60

65

60

65

Grade 12, females
Grade 16+, females

0
15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

45

50

55

60

65

15

20

25

30

35

40
Age

45

50

55

52

Figure 6a: Counterfactual Wage Densities for Mexican Immigrant Males, 1990
(Based on skill prices in Mexico)
Actual density: Mex Residents

Counterfactual: Mex Imm in US

.6

.5

.4

.3

.2

.1

0
-3

-2

-1

0
lnw

1

2

3

Figure 6b: Counterfactual Wage Densities for Mexican Immigrant Females, 1990
(Based on skill prices in Mexico)
Actual density: Mex Residents

Counterfactual: Mex Imm in US

.6

.5

.4

.3

.2

.1

0
-3

-2

-1

0
lnw

1

2

3

53

Figure 7a: Counterfactual Wage Densities for Mexican Immigrant Males, 1990

(Correcting for Undercounted Illegal Immigrants)
Actual density: Mex Residents

Counterfactual: Mex Imm in US

.6

.5

.4

.3

.2

.1

0
-3

-2

-1

0
lnw

1

2

3

Figure 7b: Counterfactual Wage Densities for Mexican Immigrant Females, 1990
(Correcting for Undercounted Illegal Immigrants)
Actual density: Mex Residents

Counterfactual: Mex Imm in US

.6

.5

.4

.3

.2

.1

0
-3

-2

-1

0
lnw

1

2

3

54

Figure 8a: Counterfactual Wage Densities for Mexican Resident Males, 1990

(Based on U.S. skill prices)
A ctual density: Mex Imm in US

Counterf actual: Mex Residents

1

.8

.6

.4

.2

0
0

1

2

lnw

3

4

4.6

Figure 8b: Counterfactual Wage Densities for Mexican Resident Females, 1990

(Based on U.S. skill prices)
A ctual density: Mex Imm in US

Counterf actual: Mex Residents

1

.8

.6

.4

.2

0
0

1

2

lnw

3

4

4.6

55

