                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                INFORMATION CONTENT OF EQUITY ANALYST REPORTS


                                             Paul Asquith
                                           Michael B. Mikhail
                                             Andrea S. Au


                                          Working Paper 9246
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9246


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




We wish to thank SP Kothari, Grace Pownall, Philip Stocken, Beverly Walther, Richard Willis, and workshop
participants at MIT, Wharton, the SECARC, and the AAA Annual Meeting for helpful comments and
suggestions. We also acknowledge the research assistance of Jeff Braun. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Paul Asquith, Michael B. Mikhail and Andrea S. Au. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Information Content of Equity Analyst Reports
Paul Asquith, Michael B. Mikhail and Andrea S. Au
NBER Working Paper No. 9246
October 2002
JEL No. G11, G14, G24, M41

                                       ABSTRACT


       This paper investigates the market reaction to the information released in security analyst
reports. It shows that the market reacts significantly and positively to changes in recommendation
levels, earnings forecasts, and price targets. While changes in price targets and earnings forecasts
both provide information to the market, revisions in price targets have a larger and more significant
impact than comparable revisions in earnings forecasts. The text of the report is also a significant
source of information as it provides the justifications supporting an analyst’s summary opinion.
When all of this information is considered simultaneously, some of it, notably the earnings forecasts,
is subsumed. The results further show that analysts correctly predict price targets slightly over 50%
of the time. Finally, the valuation methodology used does not seem to be correlated with either the
market’s reaction or the analyst’s accuracy.



Paul Asquith                                                          Michael B. Mikhail
Sloan School of Management                                            Fuqua School of Business
Massachusetts Institute of Technology                                 Duke University
50 Memorial Drive                                                     Box 90120
Cambridge, MA 02142                                                   Durham, NC 27708
and NBER                                                              mmikhail@duke.edu
pasquith@mit.edu

Andrea S. Au
Sloan School of Management
Massachusetts Institute of Technology
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
andreau@mit.edu
1.      Introduction

        This paper investigates the association between market returns and the content of security

analysts’ reports. In addition, it provides the first detailed catalog of the elements in a typical

analyst report. An analyst’s report is the culmination of a process that includes the collection,

evaluation, and dissemination of information related to a firm’s future performance. The

majority of these reports include three key summary elements: earnings forecasts, a stock

recommendation - such as buy, sell, or hold - and a price target. In addition, many reports

present extensive quantitative and descriptive analysis supporting these summary elements.1

        Previous research on analyst reports primarily examines revisions in only the first two

summary elements: stock recommendations and earnings forecasts. We extend this research by

incorporating the contents of analyst reports in their entirety rather than just individual elements

such as the summary recommendation. One problem in evaluating stock recommendations alone

is that there are a limited number of recommendation levels. For example, although analysts

have five distinct recommendations - strong buy, buy, hold, sell, and strong sell - at their

disposal, they are generally reluctant to use the two negative ratings.2 By incorporating the
gradations available in the analysts’ price targets and the reports’ contents, we overcome many

of the disadvantages caused by the use of a few discrete recommendation categories.3 Our

approach to this analysis is captured by the quote “In the end, stock ratings and target prices are

just the skin and bones of analysts’ research. The meat of such reports is in the analysis, detail,




1
  Recently some firms have announced that they will to expand this list of summary elements to include information
such as the projected price volatility and the stock’s dividend outlook. See “Merrill Lynch Announces Major
Changes to Stock Ratings and Compensation Systems for Research Analysts.”
2
  An often-cited rationale for this avoidance is that an analyst’s salary and bonus may be linked to quantifiable
measures such as his firm’s underwriting fees or commissions generated by his recommendations, outcomes that
may be facilitated by the issuance of favorable reports. In addition, analysts traditionally relied on company
management for information and thus had a reason to maintain good relations with them. The 2000 SEC Regulation
FD, which requires firms to publicly disseminate all material information, presumably reduces this incentive.
3
  Mikhail, Walther, and Willis (2002) report that approximately 55% of all recommendations are buys or strong
buys, 39% are holds and only 6% are sells or strong sells. See also Barber, Lehavy, McNichols, and Trueman
(2001). Recent announcements by Wall Street Firms to change to only three ratings codify their actual behavior.
See “Should You Trust Wall Street’s New Ratings?”


                                                                                                                 1
and tone.4” This is especially true for reiterations, which represent almost two thirds of the

analyst reports in our database.

           Using a database constructed from analyst reports issued during 1997-1999, we examine

if, after controlling for changes in earnings forecasts and summary recommendations, the

market’s response to the release of a security analyst report varies with price target changes and

other information contained in the report. Our analysis shows that changes in the summary stock

recommendations, earnings forecasts, and price targets all provide independent information to

the capital markets. In particular, incorporating changes in analyst price targets dramatically

increases the fit of our regression results over that obtained from earnings forecast revisions and

discrete recommendations alone.

           Adding proxies for other information in a report, such as the strength of the written

arguments made to support an analyst’s opinion, significantly alters our results. As expected, the

stronger the justifications provided in the report, the larger the market’s reaction to the report.

After including this additional information in our model, our results show that although the

market reaction is still correlated with changes in price targets, the significance of earnings

forecast revisions decreases. Moreover, while our recommendation downgrades remain

statistically negative, the significance of recommendation upgrades is eliminated. Recent

reductions in the recommendation levels used by some firms (e.g., from five to three by Merrill

Lynch and Goldman Sachs) will likely further increase the market’s reaction to price targets and

other information contained in analyst reports.5

           We extend our analysis to examine if the market treats an analyst’s report differently

based on the type of recommendation revision. For example, is a change in a firm’s price target,

earnings forecasts or an analyst’s justifications for an opinion more important in a report that

reiterates an old recommendation or in a report that provides an upgrade or downgrade? We find


4
    See “When a Stock’s Rating and Target Collide.”
5
    See “Should You Trust Wall Street’s New Ratings?”



                                                                                                      2
that the contents of an analyst’s report receive the most scrutiny in the case of downgrades. The

changes in a firm’s price target, earnings forecasts and the strength of a report’s arguments are

all positively correlated with the market’s response. Also, the coefficient on our proxy for a

relationship between a brokerage and a firm under analysis is statistically negative. This

suggests that the market discounts good news and amplifies bad news when the brokerage is not

independent of the firm. The strength of an analyst’s arguments and price target changes are also

important in the case of reiterations. However, the market places little weight on these examined

factors in the case of upgrades.

       Finally, we examine the accuracy of price targets and the effects of the valuation

methodology employed by an analyst. We consider a price target prediction to be accurate if the

analyzed firm’s stock price equals the projected price at any time during the 12-month period

following the release of a report. Using this definition of accuracy, we find that approximately

54% of analysts’ price targets are achieved or exceeded. The remaining 46% of firms achieve an

average of 84% of the price target within 12 months. The level of optimism exhibited by an

analyst, as measured by the projected change in a firm’s stock price, appears to be inversely

related to the probability of achieving a particular target.

       We find that the valuation methodology used by analysts is not significant in explaining

either the market’s reaction to the analyst’s recommendations or to their accuracy in predicting

price targets. In fact, most analysts use a simple earnings multiple valuation model. Only a

minority use Net Present Value or other discounted cash flow approaches favored by finance

textbooks and MBA curriculums.

       In Section 2 we summarize prior research. Section 3 describes the data and sample

selection criteria as well as a typical analyst report. We discuss our empirical results in Section

4. Sections 5 and 6 provide results on price target accuracy and valuation methodologies and

Section 7 concludes.




                                                                                                      3
2.      Prior Research

        Over the past two decades, security analysts’ reports have been the subject of extensive

empirical and experimental work. These prior investigations are primarily related to either the

market’s reaction to earnings forecast revisions or revisions in analysts’ recommendations. Most

of this work shows positive (negative) abnormal returns for upward (downward) earnings

forecast revisions or new buy (sell) recommendations. For example, Abdel-Khalik and Ajinkya

(1982) find significant abnormal returns during the publication week of forecast revisions by

Merrill Lynch analysts. Similarly, Lys and Sohn (1990) present evidence consistent with

forecast revisions having information content (see also Stickel (1991)).

         Research examining short-window returns associated with revisions in analyst

recommendations has also found a positive association between abnormal returns and the

direction of a recommendation change. Lloyd Davies and Canes (1978) indirectly examine the

market reaction to security analyst recommendations by studying stock suggestions appearing in

the Wall Street Journal’s “Heard on the Street” column. They find an event day return of 0.93%

(-2.37%) for new buy (sell) recommendations.6 More recently, Womack (1996) uses First Call
data to directly examine price reactions for stock recommendation changes to and from the most

extreme buy and sell categories. He finds that stocks added to (removed from) strong buy lists

earned size adjusted returns of 2.98% (-1.94%) while stocks added to (removed from) strong sell

lists earned size adjusted returns of -4.69% (0.32%) in the 3-day event period surrounding the

release of the recommendation revision. In most of these studies, reiterations of a previous

forecast or recommendation are ignored. In this paper, by examining the content of an analyst

report beyond the summary recommendation, we are able to draw conclusions about reiterations

as well as revisions.

        Our work is also related to research investigating security returns conditional on

examining both earnings forecast and recommendation revisions simultaneously. For example,

6
 See also Bjerring, Lakonishok, and Vermaelen (1983), Elton, Gruber, and Grossman (1986), Liu, Smith, and Syed
(1990), Beneish (1991), and Stickel (1995).


                                                                                                                 4
Francis and Soffer (1997) find that neither earnings forecast revisions nor stock

recommendations completely incorporate the information in the other signal. They also show

that when a report is summarized by a favorable stock recommendation, investors rely on

earnings forecast revisions to a greater extent. Stickel (1995), in addition to the summary

recommendation and earnings forecast revisions, includes proxies for the magnitude of the

recommendation revision, the analyst’s reputation, the size of the analyst’s brokerage house, and

the analyzed firm’s information environment. His results are consistent with those of Francis

and Soffer indicating that earnings forecast revisions are informative even in the presence of a

summary recommendation. He also finds that company size and analyst reputation affect returns

for buy recommendations, while the magnitude of the recommendation revision and brokerage

size affect returns for sell recommendations.

       Although Francis and Soffer and Stickel’s studies include a broad cross-section of

potential factors (other than price targets), which could contribute to the market’s reaction to a
                                  2                                            2
new recommendation, adjusted R s for their models are low. The adjusted R for Stickle’s study
is 1% for his buy regression and 2% for his sell regression, suggesting that important pieces of
                                                                2
the puzzle were missing. Francis and Soffer get an adjusted R of 5% for their complete cross-

sectional model. In this paper, we investigate the effects of additional report information, not

included in earlier work, such as price targets and the strength of the arguments made. These
                                                       2
additional sources of information result in adjusted R s of over 24%.

       Finally, our work is related to Hirst, Koonce, and Simko (1995) who use an experimental

setting to investigate how potential investors assess the information contained in security

analysts’ reports conditional on the characteristics of both the analyst and the report. They alter

the source of the report (independent brokerage or analyzed firm’s investment bank), the report’s

conclusions (favorable or unfavorable), and the strength of the arguments made in the report

(strong or weak). Based on psychology research, they predict and find that when an unfavorable

report is issued, investors seek out other information to corroborate the unfavorable news.




                                                                                                      5
        In particular, Hirst, Koonce, and Simko find that when a report is unfavorable the

strength of the arguments contained in an analyst’s report affects investors’ judgments. This

result conflicts with Francis and Soffer (1997) who find that investors are more likely to rely on

other information in cases of good news reports. Furthermore, Hirst, Koonce, and Simko report

that experimental investors react more strongly to negative reports from analysts who lack

independence. The effects associated with a lack of independence are similar to those found in

Michaely and Womack (1999), which documents that the mean excess returns around a buy

recommendation revision are lower when the recommendation is made by an underwriter than by

an unaffiliated brokerage.

       Two other recent papers incorporate price targets. Bradshaw (2002) documents a

correlation between price targets, recommendations, and earnings based measures on a sample of

103 analyst reports. Brav and Lehavy (2001), using a large database of price targets, find a

significant market reaction to price targets both unconditionally and conditional on

contemporaneous recommendation and earnings forecast revisions. They also regress these three
                             2
variables and find adjusted R s of almost 8%. Our paper differs in that we examine a large
sample of actual analyst reports and our analysis provides information beyond earnings forecasts,

recommendations, and price targets. We demonstrate that other information, such as the strength

of the analyst’s justifications, are also important and actually subsume some of the information

available in earnings forecasts and recommendation revisions.



3.     Sample Selection and Data Description

3.1.   Sample selection

       Our analysis uses a total of 1,126 complete analysts’ reports written by 56 unique sell-

side analysts from 11 different investment banks covering 46 industries as provided by the

Investext database. Investext features current research reports from more than 630 investment

banks, brokerage houses, and research firms worldwide including, but not limited to, Credit

Suisse First Boston, Lehman Brothers, Merrill Lynch, Morgan Stanley Dean Witter, and


                                                                                                     6
Salomon Smith Barney. Each report was read in its entirety and coded by hand for 30 separate

data fields.

         There are a number of financial databases that catalog and summarize earnings forecasts

and analyst recommendations (e.g., Zacks Investment Research and I/B/E/S). To the best of our

knowledge, however, there are currently no databases that provide similarly compiled

information that includes analyst price targets and other information, such as valuation

methodologies or justifications for recommendations made, typically found in an analyst report.

The only way to collect this information is to read individual analyst reports and hand code the

contents. To generate our sample, we select equity analyst reports that were written in 1997,

1998, or 1999 by a member of Institutional Investor’s All-America Research Team.7 We chose
these analysts because they have been independently recognized as top analysts in their given

industries. Furthermore, prior research finds that All-America Research Team members supply

more accurate earnings forecasts than other analysts (e.g., Stickel (1992)) and their

recommendation revisions result in a stronger stock market reaction than that observed for a

typical analyst (see Stickel (1995)).

         During our sample period, the number of analysts receiving top honors in the Institutional

Investor survey each year ranged from 76 to 84. However, since many analysts were multiple

year winners, only 153 unique analysts are represented in our sample. In addition to being

written bya recent All-America Research Team member, the report must also be available

through both the Zacks Investment Research (Zacks) and Investext Databases. When we began

our initial analysis, Investext did not allow users to search reports by analyst. As a result, we

used Zacks to generate a list of reports written by our sample of analysts.8 Zacks identified

approximately 7,100 reports that met our year and analyst criteria. These analyst reports



7
  To qualify for inclusion in the sample, an analyst must have achieved at least one “First Team” ranking during
1996-1999.
8
  Investext has since released a newer version that provides more search alternatives including a category for report
author.


                                                                                                                        7
consisted of both company and industry reports.9 All of these analyst reports were then cross-

referenced in the Investext database using company and brokerage identifiers as well as report

dates obtained from Zacks.

         In our matching, 21 analysts could not be included in our sample because the investment

firms that employ them do not provide reports to Investext (e.g., Goldman Sachs). We realize

that this introduces a potential bias into our sample, as only firms willing to make their reports

publicly available are included within our sample. Moreover, five of the 99 industries for which

Institutional Investor issues a ranking, Accounting and Tax Policy, Convertibles, Equity

Derivatives, Multi-Industry, and Quantitative Research, do not require that analysts follow any

specifically identified firms. We excluded these categories, which represented seven additional

analysts, from our sample. In total, we omit 28 analysts from our All-America Research Team

sample, leaving 125 unique analysts.

         Unfortunately, the Investext database is less complete than Zacks and we were only able

to find a subset of the Zacks reports.10 More specifically, Investext contains fewer analysts and
does not contain as many reports by the analysts it does list. Of the analyst reports listed in

Zacks, the percentages found in Investext were less than 13.1%, 12.4%, and 50.3% in 1997, 98,

and 99 respectively. Our final sample includes 1,126 reports consisting of 262 upgrades, 739

reiterations, and 125 downgrades, written by 56 analysts.

         Having identified our sample, the primary challenge remaining was determining the

correct announcement date for each report. Firms often release key information contained in the

analyst report before the actual report is dated and made available. As a consequence, the

announcement dates given by many analyst databases, including Zacks, often differ from the



9
  We omit Industry reports from our sample. We find that these reports did not usually contain new company
specific information but rather served as a summary across several firms. Furthermore, if an analyst reported new
information about a company and/or changed his recommendations in an industry report, he usually issued a
concurrent separate company report as well.
10
   Zacks also appears to be incomplete. Investext contains some reports by particular analysts that were not
identified in our search of Zacks. In both Investext and Zacks, coverage significantly improves in the latter part of
our sample period.


                                                                                                                        8
date given on the report.11 Obtaining the correct date is clearly important, given that our analysis

involves examining the market reaction to information releases from the reports. We explored

various sources of news releases including Dow Jones and Lexis-Nexus, as well as finance

websites such as Yahoo, to determine the correct information announcement date for a random

sample of 50 reports. We found that Zacks was particularly accurate in reporting

recommendation release dates and thus we used its dates as our announcement dates whenever

possible.



3.2.     Typical analyst report

         Table 1, Panels A and B, presents summary statistics on average values and frequency of

reporting for several of the data fields that we collect from each analyst report. All reports

contain a summary stock recommendation and our table is organized by recommendation

category, such as upgrade to strong buy or downgrade to hold, as well as by the combined

categories all upgrades, all reiterations, or all downgrades, and a total sample column.12 The
majority of the reports also include summary earnings forecasts and price targets. Additional

data included in each report in support of the authoring analyst’s forecasts and opinions are

presented in Table 1. These include the prevalence of accounting statement forecasts and

segment data analyses, data regarding relationships between the analyst’s brokerage and the firm,

data regarding the valuation methods employed, and the analyst’s qualitative justifications of his

or her recommendation.

         Consistent with other studies and recent press reports, we find that analysts rarely issue

sell or strong sell recommendations. Line 2 of Table 1, Panel A, shows that only 0.5% of the

recommendations in our sample fall into these two categories. In contrast, 30.8% of the


11
   In our sample 58.6% of all report dates matched the announcement date exactly, leaving 41.4% of the analyst
reports dated differently from the Zacks dates. Of the reports where dates differed, 92% of the time the report date
fell after the corresponding Zacks date.
12
   An analyst’s report generally indicates whether its recommendation is an upgrade, downgrade or reiteration. In
cases where the previous recommendation is indeterminate, we use the previous recommendation as conveyed by
Zacks to classify the report.


                                                                                                                       9
recommendations are classified as strong buy, 40.0% as buy, and 28.7% as hold. We also find

that the majority of reports issued across all recommendations are reiterations. The last three

columns before the Total column in Table 1, Panel A, show that upgrades, downgrades, and

reiterations represent 23.3%, 11.1%, and 65.6% of our sample, respectively.

        One hundred percent of our reports contain a summary stock recommendation and almost

all reports also provide EPS forecasts; 99.1% for the current fiscal year and 95.3% for at least

one subsequent year. There is no notable difference in the percentage of reports that contain

one-year earnings forecasts across recommendation types. At 89.6%, the downgrade to hold

recommendations are the only category of subsequent year forecasts to fall below 90%.

        Price targets, which are the analyst’s price forecasts, are only present in 72.6% of

analysts’ reports. They are given as either a point estimate or a range that the stock price is

expected to achieve within the next 12 months. Price targets, while not as common as

recommendations or earnings forecasts in the total sample, are even less frequent for unfavorable

reports. In our sample, while over 90% of all strong buy or buy recommendations include price

targets, only 11.1% of hold reiterations and 50.6% of hold downgrades include these projections.

Overall, 95.8% of upgrades, 65.5% of reiterations, and 65.6% of downgrades include price

forecasts. It appears that analysts’ reluctance to issue negative information via downgrades

extends to price targets as well, although not as strongly. In fact, 62.8% of downgrades that do

not include a price target in the current report had one in the prior report. In light of recent

events, some investment banks are specifically requiring their analyst to disclose price targets in

reports with a positive recommendation (e.g., Merrill Lynch). In addition, these banks are

including a stock chart indicating the points at which they changed their recommendations or

price targets.13

        The projected stock price increase, i.e. the percentage the price target is above the current

price, varies systematically across recommendation categories. For example the third line under

13
 See “ Merrill Lynch Announces Major Changes to Stock Ratings and Compensation Systems for Research
Analysts.”


                                                                                                      10
the category Price Targets in Table 1, Panel A, shows that the average projected increase over

the current stock price for an upgrade to strong buy or buy are 34.6% and 22.6%, respectively.

Interestingly, reiterations have even higher stock price increases than upgrades for each

recommendation category. For the entire sample, reiterations project an average 36.6% increase

while upgrades project a 28.9% average increase. Price targets below current market price are

fairly uncommon. Even in unfavorable reports such as a downgrade to hold, the average

projected increase is a positive 5.5%.

       In addition to price targets and earnings forecasts, we compile information on income

statements, balance sheets, statements of cash flow, and segment forecasts. Based on our

sample, financial statement forecasts are not disclosed as frequently as earnings or price

forecasts. Of the reports in our sample, 28.5% contain income statement forecasts, 5.1% contain

balance sheet forecasts, and 17.1% contain statement of cash flow forecasts. Although the

percentages of upgrade and downgrade reports that contain financial statement forecasts are

similar (46.6% and 40.0%, respectively), these percentages are much higher than those of

reiterated reports, which contain these forecasts only 20.1% of the time. Very few analyst

reports contain geographic (3.6%), product (4.2%), or segment information (10.0%).

       We also collect information on existing relationships between the company and the

investment bank writing the report. Analysts are required to provide this information in their

report. Of the firms examined, 52.5% have an underwriting relationship with the analyst’s

brokerage. The underwriting relationship is similar across both upgrades and reiterations at

53%. Downgrades are only slightly less frequent with an underwriting relationship in 46.4% of

the cases examined. Differences in current holdings are more varied. Investment banks have

holdings in 84.2% of the firms analyzed. Holdings of company stock exist in 68.3%, 63.2% and

93.4% of upgrades, downgrades and reiterations, respectively.

       Next, we document the valuation methods used by the analysts in Table 1, Panel A, under

the category Valuation Models. We find that 99.1% of analysts mention they use some sort of

earnings multiple (e.g., a price to earnings ratio, a price to EBIT multiple, or a relative price to


                                                                                                       11
earnings ratio). Only 12.8% of analysts report using any variation of discounted cash flow in

computing their price targets. Notably, the discounted cash flow method is much more prevalent

in downgraded reports, 20.8% compared to 13.7% and 11.1% in upgrades and reiterations,

respectively. Valuation models based on asset multiples are used in 25.1% of all reports and

22.9%, 27.6% and 15.2% of upgrades, reiterations and downgrades, respectively. Very few

analysts use alternative valuation methodologies. Other valuation methods not falling into one of

the three categories discussed above are observed in less than 3.6% of our sample. All analysts

who mention a valuation method use an earnings multiple. That is, the 0.9% that do not mention

an earnings multiple do not mention any valuation method.

        Finally, Table 1, Panel B, catalogs the analyst’s qualitative justifications of his or her

recommendation. Positive and negative remarks are recorded for sixteen specific criteria: value,

relative value, sales growth, earnings growth, new product introductions, new projects, cost

efficiencies, expectations met, mergers and acquisitions, repurchase programs, industry climate,

management, international operations, leverage, competition, and risk. Only 3% of our sample

(34 reports) do not contain some justification of the recommendations.



3.3.    Model variables

        Our empirical analyses require us to calculate several variables not directly provided in

the analyst reports we examine (see Table 1, Panel C). The first model variable we compute is

the percentage change in an analyst’s earnings forecast for a firm (EARN_REV). This is the

new earnings forecast divided by the old earnings forecast minus 1. Since the current report does

not usually contain the previous earnings forecast, we collect previous earnings forecasts from

Investext, from the report immediately preceding the one in our sample. We obtain previous

earnings forecasts for 1,029 reports, 91.4% of our sample.14 We find an average earnings


14
  We cannot be certain that the earnings forecast we obtained is from the report immediately prior to our sample
report due to reports missing on Investext, however errors from obtaining earlier forecasts should weaken our
results. This is discussed further in the results section.


                                                                                                                   12
forecast change of 4.1% and 4.0% for strong buy and buy upgrades, respectively. In contrast,

unfavorable reports such as a downgrade to buy or hold generally experience reductions in

forecasted earnings. Downgrades to buy result in an average reduction in earnings forecasts of

7.3%, while downgrades to hold experience a reduction of 4.5%. Overall, upgrades,

downgrades, and reiterations experience earnings forecast changes of 4.1%, -2.1%, and -3.6%

respectively.

         The second model variable we compute is the percentage change in an analyst’s price

target forecast for a firm (TGT_REV). This is the new price target divided by the old price

target minus 1. Since the current report rarely contains the previous price target, we collect

previous price target information, as available from Investext as described above. We obtain

previous price targets for 664 reports or 59.0% of our sample.15 We find an average price target
change of 2.8% for the total sample. The average price target changes are 13.8% and 5.5% for

strong buy and buy upgrades, respectively. In contrast, we find price target changes of only

1.0% and 2.7% for strong buy and buy reiterations. Downgrades to buy result in an average

reduction in price targets of 7.0%, while downgrades to hold experience an average reduction of

7.5%. Overall, upgrades, downgrades, and reiterations experience average price target changes

of 11.4%, -7.3%, and 1.9%, respectively. Except for downgrades to hold and strong sell, the

average price target revisions are more positive than average earnings forecast revisions.

Earnings forecast revisions and price target changes are the only model variables not computed

for every report in our sample.

         To measure the relationship between the firm analyzed and the analyst’s employer, we

construct another model variable, a proxy for underwriter affiliation (UND_HLD). This

indicator variable takes on a value of 0 if no relationship between the analyst’s brokerage and the

firm exists, 1 if the brokerage is an underwriter of the firm or has current holdings in the firm,


15
  We cannot be certain that the price target we obtained is from the report immediately prior to our sample report
due to reports missing on Investext, however errors from obtaining earlier targets should weaken our results. This is
discussed further in the results section.


                                                                                                                   13
and 2 if the brokerage is both an underwriter and has current holdings. The average UND_HLD

is similar for upgrades and downgrades with a value of 1.2 and 1.1, respectively. Reiterations

are slightly higher with an average value of 1.5.

         We model the analyst’s qualitative justifications for his or her opinion by constructing a

“strength of arguments” variable (STR_ARG). This variable is computed by aggregating the

number of positive remarks less the number of negative remarks from Table 1, Panel B. In

general, upgrades have an average strength value of 4.8 compared to 2.1 for reiterations and -0.3

for downgrades. It is notable that downgrades still result in an average score close to zero. This

is consistent with the desire to minimize management retaliation since company management is a

key source of information and future underwriting business.

         Next, we measure the market’s reaction to the release of analyst reports with CAR, our

fifth model variable. CAR is the five-day market adjusted cumulative abnormal return centered

on the report release date. The average mean CAR for all firms in our sample is a negligible

0.5%. Consistent with our expectations and prior research, we find a statistically positive

average mean return of 4.5% for upgrades, a statistically significant mean return of -6.6% for

downgrades and an insignificant mean reaction of 0.3% for reiterations. Breaking up report

types into specific summary categories yields similar results. Upgrades to strong buy and buy

result in significant mean returns of 4.7% and 4.1%, respectively. Downgrades to buy and hold

result in significant negative mean returns of -7.0% and -6.4%, on average. The mean CARs for

upgrades and downgrades are all statistically different from zero with a two-tailed probability

less than 0.01. Reiterations are generally small and insignificant with one exception: reiterations

of hold recommendations have an average mean return of -1.1%. Reports representing hold

upgrades, sell and strong sell downgrades or reiterations have too few observations to draw any

reliable conclusions as to average market reactions.16
16
  We find that a particular report’s direction (e.g., upgrade, downgrade, or reiteration) tends to dominate the specific
recommendation level. The differences in the observed market reaction between strong buy upgrades and buy
upgrades, buy downgrades and hold downgrades, or strong buy reiterations versus buy reiterations are all
insignificant. As such, although we provide descriptive statistics for reports categorized by both report type and
summary recommendation, our primary empirical tests are performed on reports categorized by direction only.


                                                                                                                     14
4.     Empirical results

4.1.   Earnings, recommendations, and price target revisions

       We first replicate prior research on our sample and document that the market reacts to

earnings forecast and recommendation revisions contained in a security analyst report at the time

of its release. Market reaction is measured by five-day market adjusted returns centered on the

report’s release date. This allows for possible delays by a brokerage in delivering its forecasts to

Zacks or for leaks of the information prior to its public release. We then investigate whether this

reaction is affected by revisions in a firm’s price target. Later in this section we also investigate

whether the strength of the arguments used in the report or the presence of an underwriting

relationship or current holdings affect the market’s reaction.

       Table 2 estimates the following regression using ordinary least squares:

CARj,t = α0 + α1EARN_REVj,t + α2UP_GRj,t + α3DOWN_GRj,t + α4TGT_REVj,t
                 + α5 STR_ARGj,t + α6 UND_HLDj,t + εj,t                                             (1)

where the variables are defined as follows:

CARj,t =           five-day market adjusted cumulative abnormal return for firm j centered on
                   the report release date t;

EARN_REVj,t = Percentage change in the analyst’s earnings forecast for firm j at time t
              computed as [(earnings forecast at time t / earnings forecast at time t-1) – 1];

UP_GRj,t =         a variable taking on the value 1 for reports issued for firm j at time t that
                   indicates the analyst’s recommendation has been upgraded, 0 otherwise;

DOWN_GRj,t =       a variable taking on the value 1 for reports issued for firm j at time t that
                   indicates the analyst’s recommendation has been downgraded, 0 otherwise;

TGT_REVj,t =       Percentage change in the analyst’s projected price target for firm j at time t
                   computed as [(price target at time t / price target at time t-1) – 1];

STR_ARGj,t =       a variable computed by aggregating the number of positive remarks less the
                   number of negative remarks related to 16 specific criteria: value, relative
                   value, sales growth, earnings growth, new product introductions, new
                   projects, cost efficiencies, expectations met, mergers and acquisitions,
                   repurchase programs, industry climate, management, international operations,
                   leverage, competition, and risk;


                                                                                                    15
UND_HLDj,t =           a variable taking on the value 0 if no relationship between the analyst’s
                       brokerage and the firm exists, 1 if the brokerage is an underwriter of the firm
                       or has current holdings in the firm, and 2 if the brokerage is both an
                       underwriter and has current holdings;

εj,t =                 assumed normally distributed error term with zero mean and constant
                       variance.


         This regression is estimated using EARN_REVj,t and TGT_REVj,t from prior reports

released within 60 days of our report. As described above, we collect prior earnings and price

targets from the same analyst’s Investext report immediately preceding ours. Since Investext is

not complete, i.e. it does not contain all reports, there is a chance that another report was released

after the prior report we collect. If so this will make our regression results weaker. Since an

analyst usually writes a minimum of six reports a year on the companies they follow, we do not

include revisions from prior reports issued more than 60 days before our report. This restriction

minimizes the effect of missing reports.17

         Columns 1, 2, and 3 of Table 2 present the results from estimating regressions for

earnings forecast revisions, recommendation revisions, and changes in price targets individually

(i.e., only including those proxy variables in the OLS regressions). If, as documented in prior

research, the market reacts to changes in earnings forecasts and the recommendation contained in

the typical security analyst report, the coefficients EARN_REV in column 1 and UP_GR in

column 2 will be positive while DOWN_GR in column 2 will be negative. If as predicted,

analyst price target revisions have information, TGT_REV in column 3 will be positive.

         Consistent with prior research, we find that the coefficient on EARN_REV is positive

and statistically significant, (0.0545, t = 2.81, one-tailed p < 0.01), suggesting that increases

(decreases) in earnings forecasts are associated with positive (negative) abnormal returns. Also

in agreement with existing work, we find that reiterations, upgrades, and downgrades are


17
  Using longer time periods, e.g. 60 to 90 days or all reports over 90 days, reduces the significance levels of the
variables EARN_REV and TGT_REV.


                                                                                                                      16
associated with insignificant, positive, and negative abnormal returns, respectively. The

intercept in column 2 is the mean abnormal return associated with a reiteration (-0.0044, t = -

1.12, two-tailed p > 0.10). Column 2A calculates the mean returns associated with an upgrade

(0.0473, F = 44.84, one-tailed p < 0.01) or downgrade (-0.0894, F = 66.77, one-tailed p < 0.01)

by summing (α0 + α2) and (α0 + α3), respectively.

       The results for price target revisions are reported in column 3. As predicted, TGT_REV

is positive and statistically significant consistent with an association between positive (negative)

abnormal returns and increasing (decreasing) price targets (0.3191, t = 9.34, one-tailed p < 0.01).

This shows that price target revisions contain new information that is quickly impounded by the

market. In fact, the market reaction for a given change in a price target forecast is stronger than

that for an equal percentage change in an earnings forecast, i.e. higher coefficient, t value, and a

higher adjusted R2.
       In column 4, we examine whether each of the three summary components of an analyst

report, forecast revisions, recommendations, and price target changes, contribute information

beyond what’s contained in the others. When all three are included in our regression, we find

that earnings forecast revisions, price target revisions, and the mean return for an upgrade remain

positive and statistically significant while the mean return for a downgrade remains statistically

negative. The results for price target revisions remain stronger than those of earnings forecast

revisions. Including the three primary components of an analyst’s report simultaneously in our

regression increases the adjusted R2 to 22%. Our results extend Francis and Soffer (1997), who

only look at earnings forecast revisions and recommendations, and support the conjecture that

the information in each of the three components of an analyst’s report is not subsumed by the

other two. Column 4A calculates, as column 2A did, the mean returns and F values for upgrades

and downgrades by summing (α0 + α2) and (α0 + α3).

       Regression results reported in column 5 examine the effects of the strength of an

analyst’s arguments and affiliations between the brokerage and the analyzed firm by adding

STR_ARG and UND_HLD. We predict that the strength of arguments contained in the report is


                                                                                                     17
likely to amplify investor’s reactions to both good and bad news suggesting that α5 will be

positive. In cases where a brokerage may have served as an underwriter for or has current

holdings in a reviewed firm, we expect investors to exhibit skepticism in responding to good

news and a more pronounced reaction to bad news resulting in α6 being negative. The

coefficient on STR_ARG is positive and statistically significant (0.0080, t = 3.59, one-tailed p <

0.01) indicating that investors react to a report’s contents even in the presence of the three

primary components previously discussed. However, earnings forecast revisions are now less

significant (0.0666, t = 1.89, one-tailed p < 0.05) and recommendation upgrades are no longer

significant. Given information regarding the strength of an analyst’s arguments as contained in

a report’s text and affiliation, investors appear to no longer rely on upgrade labels attached to a

report and rely less on earnings forecast revisions. In contrast, downgrades remain significant

and provide information in addition to the strength of arguments. Finally, we find that the

coefficient for existing relationships between the analyst and company is statistically

insignificant contradicting prior work (-0.0017, t = -0.25, one-tailed p > 0.10).

       Overall, our results in Table 2 replicate the findings of prior research that earnings forecast

revisions and recommendation changes are positively and significantly associated with the

market’s reaction at the time a security analyst report is released. More importantly, our results

provide support for the hypothesis that price target changes contain information even in the

presence of the other key components of an analyst report. This information is significant and is

stronger than that contained in earnings forecast revisions. Finally, we demonstrate the importance

of including the strength of arguments presented by an analyst in support of his recommendations.



4.2.   The effects of report type

       Prior research, the CARs in Table 1, Panel C, and column 2 of Table 2 indicate that the

market reacts as predicted to changes in recommendations, i.e. positively to upgrades and

negatively to downgrades. This holds even when other key summary elements, i.e. earnings

forecast revisions and price target revisions are added. However, column 5 indicates that


                                                                                                      18
additional information, such as strength of arguments, affects upgrades differently from

downgrades. In this section, we further investigate the effects of the information released in an

analyst report by conditioning on the direction of the recommendation revision.

       Current evidence on whether or not investors tend to place greater reliance on specific

information in an analyst’s report conditional on report type (e.g., upgrade, downgrade, or

reiteration) is inconclusive. As stated earlier, Francis and Soffer (1997) find that investors place

greater weight on earnings forecast revisions for favorable reports while Hirst, Koonce, and

Simko (1995) find that investors are more likely to analyze other information when reports are

unfavorable. Our database allows us to examine this question utilizing a broader set of

information than that available to Francis and Soffer and overcomes the shortcomings associated

with an experimental setting such as the one employed by Hirst, Koonce, and Simko. To

investigate whether potential investors assess the information contained in security analysts’

reports conditional on whether the report is an upgrade, a reiteration, or a downgrade, we

estimate the following regression using ordinary least squares:

          CARj,t = γ0 + γ1EARN_REVj,t + γ2UP_GRj,t + γ3DOWN_GRj,t + γ4TGT_REVj,t
                  + γ5 STR_ARGj,t + γ6 UND_HLDj,t + γ7EARN_REVj,t * UP_GRj,t

                  + γ8EARN_REVj,t * DOWN_GRj,t + γ9TGT_REVj,t * UP_GRj,t

                  + γ10TGT_REVj,t * DOWN_GRj,t + γ11STR_ARGj,t * UP_GRj,t

                  + γ12STR_ARGj,t * DOWN_GRj,t + γ13UND_HLDj,t * UP_GRj,t

                  + γ14UND_HLDj,t * DOWN_GRj,t + ξj,t                                             (2)

Equation (2) is simply equation (1) modified by the addition of eight interaction variables

computed as EARN_REV*UP_GR, EARN_REV*DOWN_GR, TGT_REV*UP_GR,

TGT_REV*DOWN_GR, STR_ARG*UP_GR, STR_ARG*DOWN_GR, UND_HLD*UP_GR,

and UND_HLD*DOWN_GR.

       The intercept, γ0, represents an investor’s reaction to a reiteration of a prior

recommendation, controlling for all the other information found in the analyst’s report.

Likewise, the coefficient values on EARN_REV (γ1), TGT_REV (γ4), STR_ARG (γ5), and


                                                                                                    19
UND_HLD (γ6) represent the degree an investor reacts to earnings forecast revisions, target

revisions, the strength of a report’s arguments, and the affiliation of the brokerage issuing the

recommendation for a reiteration.

       Tests of hypotheses about how a report’s type affects investor reaction are based on the

upgrade (UP_GR) and downgrade (DOWN_GR) shift and differential variables. For example, a

significant negative coefficient on TGT_REV*UP_GR would indicate that investors place less

weight on target revisions for upgrades as related to reiterations. The mean coefficients and F

statistics for upgrades as they relate to earnings forecast revisions, target revisions, the strength

of a report’s arguments and the affiliation characteristics of the brokerage issuing the

recommendation are captured by (γ1 + γ7, EARN_REV + EARN_REV * UP_GR), (γ4 + γ9,
TGT_REV + TGT_REV * UP_GR), (γ5 + γ11, STR_ARG + STR_ARG * UP_GR), and (γ6 + γ13,

UND_HLD + UND_HLD * UP_GR). Similarly the mean coefficients and F statistics for

downgrades are given by (γ1+ γ8, EARN_REV + EARN_REV * DOWN_GR), (γ4 + γ10,

TGT_REV + TGT_REV * DOWN_GR), (γ5 + γ12, STR_ARG + STR_ARG * DOWN_GR), and

(γ6 + γ14, UND_HLD + UND_HLD * DOWN_GR).

       Table 3 reports the results from estimating equation (2) organized by recommendation

revision type. We find evidence that investors assess the information contained in security

analysts’ reports conditional on whether the report is an upgrade, a reiteration, or a downgrade.

Investors appear most interested in an analyst’s supporting documentation and affiliation in the

case of a downgrade. As expected, TGT_REV (γ4 + γ10 = 0.3841, F = 13.09, one-tailed p <

0.01), EARN_REV (γ5 + γ8 = 0.1659, F = 2.74, one-tailed p < 0.05) and STR_ARG (γ3 + γ12 =

0.0149, F = 3.21, one-tailed p < 0.05) are all significantly positive while HLD_UND is

significantly negative (γ6 + γ14 = -0.0251, F = 1.92, one-tailed p < 0.10). In the case of

reiterations, only price targets revisions (0.1889, t = 4.27, one-tailed p<0.01) and the strength of

the arguments (0.0102, t = 4.16, one-tailed p < 0.01) are statistically significant. Unlike

downgrades, however, in reiterations investors do not appear to adjust their reaction in response




                                                                                                        20
to earnings forecast revisions (0.0309, t = 0.81, one-tailed p > 0.10) or to an affiliation to the

analyst’s brokerage and the firm being analyzed (0.0003, t = 0.03, one-tailed p > 0.10).

           In contrast to the results observed for downgrades and reiterations, but consistent with

Hirst, Koonce, and Simko (1995), investors do not appear to investigate beyond report type in

the case of upgrades. The mean return for upgrades is large, positive, and statistically significant

(γ0 + γ2 = 0.0936, F = 7.63, one-tailed p < 0.01). However, the coefficient estimates for

EARN_REV (γ1 + γ7 = 0.1132, F = 0.59, one-tailed p > 0.10), TGT_REV (γ4 + γ9 = 0.0606, F =

0.48, one-tailed p > 0.10), and UND_HLD (γ6 + γ13 = 0.0053, F = 0.14, one-tailed p > 0.10) are

all insignificant. The only anomaly of our results is that the mean return for STR_ARG upgrades

is significantly negative (γ5 + γ11 = -0.0117, F = 3.83, one-tailed p < 0.05) which is the opposite
of our predicted sign.

           These results lead to the conclusion that investors pay closer attention to the total content

of analyst reports in the case of downgrades and reiterations. This is not surprising in the case of

reiterations since the recommendation level does not contain much new information. However,

investors seem to read downgrade reports closely, utilizing more supporting information than in

the case of upgrades. Even though other information contained in an analyst’s report beyond the

summary recommendation is not significant in the case of recommendation upgrades, the

contents of a report are still important for reiterations and downgrades. As shown in Table 1,

these two categories constitute 76.6% of all reports issued during our sample period.



5.         Price Target Accuracy

           Price targets received most of the analyst media coverage prior to the recent emphasis on

recommendation levels. Headlines such as “Price Targets are Hazardous to Investors’ Wealth”

or “Forget Analysts’ Price Targets. They’re Really Just for Show” represent the content of these

articles.18 Skepticism about analysts’ research and the projections they produce has also


18
     See Morgenson (2001) and Maiello (2000).


                                                                                                      21
captured the attention of members of congress and the SEC (See Tully (2001)). As discussed

earlier, analysts may be more likely to issue highly favorable recommendations due to concerns

over personal compensation, relationships with the analyzed firms’ management, or their own

firm’s underwriting business. Price targets may either be a way for analysts to ameliorate the

effects of overly optimistic reports, or a part of the sales hype used to peddle stocks. In sections

4.1 and 4.2, we provide evidence consistent with price target changes containing important

additional information used by investors. This result is especially true for reiterations and

downgrades. This is proof that the market does react to price targets, the question now becomes

should they? In this section, we provide some results on price target accuracy.

       Our analysis uses 818 price targets issued between 1997 and 1999. Of this sample, 796

forecasts are for a price target above the current price. For this subsample, we consider a price

target prediction to be accurate if the analyzed firm’s stock price equals or exceeds the projected

price at any time during the 12-month period following the release of a report. Most, but not all

analysts, list a twelve-month time horizon for their price targets. For the remaining 22 targets

that forecast price decreases, we consider an analyst to be accurate and the target achieved if the

stock price falls below the price target. Table 4, Panel A, presents price target accuracy and the

time necessary to achieve it categorized by the type of recommendation. For the overall sample,

we find that price forecasts are achieved in 54.28% of all cases. Interestingly, price targets

below the current price are achieved in 20 of the 22 instances.

       Table 4, Panel B, Column 1, Target Missed, presents the average percentage of the price

target achieved by the 45.5% of the firms that do not reach the analysts’ price target. The ratio is

the maximum price achieved within 12 months divided by the price target if the price target is set

above the current price, and the price target divided by the minimum price achieved within 12

months if the price target is set below the current price. Column 3, Target Achieved, shows that

firms that achieve the price target usually overshoot it by an average of 37% during the 12

months. We do not consider subsequent price target revisions that may reduce this overshooting

percentage.


                                                                                                     22
           Although not shown, the probability of achieving a particular target is highly dependent

on the level of optimism exhibited by the analyst. Price targets that project a change of zero to

ten percent and ten to twenty percent are achieved 74.42% and 59.57% of the time, respectively.

In contrast, price targets that project a change in price of 70% or more are realized in less than

25% of the cases observed.

           Taken together, Tables 4A and 4B show that slightly more than 50% of the price targets

are achieved. In instances where price forecasts are missed, the average maximum (minimum)

price observed for projected increases (decreases) was 84% of the price target. Whether this is a

good record of accuracy in a rising market is a conclusion we leave to the reader.



6.         Valuation methodology

           The methodology used in valuing stocks falls into one of three major categories; earnings

or cash flow multiples, discounted cash flow (DCF) models, and asset multiples. Earnings or

cash flow multiples include price to earnings (PE) ratios, relative price to earnings (Relative PE)

ratios, earnings before interest and tax (EBIT) multiples, and earnings before interest, tax,

deprecation, and amortization (EBITDA) multiples. DCF models use estimated discount rates

and projected cash flows, and include free cash flow to the firm, free cash flow to equity,

adjusted present value (APV), and enterprise value added (EVA). Asset multiples include book

value, market to book value, replacement value, and liquidation value.

           The first question we ask in this section is does the market react differently depending on

the valuation methodology employed? We add valuation dummies to equation (1) and find that

these valuation methodologies are insignificant in all our regressions19. That is, the market does

not react differently depending on the valuation methodology used by the analyst or whether the

analyst uses one or many. As business school professors who teach DCF as the superior




19
     We do no report these results but they are available from the authors.


                                                                                                      23
valuation method, we find this result disappointing. The methodology is either being misapplied

or it is not significant20.

         Next, in Table 5, we examine whether the valuation methodology employed by an analyst

affects the probability of achieving a particular target. Earnings multiples are not listed as a

separate category since every report that lists valuation methodology, over 99% of analyst

reports, use some form of PE, relative PE, or other earnings multiple. Surprisingly, we find few

consistencies across recommendation types. Earnings multiples have the highest percentage of

target achieved for reiterations, asset multiples the highest for upgrades, and DCF variations the

highest for downgrades. (“Other” has 100% target achieved for downgrades but there are only

four observations.) For all price targets the earnings multiple percentage is slightly ahead of

DCF variations with asset multiples third. The only consistent performance appears to come in

cases where the analyst employs a “unique” method other than an earnings multiple, a

discounted cash flow model, or an asset multiple. This is usually the analyst’s own methodology

which is not used by other analysts or covered in most valuation textbooks. In these alternative

model cases, the probability of achieving a projected target is significantly lower.



7.       Conclusion

         This paper examines the association between security returns around the release of

analysts’ stock reports and the content of those reports. Using a database constructed from

security analyst reports issued between 1997 and 1999, we replicate the findings in prior research

that earnings forecast revisions and recommendation revisions are significantly and positively

associated with the market’s reaction at the time a security analyst report is released. We extend

the literature by providing evidence that price target changes also contain information even in the

presence of these other key components.



20
  It is possible that a number of analysts use a DCF model to predict prices but translate this into earnings multiples
for the text of their report.


                                                                                                                     24
       We find that the market reaction to price target revisions is stronger than that of an equal

percentage change in earnings forecasts. We also demonstrate that the information associated

with changes in earnings forecasts appears to be subsumed when proxies for the strength of an

analyst’s arguments and the affiliation between the brokerage and the firm being analyzed are

incorporated.

       Next, we examine whether investors assess the information contained in security

analysts’ reports conditional on whether the report is an upgrade, a reiteration, or a downgrade.

We find that investors place greater reliance on the content of security analyst reports when they

are reiterations or downgrades. In these instances, the strength of an analyst’s arguments or the

price target revision account for a significant proportion of the observed market reaction.

       Finally, we provide an examination of the accuracy of price targets and the importance of

valuation methodology. We find that approximately 54% of analysts’ price targets are achieved

within 12 months. When the target is missed, the average maximum (minimum) price observed

for projected increases (decreases) was 84% of the price target. We fail to observe any

systematic association between the valuation method employed by an analyst and either the

market’s reaction or the probability of achieving a price target.




                                                                                                    25
                                        REFERENCES

Abdel-khalik, A. and B. Ajinkya. “Returns to Informational Advantages: The Case of Analysts'
   Forecast Revisions.” The Accounting Review Vol. 57, No. 3 (1982): 661-80.

Barber, B., R. Lehavy, M. McNichols, and B. Trueman. “Can Investors Profit from the Profits?
   Security Analyst Recommendations and Stock Returns.” The Journal of Finance 56 (2001):
   531-563.

Beneish, M. “Stock Prices and the Dissemination of Analysts’ Recommendations.” Journal of
   Business Vol. 64, no. 3 (1991): 393-416.

Bjerring, J., J. Lakonishok, and T. Vermaelen. “Stock Prices and Financial Analysts’
   Recommendations.” Journal of Finance Vol. 38, no. 1 (1983): 187-204.

Bradshaw, M. “Analysts’ Reports, Stock Recommendations, and Target Prices.” Working
   Paper, 2001, Harvard University.

Brav, A. and R. Lehavy. “An Empirical Analysis of Analysts’ Target Prices: Short Term
   Informativeness and Long Term Dynamics.” Working Paper, 2001, UC Berkeley and Duke
   University.

Elton, E., M. Gruber, and S. Grossman. “Discrete Expectational Data and Portfolio
    Performance.” Journal of Finance (1986): 699-713.

Francis, J. and L. Soffer. “The Relative Informativeness of Analysts’ Stock Recommendations
   and Earnings Forecast Revisions.” Journal of Accounting Research Vol. 35, no. 2 (1997):
   193-211.

Hirst, E., L. Koonce and P. Simko. “Investor Reactions to Financial Analysts’ Research
   Reports.” Journal of Accounting Research Vol. 33, no. 2 (1995): 335-351.

Liu, P., Smith, S., and Syed, A. “Stock Price Reactions to the Wall Street Journal’s Securities
    Recommendations.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis (1990): 399-410.

Lloyd Davies, P. and M. Canes. “Stock Prices and the Publication of Second-Hand
   Information.” Journal of Business Vol. 51, no. 1 (1978): 43-56.

Lys, T. and S. Sohn. “The Association Between Revisions of Financial Analysts’ Earnings
   Forecasts and Security Price Changes.” Journal of Accounting and Economics 13 (1990):
   341-363.

Maiello, M. “Moving Targets: Forget analysts’ price targets. They’re really just for show.”
   Forbes (December 11, 2000): 288-290.




                                                                                                  26
“Merrill Lynch Announces Major Changes to Stock Ratings and Compensation System for
  Research Analysts.” BusinessWire (June 7, 2002).

Michaely, R. and K. Womack. “Conflict of Interest and the Credibility of Underwriter Analyst
   Recommendations.” The Review of Financial Studies Vol. 12, no. 4 (1999): 653-686.

Mikhail, B., B. Walther and R. Willis. “Do Security Analysts Exhibit Persistent Differences in
   Stock Picking Ability?” Duke University and Northwestern University Working Paper
   (2002).

Morgenson, G. “Price Targets are Hazardous to Investors’ Wealth.” The New York Times
  (August 5, 2001): 3.1.

Opdyke, J. “Should You Trust Wall Street’s New Ratings?” The Wall Street Journal (July 17,
   2002): D1, D2.

Santoli, M. “The Whole Truth: It’s Time to Repair Wall Street’s Dubious Research Machine.”
   Barron’s (May 28, 2001): 23.

“SEC Approves New Rules for Research Analysts.” Securities Litigation and Regulation
   Reporter (May 22, 2002).

Stickel, S. “Common Stock Returns Surrounding Earnings Forecast Revisions: More Puzzling
    Evidence.” The Accounting Review Vol. 66, No. 2 (1991): 402-416.

Stickel, S. “Reputation and Performance Among Security Analysts.” The Journal of Finance 47
    (1992): 1811-1836.

Stickel, S. “The Anatomy of the Performance of Buy and Sell Recommendations.” Financial
    Analysts Journal 51 (1995): 25-39.

Stone, A. “One Way to End the Analyst Scandals.” BusinessWeek Online (April 25, 2002)

Taylor, P. “Don’t Shoot the Analysts.” National Post (February 22, 2002): FP15.

Tsao, A. “When a Stock’s Rating and Target Collide.” BusinessWeek Online (April 25, 2002).

Tully, S., “Is Wall Street Serious About Reform? Slammed By The Public, The Press, And Now
    Even Congress, The Big Investment Firms Have Promised To Change The Way They Do
    Business. Their Lobbying Efforts Tell A Different Story,” Fortune (July 9, 2001), p. 90.

Womack, K. “Do Brokerage Analysts’ Recommendations Have Investment Value?” The
  Journal of Finance 51 (1996): 137-16.




                                                                                                 27
                                                              TABLE 1: Panel A

                                             Security Analyst Report Descriptive Statistics
                          Percentages of Reports Containing Selected Data Organized by Type of Recommendation

                          Strong Buy            Buy                      Hold                   Sell          S_Sell          All            Total
                          Up     Reit    Up     Reit   Down       Up     Reit    Down    Reit      Down       Down     Up     Reit   Down    Sample
Number of Reports         149    198     111    296     43         2     244      77       1            3       2      262    739    125     1126
% of Sample               13.2   17.6    9.9    26.3    3.8       0.2    21.7     6.8     0.0          0.3     0.2     23.3   65.5   11.1    100.0
Earnings Forecast
1 Year                    97.3   100.0   99.1   99.0   97.7      100.0   99.6    98.7    100.0     100.0      100.0    98.1   99.5   98.4     99.1
Multiple Years            95.3    96.5   95.5   95.6   93.0      100.0   95.9    89.6    100.0     100.0      100.0    95.4   95.9   91.2     95.3
Price Targets
Target Reported           94.0   94.4    98.2   91.2   95.3      100.0   11.1    50.6    100.0         0.0    100.0    95.8   65.5   65.6     72.6
Point Estimate Provided   88.6   95.7    90.7   97.4   80.5      100.0   96.3    92.3    100.0         NA      50.0    89.2   96.9   85.4     93.8
Projected Increase        34.6   44.0    22.6   34.3   21.0      -17.5    8.6     5.5     -9.6         NA     -19.0    28.9   36.6   19.1     32.9
Forecasts
Income Statement          55.6   24.7    35.1   13.5   39.5       0.0    24.6    39.0     0.0          33.3   100.0    46.6   20.1   40.0     28.5
Balance Sheet             12.1    3.5     9.0    2.7    2.3       0.0     2.0    10.3     0.0          33.3    0.0     10.7    2.7    8.0      5.1
Cash flow Statement       30.9   14.6    27.9   9.8    20.9       0.0    8.6     33.8     0.0          0.0    100.0    29.4   10.7   29.6     17.1
Segment Data
Geographic                4.7     3.5     3.6   6.1     0.0       0.0     1.2     2.6     0.0          0.0     0.0      4.2    3.8    1.6      3.6
Product                   4.0    2.0      6.6   4.7     4.7       0.0     4.5     3.9     0.0          0.0     0.0      5.0    3.9    4.0      4.2
Division                  9.4    13.6    12.6   9.5    14.0       0.0     7.8     6.5     0.0          0.0     0.0     10.7   10.0    8.8     10.0
Affiliation
Underwriter               60.8   64.6    44.1   53.7   60.5       0.0    43.4    39.0    100.0         66.7    0.0     53.3   53.4   46.4     52.6
Holdings                  63.5   88.4    74.8   91.9   81.4      50.0    99.6    51.9     0.0          66.7   100.0    68.2   93.4   63.2     84.2
Valuation Models
Earnings Multiples        99.3   99.5    99.1   98.0   100.0     100.0   100.0   100.0    0.0      100.0      100.0    99.2   98.9   100.0    99.1
DCF Variations            16.8   13.1     9.9    9.5   14.0       0.0    11.5    26.0     0.0       0.0        0.0     13.7   11.1   20.8     12.8
Asset Multiples           23.5   22.7    22.5   26.3   14.0       0.0    32.8    14.3     0.0      33.3       50.0     22.9   27.6   15.2     25.1
Other                      3.4    6.6     2.7    3.7    2.3       0.0     1.2     5.2     0.0       0.0        0.0      3.1    3.6    4.0      3.5
Average Number Pages      9.5     5.7    9.0    5.3     5.9       2.0     4.5     7.5     1.0          6.7     11.5    9.3    5.1     7.0     6.3




                                                                                                                                                      28
                                                           TABLE 1: Panel B

                                             Security Analyst Report Descriptive Statistics
                          Percentages of Reports Containing Selected Data Organized by Type of Recommendation

                          Strong Buy             Buy                  Hold                  Sell       S_Sell           All           Total
                           Up     Reit    Up     Reit   Down   Up     Reit   Down    Reit      Down    Down     Up      Reit   Down   Sample

Recommendation Basis
Stock Undervalued         100.0   71.2   100.0    3.0    7.0    0.0   14.7     1.3    0.0       0.0     0.0     99.2    25.3    3.2    40.0
Stock Overvalued           0.0     0.0    0.0     2.0    2.3    0.0    0.8     9.1    0.0      100.0   100.0     0.0     1.1   10.4     1.9
Relatively Undervalued    100.0   69.7   100.0    7.4   11.6    0.0    4.5     7.8    0.0       0.0     0.0     99.2    23.2    8.8    39.3
Relatively Overvalued       0.0    2.0     0.0    1.4    6.7    0.0    7.4     9.1   100.0     100.0   100.0     0.0     3.6   12.0     3.7
Revenues (Inc)            39.6    46.0   36.9    64.5   11.6    0.0    6.6    13.0   100.0      0.0     0.0     38.2    40.4   12.0    36.7
Revenues (Dec)             0.0     1.5    3.6     1.4    9.3    0.0    4.5    40.3    0.0       0.0     0.0      1.5     2.4   28.0     5.0
Earnings (Inc)             62.4   42.9    54.1   24.3   23.3    0.0    5.3     9.1    0.0       0.0     0.0     58.4    23.0   13.6    30.2
Earnings (Dec)              0.0    0.0     3.6    5.1   23.3    0.0    6.6    19.5    0.0      100.0    0.0      1.5     4.2   22.4     5.6
Product Intro (Pos)       26.2    17.2   18.0    20.9   7.0    0.0    8.6     3.9     0.0       0.0     0.0     22.5    15.8   4.8     16.1
Product Intro (Neg)        0.0     0.5    0.9     1.4    2.3    0.0    0.0     3.9    0.0       0.0     0.0      0.4     0.7    3.2     0.9
New Projects (Pos)        13.4     9.6    8.1    12.8   7.0    0.0    10.7    10.4    0.0       0.0     0.0     11.1    11.4   8.8     11.0
New Projects (Neg)         0.0     0.0    0.9     1.0    2.3    0.0    1.2     2.6    0.0       0.0     0.0      0.4     0.8    2.4     0.9
Cost Efficiencies          39.6   21.2    24.3   15.2   11.6   50.0   19.7    13.0    0.0       0.0    50.0     33.2    18.5   12.8    21.3
Cost Inefficiencies         2.0    7.6    10.8   18.9   11.6    0.0   12.7    19.5    0.0      33.3     0.0     5.7.0   13.8   16.8    12.2
Expectations Met           37.6   29.3    10.8   33.1   30.2    0.0   37.3    31.2    0.0       0.0    100.0    26.0    33.5   31.2    31.5
Expectations Not Met        9.4    7.1    29.7    7.8   18.6    0.0   11.9    19.5    0.0      66.7     0.0     17.9     8.9   20.0    12.2
M&A Activity (Pos)        28.9    10.6   21.6    13.5   18.6    0.0    6.6     9.1    0.0       0.0     0.0     25.6    10.4   12.0    14.1
M&A Activity (Neg)         0.0     0.5    1.8     0.3    2.3    0.0    2.5     7.8    0.0       0.0     0.0      0.8     1.1    5.6     1.5
Repurchases (Pos)         17.4     7.1   14.4     9.1    7.0   50.0   17.6    14.3    0.0       0.0     0.0     16.4    11.4   11.2    12.5
Repurchases (Neg)          0.0     0.0    0.9     0.3    0.0    0.0    0.0     3.9    0.0       0.0     0.0      0.4     0.1    2.4     0.4
Industry Climate (Pos)    24.2    12.1   18.9    11.1    9.3   50.0    4.5     3.9    0.0       0.0     0.0     22.1     9.2   5.6     11.8
Industry Climate (Neg)     3.4     7.1    8.1     5.1    7.0    0.0    7.4    15.6    0.0      66.7    50.0      5.3     6.5   14.4     7.1
Management (Pos)          37.6    15.7   25.2    27.4    7.0   50.0    4.1    22.1    0.0       0.0    50.0     32.4    16.6   16.8    20.3
Management (Neg)           0.0     1.0    0.0     0.7    7.0    0.0    1.6     7.8    0.0      66.7    50.0      0.0     1.1    9.6     1.8
International Ops (Pos)   19.5     9.6   11.7    32.1    4.7    0.0    5.3     0.0    0.0       0.0     0.0     16.0    17.2    1.6    15.2
International Ops (Neg)    2.7     1.0    2.7     2.0    9.3    0.0    7.0    15.6    0.0      33.3     0.0      2.7     3.4   13.6     4.4
Leverage (Pos)            11.4     4.0    4.5     7.4    7.0    0.0    2.5     3.9    0.0       0.0     0.0      8.4     4.9    4.8     5.7
Leverage (Neg)             4.7     2.5    0.9     3.7    2.3    0.0    7.4    10.4    0.0      33.3     0.0      3.1     4.7    8.0     4.7
Competition (Pos)         15.4     6.6    3.6    17.9    4.7    0.0    2.5     7.8    0.0       0.0     0.0     10.3     9.9   6.4      9.6
Competition (Neg)          4.0     4.0    3.6     2.4    7.0   50.0    9.4    10.4    0.0      33.3     0.0      4.2     5.1   9.6      5.4
Risk (Pos)                17.4     8.6    2.7     6.8   11.6   0.0     0.8     6.5    0.0       0.0     0.0     11.1     5.3    8.0     6.9
Risk (Neg)                 7.4     4.0    2.7     5.7    7.0    0.0    4.9    20.8    0.0      66.7    50.0      5.3     5.0   17.6     6.5




                                                                                                                                               29
                                                                                 TABLE 1: Panel C

                                                             Security Analyst Report Descriptive Statistics
                                                                           Model Variables

                                  Strong Buy                    Buy                          Hold                        Sell       S_Sell               All               Total
                                   Up        Reit      Up       Reit     Down        Up       Reit     Down       Reit      Down    Down        Up       Reit     Down     Sample

    Model Variables
    EARN_REV                        4.1      -4.4      4.0       2.4      -7.3       0.0      -5.9      -4.5      2.5       -12.1    118.8     4.1       -2.1      -3.6      -1.0
    TGT_REV                        13.8      1.0       5.5       2.7      -7.0       0.0      1.0       -7.5      0.0        NA      -14.7     11.7      1.9       -7.3      2.8
    STR_ARG                         5.6      3.4       3.8       2.5      0.6        1.5      0.7       -0.6      -1.0       -7.0     -1.5      4.8       2.1      -0.3       2.5
    UND_HLD                        1.2       1.5       1.2       1.5      1.4       0.5       1.4       0.9       1.4        0.9      1.0      1.2       1.5       1.1       1.4
    CAR                             4.7      0.3       4.1       0.8      -7.0      10.0      -1.1      -6.4      2.2        -8.7      2.1      4.5      0.0       -6.6      0.3




Notes to table 1: All numbers presented are percentages unless otherwise noted. The estimates for the model variables, EARN_REV, TGT_REV, STR_ARG, UND_HLD, and
CAR are means of the respective variables not percentages. They are defined as follows: EARN_REVj,t = percentage change in the analyst’s projected earnings forecast for
firm j at time t computed as [(earnings forecast at time t / earnings forecast at time t-1) – 1]; TGT_REVj,t = percentage change in the analyst’s projected price target for firm j at
time t computed as [(price target at time t / price target at time t-1) – 1]; STR_ARGj,t = a variable computed by aggregating the number of positive remarks less the number of
negative remarks related to 16 specific criteria: value, relative value, sales growth, earnings growth, new product introductions, new projects, cost efficiencies, expectations
met, mergers and acquisitions, repurchase programs, industry climate, management, international operations, leverage, competition, and risk; UND_HLDj,t = a variable taking
on the value 0 if no relationship between the analyst’s brokerage and the firm exists, 1 if the brokerage is an underwriter of the firm or has current holdings in the firm, and 2 if
the brokerage is both an underwriter and has current holdings; and CARj,t = five-day market adjusted cumulative abnormal return for firm j centered on the report release date t.




                                                                                                                                                                                    30
                                                                    TABLE 2

               The Market’s Reaction to the Release of a Security Analyst Report: Regression Results on
        Earnings forecast revisions, Recommendations, Price Target Revisions, Argument Strength, and Affiliation

                    Predicted
Variable              Sign       (1)              (2)              (2A)          (3)           (4)             (4A)           (5)             (5A)
INTERCEPT              ?        -0.0029          -0.0044                        -0.0018      -0.0009                        -0.0120
                                 (-0.78)          (-1.12)                        (-0.40)      (-0.18)                        (-1.57)
EARN_REV               +        0.0545     ***                                               0.0804     **                  0.0666     **
                                  (2.81)                                                       (2.27)                         (1.89)
UP_GR                  +                         0.0517     ***                              0.0283     **                  0.0123
                                                   (6.40)                                      (2.24)                         (0.92)
DOWN_GR                 -                        -0.0850 ***                                 -0.0494 ***                    -0.0321    **
                                                  (-7.31)                                     (-3.09)                        (-1.93)
Upgrade (α0+α2)        +                                          0.0473 ***                                  0.0274 **                      -0.0076
                                                                   (44.84)                                      (5.52)                         (0.20)
Downgrade (α0+α3)       -                                         -0.0894 ***                                 -0.0503 ***                    -0.0520 ***
                                                                   (66.77)                                     (11.09)                         (9.38)
TGT_REV                +                                                        0.3191 ***   0.2552     ***                 0.2213     ***
                                                                                  (9.34)       (7.06)                         (5.99)
STR_ARG                +                                                                                                    0.0080     ***
                                                                                                                              (3.59)

UND_HLD                 -                                                                                                   -0.0017
                                                                                                                             (-0.25)
Adjusted R2                     0.0112     ***   0.1382     ***                 0.1799 ***   0.2193     ***                 0.2408     ***
                                  (7.91)          (56.40)                        (87.21)      (28.38)                        (21.62)
N                                  612              691                            393          390                            390




                                                                                                                                                           31
Notes to table 2: This table presents the results of estimating the following regression using ordinary least squares: CARj,t = α0 + α1EARN_REVj,t + α2UP_GRj,t +
α3DOWN_GRj,t + α4TGT_REVj,t + α5 STR_ARGj,t + α6 UND_HLDj,t + εj,t where the variables are defined as follows: CARj,t = five-day market adjusted cumulative abnormal
return for firm j centered on the report release date t; EARN_REVj,t = percentage change in the analyst’s projected earnings forecast for firm j at time t computed as [(earnings
forecast at time t / earnings forecast at time t-1) – 1]; UP_GRj,t = a variable taking on the value 1 for reports issued for firm j at time t that indicates the analyst’s recommendation
has been upgraded, 0 otherwise; DOWN_GRj,t = a variable taking on the value 1 for reports issued for firm j at time t that indicates the analyst’s recommendation has been
downgraded, 0 otherwise; TGT_REVj,t = percentage change in the analyst’s projected price target for firm j at time t computed as [(price target at time t / price target at time t-1) –
1]; STR_ARGj,t = a variable computed aggregating the number of positive remarks less the number of negative remarks related to 16 specific criteria: value, relative value, sales
growth, earnings growth, new product introductions, new projects, cost efficiencies, expectations met, mergers and acquisitions, repurchase programs, industry climate,
management, international operations, leverage, competition, and risk; UND_HLDj,t = a variable taking on the value 0 if no relationship between the analyst’s brokerage and the
firm exists, 1 if the brokerage is an underwriter of the firm or has current holdings in the firm, and 2 if the brokerage is both an underwriter and has current holdings; εj,t = assumed
normally distributed error term with zero mean and constant variance. t-statistics are below the estimated coefficients. F-statistics are below the adjusted R2 and the aggregated
coefficient estimates in columns 2A, 4A and 5A. * one-tailed probability < 0.10; ** one-tailed probability < 0.05; *** one-tailed probability < 0.01; † two-tailed probability < 0.10;
††
   two-tailed probability < 0.05; ††† two-tailed probability < 0.01.




                                                                                                                                                                                       32
                                                                                     TABLE 3
                                                 The Market Reaction to the Release of a Security Analyst Report:
                                                        The Effects of Recommendation Revision Type

                                     Reiterations                                             Upgrades                                               Downgrades
Variable           Predicted                                             Predicted                                                Predicted
                     Sign                Coefficient           t-stat      Sign                 Coefficient             F-stat      Sign                 Coefficient             F-stat

                                    γ0
                                                       †
Intercept               ?                  -0.0284            (-1.86)

Upgrade                                                                       +          γ0 + γ2      0.0936 ***        (7.63)

Downgrade                                                                                                                               -         γ0 + γ3      0.0008            (0.00)

EARN_REV                +           γ1      0.0309             (0.81)         +          γ1 + γ7      0.1132            (0.59)         +          γ1 + γ8      0.1659 **         (2.74)

TGT_REV                 +           γ4      0.1889 ***         (4.27)         +          γ4 + γ9      0.0600            (0.48)         +         γ4 + γ10      0.3841 ***        (13.09)

STR_ARG                 +           γ5      0.0102 ***         (4.16)         +         γ5 + γ11     -0.0117 **         (3.83)         +         γ5 + γ12      0.0149 **         (3.21)

UND_HLD                 -           γ6      0.0003             (0.03)          -        γ6 + γ13      0.0053            (0.14)          -        γ6 + γ14     -0.0251 *          (1.92)


Adjusted R2          0.2847       ***

F-stat              (12.09)
N                      390



Notes to table 3: This table presents the results of estimating the following regression using ordinary least squares: CARj,t = γ0 + γ1EARN_REVj,t + γ2UP_GRj,t + γ3DOWN_GRj,t +
γ4TGT_REVj,t + γ5 STR_ARGj,t + γ6 UND_HLDj,t + γ7EARN_REVj,t * UP_GRj,t + γ8EARN_REVj,t * DOWN_GRj,t + γ9TGT_REVj,t * UP_GRj,t + γ10TGT_REVj,t * DOWN_GRj,t
+ γ11STR_ARGj,t * UP_GRj,t + γ12STR_ARGj,t * DOWN_GRj,t + γ13UND_HLDj,t * UP_GRj,t + γ14UND_HLDj,t * DOWN_GRj,t + ξj,t. See notes to table 2 for variable definitions.
t-statistics are to the right of the estimated reiteration coefficients. F-statistics are to the right of the aggregated coefficient estimates for upgrades and downgrades. The adjusted
R2 and associated F-statistic is for the entire regression in equation 2. * one-tailed probability < 0.10; ** one-tailed probability < 0.05; *** one-tailed probability < 0.01;
†
  two-tailed probability < 0.10; †† two-tailed probability < 0.05; ††† two-tailed probability < 0.01.




                                                                                                                                                                                      33
                               TABLE 4: Panel A
Percentage of Reports Achieving 12-Month Price Targets by Recommendation Type


                                          Target Achieved In:
                       Target    1 to 3    4 to 6     7 to 9    10 to 12
                      Achieved   Months   Months     Months     Months     N
 All                   54.28     30.81    13.21        5.62      4.64      818
       Upgrades        57.37     25.50    17.13        7.17      7.57      251
       Reiterations    50.72     30.93    11.55        5.15      3.09      485
       Downgrades      65.85     46.34    10.98        3.66      4.88       82

 Strong Buy            45.12     17.99    17.07        4.57      5.49      328
    Upgrades           50.00     16.43    20.00        7.14      6.43      140
    Reiterations       41.49     19.15    14.89        2.66      4.79      188

 Buy                   57.14     35.48    11.67       7.38       2.62      420
   Upgrades            66.97     36.70    13.76       11.93      4.59      109
   Reiterations        54.81     36.67    10.00       6.30       1.85      270
   Downgrades          46.34     24.39    17.07       2.44       2.44       41

 Hold                  77.61     61.2      4.48       7.46       4.48      67
   Upgrades            50.00     50.00     0.00        0.00      0.00       2
   Reiterations        73.08     53.85     3.85       11.54      3.85      26
   Downgrades          84.62     69.23     5.13        5.13      5.13      39

 Sell                  100.00    100.00    0.00        0.00      0.00      1
    Reiterations       100.00    100.00    0.00        0.00      0.00      1

 Strong Sell           100.00    50.00     0.00        0.00      50.00     2
    Downgrades         100.00    50.00     0.00        0.00      50.00     2




                                                                                 34
                                  TABLE 4: Panel B
           12-Month Price Maximums / Minimums and Predicted Price Targets (%)

                                       Target                 Target           Full
                                       Missed            N   Achieved   N     Sample   N
               All                      84.38        374      137.27    444   113.09   818
                Upgrades                88.05        107      130.86    144   112.61   251
                Reiterations            82.50        239      140.07    246   111.70   485
                Downgrades              86.37         28      141.59     54   122.74    82
               Strong Buy               83.20        181      129.30    147   103.86   328
                 Upgrades               87.20         71      127.53     69   107.08   140
                 Reiterations           80.61        110      130.86     78   101.46   188
               Buy                      85.21        179      141.43    241   117.47   420
                Upgrades                90.39         35      133.34     74   119.55   109
                Reiterations            83.61        122      146.48    148   118.07   270
                Downgrades              85.83         22      133.54     19   107.94    41
               Hold                     89.00        14       141.76    53    130.74   67
                Upgrades                66.51         1       176.95     1    121.73    2
                Reiterations            92.75         7       128.37    19    118.78   26
                Downgrades              88.34         6       148.41    33    139.17   39
               Sell                       NA         NA       131.63     1    131.63   1
                Reiterations              NA         NA       131.63     1    131.63   1
               Strong Sell                NA         NA       105.64     2    105.64   2
                 Downgrades               NA         NA       105.64     2    105.64   2



Notes to table 4: All results reported as percentages.




                                                                                             35
                                     TABLE 5

   Percentage of Reports Achieving 12-Month Price Targets by Valuation Methodology

                                                   Target Achieved In:
                           Target     1 to 3     4 to 6      7 to 9    10 to 12      N
                          Achieved    Months     Months     Months     Months
All
 Earnings Multiples         54.24      30.87      13.16       6.64       3.57     813
 DCF Variations             51.37      23.85      16.51       6.42       4.59     109
 Asset Multiples            45.46      22.73      10.10       8.08       4.55     198
 Other                      33.33      19.45       5.56       5.56       2.78     36

Upgrades
 Earnings Multiples         57.43      25.70      17.27      10.44       4.02     249
 DCF Variations             52.78      11.11      25.00      13.89       2.78      36
 Asset Multiples            59.32      22.03      22.03      8.47        6.78     59
 Other                      42.86      14.29       0.00      28.57       0.00      7

Reiterations
 Earnings Multiples         50.62      30.91      11.41       5.19       3.11     482
 DCF Variations             45.61      21.05      14.03       3.51       7.02      57
 Asset Multiples            37.80      21.26      4.72        8.66       3.15     127
 Other                      20.00      12.00       4.00       0.00       4.00     25

Downgrades
 Earnings Multiples        65.85       46.34      10.98       3.66       4.87     82
 DCF Variations            68.75       62.50       6.25       0.00       0.00     16
 Asset Multiples           58.33       41.67       8.33       0.00       8.33     12
 Other                     100.00      75.00      25.00       0.00       0.00      4




                                                                                     36
