NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

AN ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF ADULT OBESITY:
RESULTS FROM THE BEHAVIORAL RISK FACTOR SURVEILLANCE SYSTEM
Shin-Yi Chou
Michael Grossman
Henry Saffer
Working Paper 9247
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9247
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Shin-Yi Chou, Michael Grossman and Henry Saffer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.

An Economic Analysis of Adult Obesity: Results from the Behavioral
Risk Factor Surveillance System
Shin-Yi Chou, Michael Grossman and Henry Saffer
NBER Working Paper No. 9247
October 2002
JEL No. I12, I18
ABSTRACT
Since the late 1970s, the number of obese adults in the United States has grown by over 50
percent. This paper examines the factors that may be responsible for this rapidly increasing
prevalence rate. To study the determinants of adult obesity and related outcomes, we employ microlevel data from the 1984-1999 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. These repeated cross
sections are augmented with state level measures pertaining to the per capita number of fast- food
restaurants, the per capita number of full-service restaurants, the price of a meal in each type of
restaurant, the price of food consumed at home, the price of cigarettes, clean indoor air laws, and
hours of work per week and hourly wage rates by age, gender, race, years of formal schooling
completed, and marital status. Our main results are that these variables have the expected effects on
obesity and explain a substantial amount of its trend. These findings control for individual-level
measures of household income, years of formal schooling completed, and marital status.

Shin-Yi Chou
Department of Humanities and Social Science
New Jersey Institute of Technology
Newark, NJ 07102
and NBER
chou@admin.njit.edu
Henry Saffer
NBER
365 Fifth Ave, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016
and Kean University
hsaffer@gc.cuny.edu

Michael Grossman
NBER
365 Fifth Ave, 5th floor
New York, NY 10016
and CUNY Graduate Center
mgrossman@gc.cuny.edu

I. Introduction
Since the late 1970s, the number of obese adults in the United States has grown by over
50 percent. This paper examines the factors that may be responsible for this rapidly increasing
prevalence rate. We focus on societal forces which may alter the cost of nutritional and leisure
time choices made by individuals and specifically consider the effect of changes in relative
prices, which are beyond the individual’s control, on these choices. The principal hypothesis to
be tested is that an increase in the prevalence of obesity is the result of several economic changes
that have altered the lifestyle choices of Americans. One important economic change is the
increase in the value of time, particularly of women, which is reflected by the growth in their
labor force participation rates and in their hours of work. The reduction in home time, due in part
to the slow growth in income among certain groups, has been associated with an increase in the
demand for convenience food. Another important change is the rise in the real cost of cigarette
smoking due to increases in the money price of cigarettes, the diffusion of information
concerning the harmful effects of smoking, and the enactment of state statutes that restrict
smoking in public places and in the workplace. This relative price change may have reduced
smoking, which tends to increase weight. A final set of relative price changes revolves around
the increasing availability of fast food, which reduces search and travel time and changes in the
relative costs of meals consumed in fast-food restaurants, full-service restaurants, and meals
prepared at home.
To study the determinants of adult obesity and related outcomes, we employ micro-level
data from the 1984-1999 Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. These repeated cross
sections are augmented with state level measures pertaining to the per capita number of
restaurants, the prices of a meal in fast-food and full-service restaurants, the price of food

1

consumed at home, the price of cigarettes, clean indoor air laws, and hours of work per week and
hourly wage rates by age, gender, race, years of formal schooling completed, and marital status.
Our main results are that these variables have the expected effects on obesity and explain a
substantial amount of its trend. These findings control for individual-level measures of age, race,
household income, years of formal schooling completed, and marital status.

II. Background
The significance of research on obesity and sedentary lifestyle is highlighted by the level
of mortality and health problems and by the costs associated with these behaviors. According to
McGinnis and Foege (1993) and Allison et al. (1999), obesity and sedentary lifestyles result in
over 300,000 premature deaths per year in the United States. By comparison, the mortality
associated with tobacco, alcohol and illicit drugs is about 400,000, 100,000, and 20,000 deaths
per year, respectively. Stevens et al. (1998) estimate that excess body weight increases the risk
of death for individuals between 30 and 74 years old. These deaths result from coronary artery
disease, stroke, high blood pressure, cancers of the colon, breast, and prostate, and diabetes. This
makes obesity and sedentary lifestyle second only to tobacco in causing premature death.
The monetary costs of obesity and sedentary lifestyle include the cost of caring for those
who are ill with related diseases and lost productivity from related illness and mortality. Wolf
and Colditz (1998) estimate that in 1995 the costs of obesity were $99.2 billion, which was 5.7
percent of the total costs of illness. Public financing of these costs is considerable since
approximately half of all health care is paid by the federal government and state and local
governments, and the prevalence of obesity continues to increase.
The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive Kidney Diseases (1996) reports

2

that Americans spend $33 billion dollars annually on weight reduction products and
services. There are often serious health risks associated with some of these products that
can affect a large number of consumers and increase the cost of obesity. Kolata (1997)
reports that physicians wrote 18 million prescriptions for fenfluramine and dexfenfluramine
in 1996 (often used with phentermine, as part of the combination known as fen-phen) prior
to the removal of the two top diet drugs from the market at the request of the Food and
Drug Administration. It was found that these drugs may cause heart valve damage in as
many as 30 percent of patients.
The significance of research on obesity and sedentary lifestyle is also highlighted by
the level and growth of obesity rates. Until recently, obesity in the U.S. was a fairly rare
occurrence. Obesity is measured by the body mass index (BMI), also termed Quetelet’s
index, and defined as weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared (kg/m2).
According to the World Health Organization (1997) and the National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute (1998), a BMI value of between 20 and 22 is “ideal” for adults regardless of
gender in the sense that mortality and morbidity risks are minimized in this range. For a
woman whose height is five feet five inches, this corresponds to a weight between 120 and
130 pounds. For a six-foot-tall man, the corresponding weight is between 150 and 165
pounds. Persons with BMI equal to or greater than 30 are classified as obese. Hence a
five-foot-five-inch-tall woman is obese at 190 pounds. A six-foot tall-man is obese at 235
pounds.
Trends in the mean body mass index of adults ages 18 years of age and older and the
percentage who are obese between 1959 and 1994 are presented in Table 1. These data
come from heights and weights obtained from physical examinations conducted in the first

3

National Health Examination Survey (NHES I) between 1959 and 1962, the first National
Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES I) between 1971 and 1975, the second
National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES II) between 1976 and 1980,
and the third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES III) between
1988 and 1994.1 Note the extremely modest upward trends in the two outcomes in Table 1
until the period between 1978 (the mid-year of NHANES II) and 1991 (the mid-year of
NHANES III). In that thirteen-year period, the number of obese Americans grew by 55
percent. At the same time, BMI rose by 1.24 kg/m2 or by 5 percent, which represents a sixpound weight gain for the woman and man described above. The corresponding figures
between 1960/61 (the mid-year of NHES I) and 1978 were a 10 percent increase in the
number of obese persons, and a 1 percent increase in BMI.
The trends in Table 1 are important because the stability of BMI in the two decades
between NHES I and NHANES II is masked in longer-term trends in this variable between
1864 and 1991 presented by Costa and Steckel (1997).2 They include NHES I and
NHANES III in their time series but do not include NHANES I and NHANES II. Philipson
and Posner (1999), Philipson (2001), and Lakdawalla and Philipson (2002) use Costa and
Steckel’s time series as the point of departure of a penetrating analysis in which increases
in BMI over time are caused by reductions in the strenuousness of work. Lakdawalla and
Philipson (2002) show that BMI is negatively related to an index of job strenuousness in
repeated cross sections from the National Health Interview Survey for the period 1976
through 1994 and in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth for the period from 1982
through 1998. This important finding confirms their explanation of the long-term trend in

4

BMI. Yet it sheds little light on the trend between NHANES II and NHANES III because
the job strenuousness measure was very stable in the periods that they consider.
The trends in Table 1 also are important because public health objectives presented
in Healthy People 2010: National Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Objectives
(Public Health Service 2001) target an obesity prevalence rate of 15 percent for adults in
2010. The available data suggest that in 2010 the prevalence of obesity in the U.S. is likely
to be more than twice the target or approximately 33 percent.3 Since the available data
indicate that the prevalence of obesity continues to increase each year, it is likely that the
mortality and disease costs of obesity will be significantly higher in 2010 than they are
today. Although the prevalence of obesity continues to rise, the reasons for this increase
remain unknown and speculative. The development of policies to reverse this trend
requires an understanding of the underlying behavioral processes. We direct our attention
to this aim in the remainder of the paper. We begin and conclude this section by examining
briefly insights provided by aggregate time series data and by three empirical studies by
economists (Cawley 1999; Ruhm 2000; Lakdawalla and Philipson 2002).
The shift from an agricultural or industrial society to a post-industrial society
emphasized by Philipson (2001) in his economic analysis of obesity has been accompanied
by innovations that economize on time previously allocated to the nonmarket or household
sector. One such innovation has economized on time spent in food preparation at home and
is reflected by the introduction of convenience food for consumption at home and by the
growth of fast-food and full-service restaurants. The growth in restaurants, particularly fast
food restaurants, has been dramatic. According to the Census of Retail Trade, the per
capita number of fast-food restaurants doubled between 1972 and 1997, while the per

5

capita number of full-service restaurants rose by 35 percent (Bureau of the Census 1976,
2000).
Fast food and convenience food are inexpensive and have a high caloric density (defined
as calories per pound) to make them palatable (Schlosser 2001). Total calories consumed rises
with caloric density if the reduction in the total amount of food consumed does not fully offset
the increase in density. Mela and Rogers (1998) report that this occurs in many cases. Indeed,
available per capita calories increased from 3,250 calories per day in 1970 to 3,800 calories per
day in 1997 (Bureau of the Census various years).4 Also, the annual per capita consumption of
corn sweeteners has risen from 38.2 pounds in 1980 to 86.8 pounds in 1998. This has been
somewhat offset by a reduction in the use of sugar. Per capita annual consumption of total
sweeteners increased from 123.0 pounds per year in 1980 to 155.1 pounds per year in 1998. To
exacerbate these factors, there is evidence that caloric consumption is habituating, where
habituation is defined as a positive effect of past consumption on current consumption (Naik and
Moore 1996; Cawley 1999).
The increasing prevalence of convenience food and fast food is part of the long-term
trend away from the labor-intensive preparation of food at home prior to consumption. But it
also can be attributed in part to labor market developments since 1970 that have witnessed
declines in real income of certain groups and increases in hours of work and labor force
participation rates by most groups. Real income of single earner households decreased from
1970 to 1993 and was only one percent higher in 1998 than in 1970 (Bureau of the Census
various years). Real income of single men and women followed a similar downward
pattern. At the same time, the labor force participation of married women jumped from 41
percent in 1970 to 62 percent in 1998. As a result, real income of all married-couple

6

families rose by 31 percent between those two years. According to Bluestone and Rose
(1997), between 1970 and 1990, the typical two earner family increased market work by
600 hours a year. This is about one and a half days a week on the job.
These data show that more household time is going to market work. There is
correspondingly less time and energy available for home and leisure activities such as food
preparation and active leisure. The increases in hours worked and labor force participation
rates, reductions in wage rates, and declines or modest increases in real income
experienced by certain groups appear to have stimulated the demand for inexpensive
convenience and fast food which has increased caloric intakes. At the same time, the
reduction in the time available for active leisure has reduced calories expended.
The final trend that we wish to call attention to is the anti-smoking campaign, which
began to accelerate in the early 1970s. Individuals who quit smoking typically gain weight. The
real price of cigarettes rose by 164 percent between 1980 and 2001 (Orzechowski and Walker
2002). This large increase resulted in part from four Federal excise tax hikes, a number of state
tax hikes and the settlement of the state lawsuits filed against cigarette makers to recover
Medicaid funds spent treating diseases related to smoking. The period since the late 1970s also
has been characterized by a dramatic increase in the percentage of the population residing in
states that have enacted clean indoor air laws that restrict smoking in public places and in the
workplace. For example, in 1980, 6 percent of the population resided in states that restrict
smoking in the workplace. By 1999, this figure stood at 42 percent (Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention website http://www2.cdc.gov/nccdph/osh/state).
Very recent contributions to the determinants of obesity by economists have focused on
the roles of unemployment, job strenuousness, and prices of food prepared at home. Ruhm

7

(2000) finds that body mass index and obesity are inversely related to state unemployment rates
in repeated cross sections from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System for the years
1987-1995. His interpretation of these results is that the value of time is negatively related to the
unemployment rate. Cawley (1999) reports that BMI is negatively related to the real price of
groceries in the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) for the period from 1981
through 1996. His price variable is the price of food at home as reported by the Bureau of Labor
Statistics. It incorporates variations over time and among the four major geographic regions of
the U.S. Cawley is careful to note that more expensive food does not always contain more
calories than cheaper food and that consumers can substitute towards inexpensive, caloric food
when this overall price index rises.
Using the same NLSY panel employed by Cawley, Lakdawalla and Philipson (2002) also
find a negative effect of a price of food at home measure that varies by city and year on BMI.
They control for unmeasured time effects but do not control for unmeasured area effects.
Moreover, their methodology assumes that each individual faces an upward sloping average or
marginal cost function of food. This differs from the standard assumption that consumers are
price takers. We extend the research just summarized by considering many more potential
determinants of BMI and obesity, especially those with significant trends. This is important in
attempting to explain the growth in obesity since the late 1970s. Although job strenuousness,
unemployment, and grocery prices are important determinants of BMI and obesity, trends in the
first two variables cannot account for the increase in obesity. Moreover, a focus on the role of
food at home prices ignores the dramatic shift away from the consumption of meals at home
during the past thirty years.

8

III. Analytical Framework
This section outlines aspects of a simple behavioral model of the determinants of obesity
using standard economic tools. Cawley (1999) and Philipson and his colleagues (Philipson and
Posner 1999; Lakdawalla and Philipson 2002) have developed more refined models, although the
Philipson studies focus on body mass index rather than on obesity. Our aim is to provide an
elementary framework to consider the effects of variables not explicitly treated in the models just
cited.
We begin with a relationship in which obesity is a function of an individual’s energy
balance over a number of time periods or ages. Let Bj, the energy balance in period j, be defined
as
Bj ≡ C j - E j,

(1)

where Cj are calories consumed in period j and Ej are calories expended in all activities in period
j. Obesity (O) is a cumulative function of the individual’s energy balance over a number of
periods:

O = O(∑ Bj , ε),

(2)

j

where ε is a vector of variables that is specific to an individual and is related to his or her genetic
predisposition towards obesity. Age, gender, race, and ethnicity also may enter this vector
because they influence the process by which energy balances are translated into changes in body
mass. Equation (2) highlights that a model of obesity must explain the determinants of calories
consumed and calories expended.
No one desires to be obese, although some people gain more utility from food than
others. Therefore, it is useful to consider obesity as the byproduct of other goals. Becker’s
(1965) household production function model of consumer behavior provides a framework for

9

studying the demand for caloric intakes and expenditures because it recognizes that consumers
use goods and services purchased in the market together with their own time to achieve or
produce more fundamental commodities that enter their utility or preference functions. Three
such commodities are health, the positive senses of taste and smell associated with the
consumption of food, and the entertainment provided by dining with family and friends in
restaurants or at home. In turn, they are related to the calories, nutrients, and other ingredients
contained in food and to the setting in which it is consumed. The relationship between health
and caloric consumption is complex. Persons who are too heavy or too thin face elevated risks
of mortality and illness. Thus persons at recommended weight levels can maintain health by
setting caloric intake equal to calories expended. With calories expended held constant, an
increase in calories consumed increases the health of those who are too thin and lowers the
health of those who are too heavy.
Households consume the ingredients in food via meals, and meals are produced with
inputs of food and time. Time enters the production of meals in a variety of ways. Obviously, it
is required to consume the food, but it also is required to obtain and prepare it. The production of
meals at home is the most intensive in the household’s own time, while the production of meals
in restaurants is the least intensive in that time. For a given quality, food consumed in
restaurants is more expensive than prepared food consumed at home, which in turn is more
expensive than food prepared and consumed at home.
Since time is a scarce resource, households have incentives to substitute towards less
time-intensive methods of producing meals when the value or price of time rises. One model of
the labor market assumes that employees are offered an hourly wage rate and are free to work as
many hours as they want at that wage. In this model, the price of an hour allocated to food

10

preparation equals the market wage rate. An increase in the wage creates obvious incentives to
purchase more convenience foods and to increase consumption of food in fast-food restaurants.
An alternative model of the labor market (for example, Trejo 1991) assumes that hours of
work are a job characteristic over which both firms and workers have preferences. Firms that
demand more hours per worker must pay a higher hourly wage rate. This approach can be
expanded to include a flexible hours sector of the economy and a number of constrained hours
sectors (Abowd and Ashenfelter 1981). In the constrained hours model, an exogenous increase in
work hours makes home time a scarcer resource and raises its price. This creates the same
incentives to purchase more convenience and restaurant food that are generated by an increase in
the wage rate in the unconstrained model.
The other variable in the energy balance equation is caloric expenditure. Calories are
expended at work, doing home chores, and at active leisure. Calories expended at work depend
on the nature of the occupation as emphasized by Lakdawalla and Philipson (2002). Individuals
who work more hours in the market will substitute market goods for their own time in other
activities. An increase in hours of work raises the price of active leisure and generates a
substitution effect that causes the number of hours spent in this activity to fall. An increase in
hours of work also lowers the time allocated to household chores.
Based on these considerations, we translate equation (2) from a theoretical to an
empirical construct by writing it as
O = O(C, L, HC, EW, CS, A, G, R),

(3)

where C is calories consumed, L is active leisure (either the time allocated to this activity or the
total energy expended by an average person in performing each of a variety of leisure activities),
HC is a similar concept pertaining to household chores, EW is energy expended by an average

11

person in the occupation performed by the individual at issue, CS is cigarette smoking, A is age,
G is gender, and R summarizes racial and ethnic background. Cigarette smoking is included in
equation (3) because smokers have higher metabolic rates than non-smokers. They also consume
fewer calories than non-smokers, so that cigarette consumption is a partial indicator of caloric
intakes in previous periods.
The framework that we have discussed generates demand functions for calories
consumed, active leisure, household chores, and cigarette smoking (another object of choice in
the utility function) that depend on a set of exogenous variables specified below and consisting
mainly of prices and income. Substitution of these equations into equation (3) yields:
O = O(H, F, P, S, M, EW, A, G, R),

(4)

where H is hours of work; F is family income; P is a vector of prices including the prices of
convenience foods, the prices of meals consumed at fast-food and at full-service restaurants, the
prices of food requiring significant preparation time, and the price of cigarettes; S is years of
formal schooling completed; and M is marital status. 5 We term equation (4) a reduced-form
equation because we treat the variables on the right-hand side as exogenous. Our goal is to
estimate it and a corresponding equation for body mass index.
We have not discussed the roles of a number of variables in the reduced form. With
hours of work held constant, an increase in income expands real resources. If health is a superior
commodity (a commodity whose optimal value rises as income rises with prices held constant)
and if an individual weighs less than his or her recommended weight, the demand for calories
grows. Even for consumers at or above recommended weight, calorie consumption increases if
foods that are important contributors to the positive senses of taste and smell are rich in calories.
In addition, visits to “upscale” full-service restaurants are likely to rise with income since the

12

entertainment provided by dining with friends and family in these settings is likely to have a
positive income elasticity. Their impact on obesity depends on the caloric content of the food
consumed.
The above factors do not necessarily mean that body mass or obesity will rise with
income because the increase in active leisure may offset or more than offset the increase in
caloric intakes. In addition, the price of time rises with income since the household experiences
an increase in the ratio of market goods to its own time. This makes home time a relatively
scarcer resource and generates the type of substitution effects towards convenience and fast food
that accompany an increase in hours of work. Note that the income or real resource effects that
accompany these two increases in the price of time go in opposite directions. This is because an
increase in money income (F) raises real resources, while an increase in hours of work (H)
lowers real resources.
Reductions in convenience food prices, fast-food restaurant prices, and certain fullservice restaurant prices, or increases in the prices of foods requiring significant preparation time
raise calorie consumption by inducing a substitution towards higher caloric intakes. It is
conceivable that the demand for active leisure may rise, although we consider this offset to the
potential increase in obesity to be unlikely. The price vector is not limited to food prices because
cigarette smoking is associated with lower weight levels, as previously noted. Many studies
summarized by Grossman (2001) have shown that cigarette consumption falls as the money price
of cigarettes rises. Restrictions on smoking in public places and in the workplace raise the “full
price” of smoking by increasing the inconvenience costs associated with this behavior. Trends in
the enactment of clean indoor air laws also may reflect increased information about the harmful
effects of smoking.

13

Years of formal schooling completed may increase efficiency in the production of a
variety of household commodities, expand knowledge concerning what constitutes a healthy diet,
and make the consumer more future oriented. These forces should lower the incidence of
obesity, possibly by lowering the demand for dense food or by increasing the demand for active
leisure by more than demand for calories. Marital status may affect the time available for
household chores and active leisure in a variety of ways.
Consumption of meals in restaurants requires travel and in some cases waiting time.
Hence, the full price of a meal in a restaurant should reflect this component as well as the money
price. Travel and waiting time should fall as the per capita number of restaurants in the
consumer’s area of residence rises. Therefore, we include the per capita numbers of fast-food
and full-service restaurants in our empirical analysis. This is particularly important because we
do not have direct measures of wage rates or hours of work, although we do use proxies in some
specifications. Restaurants, particularly fast food restaurants, should locate in areas in which
consumers have relatively high time values. Consequently, the availability of these restaurants
in a particular area is a negative correlate of travel and waiting time and a positive correlate of
the value that consumer’s place on their time.

IV. Empirical Implementation
To investigate the determinants of body mass index and obesity, we employ repeated
cross sections from the Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) for the years 1984
through 1999. The BRFSS consists of annual telephone surveys of persons ages 18 and older
conducted by state health departments in collaboration with the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC). Fifteen states participated in the first survey in 1984. The number of

14

participating states grew to 33 in 1987, to 45 in 1990, and to all 51 states (including the District
of Columbia) in 1996. The average number of interviews per state ranged from approximately
800 in 1984 to 1,800 in 1990, and to 3,000 in 1999. These state stratified cluster samples are
used by CDC to make state-specific estimates of the prevalence of lifestyle indicators and
behavioral factors that contribute to positive or negative health outcomes.
Definitions, means, and standard deviations of all variables employed in the regressions
in Section V are contained in Table 2. Except where noted, they are based on the sample of
1,111,074 that emerges when observations with missing values are deleted. The means and
standard deviations in the table and those cited in the text are computed based on BRFSS
sampling weights and are representative of the population at large. The weights are not
employed in the regression estimates since DuMouchel and Duncan (1983) and Maddala (1983,
pp. 171-173) have shown that this is not required in the case of exogenous stratification.
Self-reported data on height and weight allow us to construct the body mass index of
each respondent and indicators of whether he or she is obese. It is well known that self-reported
anthropometric variables contain measurement error with heavier persons more likely to
underreport their weight. Therefore, we employ procedures developed by Cawley (1999) to
correct for these errors. The third National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES
III) contains both actual weight and height from physical examinations and self-reported weight
and height. For persons 18 years of age and older in NHANES III, we regress actual weight on
reported weight and the square of reported weight. We also regress actual height on reported
height and the square of reported height. These regressions are estimated separately for eight
groups: white male non-Hispanics, white female non-Hispanics, black male non-Hispanics, black
female non-Hispanics, Hispanic males, Hispanic females, other males, and other females. 6 The

15

coefficients from these regressions are combined with the self-reported BRFSS data to adjust
height and weight and to compute BMI and the obesity indicator.7 These two measures are
employed as alternative dependent variables. Given the large sample size, we fit linear
probability models rather than logit or probit models when obese is the outcome.
The corrected mean values of BMI and obese all exceed values computed from reported
weight and height. For BMI, the corrected figure is 26.04 kg/m2, and the uncorrected figure is
25.40 kg/m2. According to the corrected data, 17.54 percent of the population is obese, compared
to an uncorrected figure of 13.75 percent. The simple correlation coefficient between corrected
and uncorrected BMI exceeds 0.99. The simple correlation coefficients between the corrected
and uncorrected obesity indicator is smaller (0.86) but still very substantial.
The trends in corrected BMI and the corrected percentages of the population obese are
plotted in Figure 1. Between 1984 and 1999, BMI increased by 2.13 kg/m2 or by 9 percent, and
the number of obese adults more than doubled. While the algorithm for adjusting self-reported
weight and height does raise BMI and obesity, the adjusted levels are still lower than those in
NHANES III. Nevertheless, annual rates of change in BRFSS appear to be comparable to those
between NHANES II and III.
The roles of all the independent variables in Table 2 in body mass and obesity outcomes
were discussed in Section III. Therefore, in the remainder of this section, we discuss the
definitions and sources of the variables that are appended to the BRFSS based on state of
residence and survey year.8 In addition, we address several estimation issues.
The number of fast-food restaurants and the number of full-service restaurants are taken
from the 1982, 1987, 1992, and 1997 Census of Retail Trade (Bureau of the Census 1986, 1989,
1994, 2000). For other years, these variables are obtained from interpolations and extrapolations

16

of state-specific logarithmic time trends. Except for 1999, the Bureau of the Census classifies
establishments based on the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) system. Fast-food
restaurants correspond to refreshment places (SIC category 5812/40). These are establishments
primarily selling limited lines of refreshments and prepared food items. Included are
establishments which prepare pizza, barbecued chicken, and hamburgers for consumption either
on or near the premises or for “take-home” consumption. Full-service restaurants are restaurants
and lunchrooms (SIC category 5812/10). They are establishments engaged in serving prepared
food selected by the patron from a full menu. Waiter or waitress service is provided, and the
establishment has seating facilities for at least 15 patrons. The distinction between fast-food and
full-service restaurants made by the Bureau of the Census is not clear-cut. In particular, many
full-service restaurants serve the type of high-caloric and inexpensive food that is offered by fastfood restaurants. In preliminary regressions, the coefficients of the two types of restaurants were
very similar. Therefore, we summed the fast-food and full-service restaurants and employ the
per capita number in the regressions in Section V.
The full-service restaurant price pertains to the average cost of a meal in this type of
restaurant and was taken from the same source as the number of full-service restaurants. The
Census of Retail Trade contains data on the number of restaurants whose average cost of a meal
falls in specific categories by state. The categories are less than $2.00, $2.00-$4.99, $5.00-$6.99,
$7.00-$9.99, $10.00-$14.99, $15.00-$19.99, $20.00-$29.99, and $30.00 and over. We assigned
midpoints to the closed end categories, an average cost of $1.50 to the smallest category, and an
average cost of $45.00 to the highest category. We then computed price as a weighted average
of the average cost in each category, where the weights are the number of restaurants in each
category in the state. The use of midpoints and the failure to adjust for quality imply that the

17

restaurant price variable suffers from measurement error. In addition, the price in 1982, which is
required to obtain estimates for 1984, 1985, and 1986, is based on much broader average cost
categories than those in 1987. 9
The fast-food price and the food at home price come from prices in the ACCRA Cost of
Living Index, published quarterly by the American Chamber of Commerce Researchers
Association (ACCRA various years), for between 250 and 300 cities. Three fast-food prices are
reported by this source: a McDonald’s Quarter-Pounder with cheese, a thin crusted cheese pizza
at Pizza Hut or Pizza Inn, and fried chicken at Kentucky Fried Chicken or Church’s. We
obtained quarterly state-specific prices as population-weighted averages of the city prices and
then averaged over the four quarters in a given year to get annual prices.
The ACCRA collects prices of 59 different items and also reports the weight of each item
in the typical budget a of household whose head holds a midmanagement position. The budget
shares of each of the three fast-food items were equal to each other in the period from 1984
through 1999. Therefore, the fast-food price employed in the regressions is a simple average of
the three ACCRA fast-food prices divided by the annual Bureau of Labor Statistics Consumer
Price Index (CPI) for the U.S. as a whole (1982-84 = 1). All other money prices, money income,
and wage rates in the regressions are deflated by the CPI. 10
The food at home price is constructed from 13 food prices obtained by ACCRA. As in
the case of fast-food prices, we obtained quarterly state-specific prices as population-weighted
averages of the city prices and then averaged over the four quarters in a given year to get annual
prices. The final food at home price is a weighted average of these thirteen prices, where the
weights are the average expenditure shares of these items as reported by the ACCRA during the

18

years from 1984 through 1999. Since the weights are fixed over time, the resulting price is a
Laspeyres food at home price level.11
The price of cigarettes is taken from the Tax Burden on Tobacco (Orzechowski and
Walker 2002 and formerly published by the Tobacco Institute). The price in this source is given
as a weighted-average price per pack, using national weights for each type of cigarette (regular,
king, 100-mm) and type of transaction (carton, single pack, machine). It is inclusive of Federal
and state excise taxes. 12 The clean indoor air regulations (private, government, restaurant, and
other) are taken from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website
(http://www2.cdc.gov/nccdph/osh/state).
The BRFSS contains extremely limited information on labor market variables.
Therefore, we use the Current Population Survey (CPS) Merged Outgoing Rotation Groups Files
(Bureau of Labor Statistics and Bureau of the Census 2000) to obtain usual hours worked per
week by employed workers, hourly wage rates of employed workers (usual weekly earnings
divided by usual hours worked), and employment rates (ratios of employment to population) by
state and year for 64 demographic groups. These groups are defined by gender (males and
females), race (white non-Hispanic and other), marital status (married and other), age (25
through 44 and 45 through 64), and years of formal schooling completed (less than 12, 12, 13-15,
and 16 and over). Since many persons between the ages of 18 and 24 are attending college and
many persons over the age of 64 are retired, we limit the regressions containing labor market
variables to persons between the ages of 25 and 64. Since earnings and hours are poorly
measured for the self-employed, we also exclude this group from the CPS tabulations and from
the BRFSS regressions that include the CPS variables.
We construct two alternative measures of the value of time. One is usual hours worked

19

per week and per worker in one of the 64 cells in a given state and year multiplied by the
employment ratio in that cell (the number of employed people divided by the sum of the number
of employed people, the number of unemployed people, and the number of people not in the
labor force). The second is the hourly wage rate of persons in the cell multiplied by the
employment rate. The first variable can be interpreted as expected hours worked per week
(hours worked per week multiplied by the probability of working those hours), and the second
variable can be interpreted as the expected hourly wage rate. The expected hours variable is the
most relevant one if one thinks that workers cannot freely vary their hours, while the expected
wage variable is a better measure of the value of time when workers can vary their hours. Both
variables, however, reflect changes in labor force and employment rates, which are particularly
relevant in the case of women, as well as changes in hours or wage rates among employed
workers. Each BRFSS respondent between the ages of 25 and 64 is assigned an expected hours
of work and an expected wage based on the respondent’s state of residence, year of interview,
and demographic characteristics.
The main aim of the empirical analysis in the next section is to see how much of the trend
in the prevalence of the percentage of the population that is obese and in body mass index can be
accounted for by the state-specific variables just defined. If pure trend terms are included in the
regressions, this aim is difficult to achieve because of multicollinearity between the state-specific
variables and time. This problem is exacerbated because the restaurant measure had to be
interpolated and extrapolated for years not covered by the Census or Retail Trade. Therefore, we
fit three models for each of the two outcomes. The first includes only variables measured in the
BRFSS, time, and the square of time. The second omits the trend terms and includes the statespecific variables, while the third includes all regressors. We then use the second and third

20

models to “explain” trends in obesity and BMI between 1984 and 1999 and in between 1960/61
(the mid-year of NHES I) and 1978 (the mid-year of NHANES II). We use a quadratic trend
rather than time dummies in order to address the behavior of obesity prior to 1984. Moreover, a
specification with time dummies forces the national mean of the dependent variable to lie on the
regression line in each year. Thus it “stacks the deck” in favor of the pure trend model relative to
the model with state-specific variables. To be consistent with our treatment of trend effects, we
employ a quadratic specification for each continuous variable. In preliminary regressions we
found evidence that most of these variables had non-linear effects. We go part of the way
towards a full fixed-effects specification by including a set of dichotomous variables for each
state except one in all regressions. Hence we control for unmeasured determinants of obesity
that vary among states but do not vary over time. These unmeasured determinants may be
correlated with the state-specific variables. We allow the coefficients of the state-specific
variables to be determined by within-state variation over time and by national variation over time
in one of the two specifications with these variables. We emphasize results with this
specification because it does a much better job of explaining trends in obesity before 1984 than
the specification with trend terms.

V. Results
Table 3 and 4 contain ordinary least squares regressions of body mass index and the
probability of being obese, respectively, for persons 18 years of age and older. Three regressions
are presented in each table. Robust or Huber (1967) standard errors, which allow for state/year
clustering, are obtained.
The six regressions in the two tables have low explanatory power, with R squares ranging

21

from 4 to 8 percent. In part this is because more than a million people are included in the
regressions. But the main reason is that body mass index and obesity have large genetic
components. In this context it is important to emphasize that our aim is to explain the increasing
prevalence of obesity rather than to explain why a given individual is obese. This perspective is
important because genetic characteristics of the population change slowly, while the incidence of
obesity has increased rapidly. To be sure, some individual characteristics, such as years of
formal schooling completed, may be correlated with genetic determinants of weight outcomes. 13
But there is little reason to believe that the state-specific variables that we consider are correlated
with heredity.
Focusing on the effects of the individual characteristics in the first model in each table,
one sees that age has an inverted U-shaped effect. BMI peaks at an age of approximately 57,
while the probability of being obese peaks at an age of 45. Black non-Hispanics and Hispanics
have higher values of both outcomes than whites, while persons of other races have lower values.
Males have higher BMI levels than females, but females are more likely to be obese. Married
and widowed persons have higher levels of BMI than single (never married) and divorced
individuals, these relations carry over to the prevalence of obesity.
Years of formal schooling completed and real household income have negative effects on
BMI and the probability of being obese. There is little evidence that the schooling effect falls as
the amount of schooling rises. Differentials between college graduates and those who attended
college but did not graduate are almost as large as differentials between the latter group and
persons who did not attend high school. Graduation from college appears to maximize the
probability that BMI is in the range that minimizes mortality and morbidity risks since the
differentials between those with some college and those who are high school graduates are small.

22

Although the negative effect of household income on BMI or obesity falls as income
rises, the effect remains negative throughout almost all the observed income range. At weighted
sample means, the income elasticity of body mass index is modest (0.03). The income elasticity
of the probability of being obese of 0.50 is more substantial.
Finally both time and the square of time have positive and statistically significant
coefficients. This suggests that the two outcomes increased at an increasing rate during the
period from 1984 through 1999.
The second model in each table introduces the set of state-specific regressors. Despite
the relatively large number of variables in the set and the considerable amount of
intercorrelations among them, most of their coefficients have the expected signs and are
statistically significant. Regardless of the outcome considered, the per capita number of
restaurants and the real price of cigarettes have positive and significant effects at weighted
sample mean. Along the same lines, the real fast-food restaurant price, the real food at home
price and the real full- service restaurant price have negative and significant effects at weighted
sample means.
The effects of the clean indoor air laws do not show a consistent pattern. Restrictions on
cigarette smoking in restaurants have no role in weight outcomes. This is surprising because
these restrictions are most likely to encourage a substitution of food for cigarettes. Restrictions
in state and local government workplaces are associated with higher levels of BMI and higher
prevalence rates of obesity, but the coefficients are not significant. Private workplace
restrictions never are significant and are associated with higher levels of BMI and obesity.
Restrictions in elevators, public transportation, and theaters (reflected by the dichotomous
indicator other) raise both two weight outcomes, with the obesity effect achieving significance.

23

Table 5 contains elasticities of the two outcomes with respect to the continuous statespecific variables at the points of weighted sample means. As in the case of income, the
elasticity of body mass index with respect to any of these variables is modest. The largest
elasticity of 0.17 pertains to the per capita number of restaurants. This elasticity is seven times
larger than the absolute value of the income elasticity. When the probability of being obese is
the outcome, the elasticities in Table 5 are much more substantial. For example, a 10 percent
increase in the number of restaurants increases the number of obese people by 9 percent. With
regard to the three direct food price variables, the greatest responses occur when the real fastfood restaurant price varies. The elasticities of BMI and the probability of being obese with
respect to this price are –0.05 and –0.39, respectively. Like Cawley (1999) and Lakdawalla and
Philipson (2002), we find that weight outcomes rise when food at home prices decline. The
magnitude of the relevant elasticity is, however, only 70 to 90 percent as large as the
corresponding fast-food restaurant price elasticity. The full-service restaurant price elasticity is
never larger than -0.08, but this elasticity may be biased downward, as noted above.
The positive cigarette price elasticities in Table 5 indicate substitution between calories
and nicotine. The magnitude of the effect is almost as large as the food at home price elasticity.
These results point to an unintended consequence of the anti-smoking campaign. In particular,
state and Federal excise tax hikes and the settlement of state Medicaid lawsuits have caused the
real price of cigarettes to rise substantially. Our findings suggest that this development
contributed to the upward trend in obesity.
The large elasticities with regard to the per capita number of restaurants emerge from
models that hold the real fast-food restaurant price and the real full-service restaurant price
constant. A simple supply and demand model predicts that these two variables should be

24

negatively correlated if the demand function for restaurants is more stable than the supply
function and positively correlated if the supply function is more stable. Only a minor change in
the restaurant elasticity occurs when the price variables are deleted, implying that the supply
function is very elastic. The reader should keep in mind that the per capita number of restaurants
is employed as a proxy for the travel time and waiting time costs involved in obtaining meals at
these eating places. A literal interpretation of the elasticities in Table 5 implicates fast-food and
full-service restaurants as culprits in undesirable weight outcomes. But a very different
interpretation emerges if one recognizes that the growth in these restaurants, and especially fastfood restaurants, is to a large extent a response to the increasing scarcity and increasing value of
household or nonmarket time.
The third model in Tables 3 and 4 includes the trend terms as well as the state-specific
variables. At the mean full-service restaurant price, the marginal effect of this variable switches
from negative to positive. The marginal effects of the remaining continuous state-specific
variables retain their signs but are reduced substantially in absolute value. In our view, these
results suggest that the third model is plagued by multicollinearity and that it employs too many
regressors to explain trends in obesity. We return to this issue at the end of this section.
Table 6 introduces our two alternative measures of the value of time into the second and
third models in Tables 3 and 4. These two measures are the expected hourly wage (the stateyear-age-race-gender-schooling-marital-status-specific hourly wage rate multiplied by the
corresponding employment rate) and the expected number of hours worked per week. It is
important to bear in mind that both variables reflect changes in labor force and employment
rates, which are particularly relevant in the case of women, as well as changes in hours or wage
rates among employed workers. We restrict the sample to persons between the ages of 25 and

25

64. The sample size is reduced from 1,111,074 to 722,090 when 18 to 24 year olds, those older
than 64, and observations with missing CPS cells are deleted. We only report coefficients of the
hourly wage, the hourly wage squared (columns 1 and 2), weekly hours and weekly hours
squared (columns 3 and 4) in Table 6.
Either the expected wage rate or the expected number of hours of work has a positive and
very significant effect on each of the two outcomes. At the point of means, the elasticity of BMI
with respect to the wage is 0.03, and the elasticity of BMI with respect to hours is 0.04. When
the probability of being obese is considered, these elasticities are 0.32 and 0.19, respectively.
The significance and magnitudes of the wage and hours effects are not altered when the trend
terms are included.
These findings concerning the relationship between obesity and labor market outcomes
are related to but not entirely comparable with those in studies by Averett and Korenman (1996),
Cawley (2000), and Lakdawalla and Philipson (2002). The first two studies stress causality from
obesity to labor market outcomes, perhaps due to discrimination. Behrman and Rosenzweig
(2001) report, however, that the negative effect of BMI on wage rates can be traced to
unobserved individual effects. Lakdawalla and Philipson (2002) argue that the negative effect of
earned income on BMI (beyond a certain income level) is weakened if work is sedentary. Our
specification differs from those found in the research just discussed because we examine the
effect of time allocated to the market or its value on obesity with household income held
constant. Hence, we focus on pure substitution effects associated with a rise in the price of time.
Our results can be traced to incentives to reduce active leisure and to increase the consumption of
convenience food and fast food because these are ways to economize on scarce time.

26

The main purpose of this paper is to gain an understanding of the factors associated with
the stability in obesity between the early 1960s and the late 1970s and the rapid increase since
that time. Tables 7 and 8 address the latter issue by examining how well selected models predict
the increases in obesity and related outcomes between 1984 and 1999. Table 7 pertains to
persons ages 18 years of age and older, while Table 8 pertains to persons between the ages of 25
and 64. The estimates in Table 7 are based on regression models in Table 3. The procedure
simply is to multiply the change in a given variable between the initial and terminal year by the
coefficient of that variable. In the cases of race/ethnicity, schooling, marital status, the clean
indoor air laws, and variables in quadratic form, predicted changes associated with related
variables (married, divorced, and widowed in the case of marital status) are summed to form a
single factor.
During the period at issue BMI rose from 24.94 kg/m2 to 27.07 kg/m2, and the percentage
of the population obese rose from 11.05 percent to 24.04 percent. The model with the individual
characteristics and the trend explains 97 percent of the growth in BMI and 99 percent of the
growth in the number of obese persons. The model with the state-specific variables slightly
overpredicts both outcomes. Hence, there is little to choose between these two models; either
one does about as good a job in explaining the trend as the other. This finding highlights why
problems arise when both the trend and the state-specific variables are included in the same
regression. In particular, trends in the state-specific variables account for trends in obesity.
Once these variables are included the trend becomes redundant. 14
Regardless of the model employed, race/ethnicity, schooling, marital status, and
household income contribute little to an understanding in the behavior of obesity over time.
Indeed, the last three variables predict reductions in obesity. This is because schooling, real

27

household income, and the fraction of the population divorced grew in the period at issue, while
the fraction of the population married declined.
Without trend terms, the increase in the per capita number of restaurants makes the
largest contribution to trends in weight outcomes, accounting for 69 percent of the growth in
BMI and 68 percent of the rise in the percentage obese. The real price of cigarettes ranks second,
with a contribution roughly one third as large as that due to restaurants. The three real food
prices considered fell during the period at issue, causing the weight outcomes to rise. But the
declines were modest and explain little of the trend. The largest contribution is made by the food
at home price and contributes 6 percent to the trends in BMI and obesity. The rising prevalence
of clean indoor air laws has about the same impact as the reduction in the fast-food restaurant
price.
The model with all variables slightly overpredicts both weight outcomes. It attributes
most of the increase in these outcomes to unmeasured trend factors. This is not surprising given
the diminished effects of the state-specific variables in this specification. Despite the high
correlation between the restaurant measure and time, the former still accounts for 10 percent of
the growth in BMI and 12 percent of the rise in the percentage obese.
Table 8 contains a similar analysis of trends in weight outcomes for persons between the
ages of 25 and 64. The four models employed in Table 6 are used for each outcome. Recall that
trends in either labor market variable reflect the behavior of the employment rate over time as
well as the behavior of hours worked per employed person or the wage rate per employed
person.
The contributions of factors already discussed do not change when the age range of the
sample is restricted. The new results pertain to the hourly wage and weekly hours. The

28

contribution of either variable to trends in weight outcomes is rather modest. In the model
without time and its square, the hourly wage ranks fourth in importance after trends in
restaurants, cigarette prices and food at home price. It explains about 5 percent of the growth in
a given outcome. In the model with time and its square, the trend terms, hourly wage ranks
second among determinants other than the trend, although the magnitude of its contribution to
trends in weight outcomes does not change. If pure time effects are excluded, weekly hours is
the least important determinant of trends in BMI and the percentage obese. With the trend terms,
weekly hours ranks higher than fast-food restaurant price, full-service restaurant price and clean
indoor air laws as a determinant of the growth in the number of obese persons between the ages
of 25 and 64. The absolute value of the negative household income effect in Table 8 is
approximately the same in magnitude as wage or hours effect. Hence an explanation as to why
the growth in household income did not result in better weight outcomes is that it was
accompanied by increases in labor force participation, hours of work, and wage rates.
As shown in Table 1, BMI, and the percentage obese were very stable between 1960/61
(the mid-year of NHES I) and 1978 (the mid-year of NHANES II). We conclude by applying
our estimated regression coefficients to trends in exogenous variables between those two years in
an attempt to explain why weight outcomes did not rise in that eighteen-year period. The results
of this exercise are contained in Table 9. Panel A of the table pertains to persons ages 18 and
over, while panel B pertains to persons ages 25 through 64.
Since a consistent series on household income is not available over this period, median
family income is used in its place. This variable as well as marital status and schooling are taken
from the Bureau of the Census (various years). The initial year values of the number of fast-food
and full-service restaurants are averages of the figures reported in the 1958 and 1963 Census of

29

Business (Bureau of the Census 1961, 1966). Effects due to fast-food and full-service restaurant
prices are omitted because there are no measures of these prices in 1960. Trends in the food at
home price are based on the series in the Consumer Price Index (Bureau of the Census various
years).15 Labor market variables for the initial year come from the 1960 Census of Population
(Bureau of the Census 1964). To avoid distorting the upward trend due to predicted troughs at
negative time values, a linear approximation to the trend effect is employed. 16
Focusing on panel A, one sees that the specification with the trend fails to explain the
stability of weight outcomes between 1960 and 1978. That specification predicts much larger
increases in these outcomes than the very modest ones that actually occurred. Increases in
schooling and real family income and changes in marital status offset a very small portion of the
pure trend component. The model that replaces the trend with state-specific variables is much
more successful. It predicts very small reductions in the outcomes compared to the very small
increases that actually took place. The estimates in panel B tell the same story. Taken as a
whole, the results in the table underscore the problems that can arise when a trend is used to
capture the effects of unobserved time-varying variables.
The main reason for the success of the model with state-specific variables is that the per
capita number of full-service restaurants fell between 1960 and 1978. While more credence
might be given to this result if the per capita number of fast-food restaurants declined, the
distinction between these two types of restaurants is not “hard and fast.” Some full-service
restaurants serve the high-caloric food offered by fast-food restaurants. Hence the growth of
both types of restaurants after 1978 but the growth in only one type before that year is the
explanation that we offer for the stability in obesity between 1960 and 1978 and its expansion
after 1978.

30

Our explanation is subject to several caveats. Trends in cigarette prices account for little
of the trend in obesity because the real cigarette price in 1960 was almost the same as the real
price in 1978. If, however, a year in the mid-1960s had been selected as the initial year, the real
price of cigarettes would have fallen, and the predicted negative cigarette price component would
have been larger in absolute value. More importantly, adult smoking participation rates fell
between 1960 and 1978 as well as after that year. Absolute declines in the two periods were
very similar (Public Health Service 1996). Obesity should have increased in both periods due to
this factor alone. Our model appears to be missing a variable that can account for the reduction
in smoking in the earlier period since the increasing prevalence of clean indoor air laws has small
effects. 17 This suggests that it also is missing a variable that can offset the positive impact of
declines in smoking on obesity.

VI. Summary
In this paper we have examined the extent to which relative price variations determine
variations in body mass index and obesity among adults and the extent to which changes in
relative prices over time contribute to an understanding of trends in weight outcomes. The set of
relative prices includes state level measures pertaining to the per capita number of restaurants,
the price of a meal in fast-food and full-service restaurants, the price of food consumed at home,
the price of cigarettes, clean indoor air laws, and hours of work per week and hourly wage rates
by age, gender, race, years of formal schooling completed, and marital status. Our main results
are that these variables have the expected effects on obesity and explain a substantial amount of
its trend. These findings control for individual level measures of household income, years of
formal schooling completed, and marital status.

31

Two results stand out. The first is the large positive elasticities associated with the per
capita number of restaurants and the importance of trends in this variable in explaining the
stability of obesity between 1960 and 1978 and the increase since 1978. A literal interpretation
of this result implicates fast-food and full-service restaurants as culprits in undesirable weight
outcomes. But a very different interpretation emerges if one recognizes that the growth in these
restaurants, and especially fast-food restaurants, is to a large extent a response to the increasing
scarcity and increasing value of household or nonmarket time. Indeed, we have presented
evidence of direct positive effects of increased labor market attachment on obesity. In a fuller
model that perhaps treated restaurant availability as endogenous, labor market attachment would
have indirect effects that operate through restaurant availability.
The second result that stands out is the positive cigarette price coefficient. This result
points to an unintended consequence of the anti-smoking campaign. In particular, state and
Federal excise tax hikes and the settlement of state Medicaid lawsuits have caused the real price
of cigarettes to rise substantially. Our findings suggest that this development contributed to the
upward trend in obesity.
In a sense, both findings underscore the price that must be paid to achieve goals that in
general are favored by society. Expanded labor market opportunities for women have resulted in
significant increases in families’ command of real resources and higher living standards.
Cigarette smoking is the largest cause of premature death, and declines in this behavior have
obvious health benefits. Our results suggest that these two factors contribute to the rising
prevalence of obesity. Whether public policies should be pursued that offset this ignored
consequence of previous actions to discourage smoking and increase market opportunities
depends on the costs and benefits of these policies.

32

The reduced form approach to the determinants of obesity in this paper would be
complemented and enriched by a structural approach in which caloric intake, energy expenditure,
and cigarette smoking are treated as endogenous determinants of weight. A study that takes this
approach deserves high priority on an agenda for future research.

33

References
Abowd, John M., and Ashenfelter, Orley. “Anticipated Unemployment, Temporary Layoffs, and
Compensating Wage Differentials.” In Studies in Labor Markets, edited by Sherwin
Rosen. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1981, 141-170.
Allison, David B.; Fontaine, Kevin R.; Manson, JoAnne E.; Stevens, June; and VanItallie,
Theodore B. “Annual Deaths Attributable to Obesity in the United States.” Journal of
the American Medical Association, 282, No. 16 (October 27, 1999), 1530-1538.
American Chamber of Commerce Researchers Association. ACCRA Cost of Living Index.
Arlington, Virginia: ACCRA, various years.
Averett, Susan, and Korenman, Sanders. “The Economic Reality of the Beauty Myth.”
Journal of Human Resources, 31, No. 2 (Summer 1996), 304-330.
Becker, Gary S. “A Theory of the Allocation of Time.” Economic Journal, 75, No. 299
(September 1965), 493-517.
Behrman, Jere R., and Rosenzweig, Mark R. “The Returns to Increasing Body Weight.”
Working Paper, Department of Economics, University of Pennsylvania, February 2001.
Bluestone, Barry, and Ross, Stephen. “Overworked and Underemployed: Unraveling an
Economic Enigma.” The American Prospect, 31 (March-April 1997), 58-69.
Bureau of the Census, U.S. Department of Commerce. 1958 and 1963 Census of Business.
Washington, D. C.: U. S. Government Printing Office, 1961 and 1966.
Bureau of the Census, U.S. Department of Commerce. 1960 Census of Population. Washington,
D. C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1964.

34

Bureau of the Census, U. S. Department of Commerce. 1972, 1982, 1987, 1992, and 1997
Census of Retail Trade. Washington, D. C.: U. S. Government Printing Office, 1976,
1986, 1989, 1994, and 2000.
Bureau of the Census, U. S. Department of Commerce. Statistical Abstract of the United States
Washington, D. C.: U. S. Government Printing Office, various years.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, U. S. Department of Labor, and Bureau of the Census, U. S.
Department of Commerce. Current Population Survey: Design and Methodology.
Technical Paper 63. March 2000.
Cawley, John. “Body Weight and Women’s Labor Market Outcomes.” National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 7841, August 2000.
Cawley, John. “Rational Addiction, the Consumption of Calories, and Body Weight.” Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Chicago, 1999.
Costa, Dora L., and Steckel, Richard H. “Long-Term Trends in Health, Welfare, and Economic
Growth in the United States.” In Health and Welfare during Industrialization, edited by
Richard H. Steckel and Roderick Floud. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1997, 4789.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention website http://www2.cdc.gov/nccdph/osh/state.
DuMouchel, William, and Duncan, Greg J. “Using Sample Survey Weights in Multiple
Regression Analysis of Stratified Samples.” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, 78, No. 383 (September 1983), 535-543.
Evans, William; Farrelly, Matthew C.; and Montgomery, Edward. “Do Workplace Smoking
Bans Reduce Smoking?” American Economic Review, 89, No. 4 (September 1999),
728-747.

35

Fogel, Robert W., and Costa, Dora L. “A Theory of Technophysic Evolution, with Some
Implications for Forecasting Population, Health Care, and Pension Costs.” Demography,
34, No. 1 (February 1997), 49-66.
Grossman, Michael. “The Economics of Substance Use and Abuse: The Role of Price.” In The
Economic Analysis of Substance Use and Abuse: The Experience of Developed
Countries and Lessons for Developing Countries, edited by Michael Grossman and CheeRuey Hsieh. Cheltenham, United Kingdom: Edward Elgar Limited, 2001, 1-30.
Huber, P. J. “The Behavior of Maximum Likelihood Estimates Under Nonstandard Conditions.”
In Fifth Berkeley Symposium on Mathematical Statistics and Probability. Berkeley,
California: University of California Press, 1967, 221-233.
Kolata, Gina. “2 Top Diet Drugs Are Recalled Amid Reports of Heart Defects.” New
York Times, September 16, 1997, A1 and A25.
Lakdawalla, Darius, and Philipson, Tomas. “The Growth of Obesity and Technological Change:
A Theoretical and Empirical Investigation.” National Bureau of Economic Research
Working Paper No. 8965, May 2002.
Maddala, G. S. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics. Cambridge,
England: Cambridge University Press, 1983.
McGinnis, J. Michael, and Foege, William. H. “Actual Causes of Death in the United States.”
Journal of the American Medical Association, 270, No. 18 (November 10, 1993), 22072212.
Mela, David J., and Rogers, Peter J. Food, Eating and Obesity: The Psychobiological Basis of
Appetite and Weight Control. London: Chapman and Hall, 1998.
Moore, Michael J. “The Political Economy of Workplace Smoking.” Working Paper, Darden

36

Graduate School of Business Administration, University of Virginia, July 2001.
Naik, Narayan Y., and Moore, Michael J. “Habit Formation and Intertemporal Substitution in
Individual Food Consumption.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 78, No. 2 (May
1996), 321-328.
National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health. “Clinical Guidelines on
the Identification, Evaluation, and Treatment of Overweight and Obesity in Adults-The
Evidence Report.” Obesity Research 6, Supplement 2 ( September 1998), 51S-215S.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Statistics Related to
Overweight and Obesity. NIH Publication No. 96-4158. Washington, D. C.: U. S.
Government Printing Office, 1996.
Orzechowski, William, and Walker, Robert. The Tax Burden on Tobacco: Volume 36, 2001 .
Arlington, VA: Orzechowski and Walker, 2002.
Philipson, Tomas. “The World-Wide Growth in Obesity: An Economic Research Agenda.”
Health Economics, 10, No. 1 (January 2001), 1-7.
Philipson, Tomas, and Posner, Richard A. “The Long-Run Growth in Obesity as a Function of
Technological Change.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7423,
November 1999.
Public Health Service, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Health United States
1995. Washington, D. C.: U. S. Government Printing Office, 1996.
Public Health Service, U. S. Department of Health and Human Services. Healthy People 2010:
National Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Objectives. Washington, D. C.: U. S.
Government Printing Office, 2001.

37

Ruhm, Christopher J. “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?” Quarterly Journal of Economics
115, No. 2 (May 2000), 616-650.
Schlosser, Eric. Fast Food Nation: The Dark Side of the All-American Meal. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin Company, 2001.
Stevens, June; Cai, Jianwen; Pamuk, Elsie R.; Williamson, David F.; Thun, Michael J; and
Wood, Joy L. “The Effects of Age on the Association Between Body-Mass Index and
Mortality.” New England Journal of Medicine, 338, No. 1 (January 1, 1998), 1-7.
Trejo, Stephen J. “The Effects of Overtime Pay Regulation on Worker Compensation.”
American Economic Review, 81, No. 4 (September1991), 719-740.
Wolf, Anne, and Colditz, Graham. “Current Estimates of the Economic Cost of Obesity in the
United States.” Obesity Research, 6, No. 2 (1998), 97-106.
World Health Organization. Obesity: Preventing and Managing the Global Epidemic. Geneva:
World Health Organization, 1997.

38

Footnotes
Research for this paper was supported by grant number 5R01 DK54826 from the
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases to the National Bureau of
Economic Research. We are indebted to Inas Rashad and Neeraj Kaushal for research
assistance. We also are indebted to Anna M. Jacobson for advice with regard to data on fastfood and full-service restaurants in the Census of Retail Trade. We wish to thank David B.
Allison for helpful comments and suggestions. Preliminary versions of this paper were presented
at the Third Annual International Health Economics Association Conference, the 23rd Annual
Association for Public Policy Analysis & Management Research Conference, the RAND
Corporation, the Leonard Davis Institute at the University of Pennsylvania, the Johns Hopkins
University School of Hygiene and Public Health, and the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. We are grateful to the participants in those conferences and seminars for comments
and suggestions. This paper has not undergone the review accorded official NBER publications;
in particular, it has not been submitted for approval by the Board of the Directors. Any opinions
expressed are those of the authors and not those of NIDDKD or NBER.
1

The figures in Table 1 are based on our computations with these surveys. They differ

slightly from published estimates because we consider a somewhat broader age range and
because we include pregnant women. The exclusion of pregnant women and persons below the
age of 20 has almost no impact on levels or trends.
2

Costa and Steckel (1997) and Fogel and Costa (1997) show that the long-term increase

in BMI is the major “proximate cause” of the long-term reduction in mortality and morbidity in
the U.S. and other countries. This finding is analogous to the key role played by birthweight in
infant survival outcomes. Of course, the studies just cited recognize that BMI is endogenous.

39

3

This assumes that the increase in the percentage of the population who are obese of 0.59

percentage points a year between the mid-years of NHANES II and NHANES III will continue
until 2010.
4

Available calories are greater than calories actually consumed since some proportion are

lost to waste and spoilage.
5

In an unconstrained hours of work model, the hourly wage rate replaces hours of work

in equation (4).
6

The other category consists of persons who are not white, black, or Hispanic and

primarily includes Asians, Pacific Islanders, Native Americans, and Eskimos. The number of
people in this category is very small.
7

We eliminated the extremely small number of BRFSS respondents with an uncorrected

BMI of less than 11 or greater than 140.
8

Starting in 1989, county of residence codes are contained in the BRFSS. These codes,

however, are missing for many respondents.
9

In that year, the categories are less than $2.00, $2.00-$4.99, $5.00-$9.99, and $10.00

and over.
10

The ACCRA reports a cost of living index for each city which can be employed to

compute a state-specific cost-of-living index. We chose not to do this because the index reflects
cost differentials among areas for households whose heads hold midmanagement positions.
Clearly, these households have higher incomes than those headed by clerical workers or by
average urban consumers. In particular, homeownership costs are more heavily weighted than
they would be if the index reflected clerical workers’ or average urban consumers’ standards of
living.

40

11

A detailed description of the food at home price is available on request.

12

Starting in 1990, the source contains two price series: one that includes generic brands

and one that excludes these brands. For purposes of comparability, the series that excludes
generic brands is employed. The two price series are extremely highly correlated.
13

Suppose that u and g are unobserved variables. An increase in u, which might

represent mental ability, raises schooling; while an increase in g, which might represent the
genetic propensity towards obesity, raises this outcome and BMI. If g and u are negatively
correlated, the schooling coefficient in an obesity or bmi regression is biased away from zero in a
negative direction. The reverse holds if u and g are positively correlated. Trends in schooling
over periods as short as three or four decades are unlikely to be explained by trends in u. But
some caution should be exercised when cross-sectional regression coefficients are applied to
these trends. For a detailed analysis of the roles of heredity and the environment in schooling,
body mass, and wage outcomes, see Behrman and Rosenzweig (2001).
14

A purist might demand a result in which the trend is insignificant in a regression with

the state-specific variables. But given the degree of collinearity in the data, this is an extremely
demanding criterion.
15

To preserve the magnitude of this variable, it is multiplied by the ratio of the ACCRA

real food at home price to the CPI real food at home price in 1984.
16

Let α be the coefficient of time (t) and let β be the coefficient of the square of time.

The trend component in Table 16 is (α + 2β*8)*18. The term in parentheses is the effect of time
on a given outcome evaluated at its mean value of 8 in the BRFSS. This coincides with the
coefficient of t that emerges when t2 is omitted from the set of regressors. A literal interpretation
of the quadratic specification suggests a trough in a year prior to 1984 (the first year of the

41

BRFSS) and given by t = -α/2β. This is inconsistent with long-term trends in BMI reported by
Costa and Steckel (1997). As an alternative, we also computed the trend component as
18α + 182β. The two estimates are very similar.
17

Evans, Farrelly, and Montgomery (1999) find that workplace smoking bans have very

large negative effects on smoking participation. Moore (2001) reports this relationship reflects
the underlying preferences of workers and employers rather than a direct causal process.

42

Table 1

Trends in Body Mass Index and the Percentage Obese,
Persons 18 Years of Age and Oldera

Body Mass Indexb

Percentage Obesec

1959-1962

24.91

12.73

NHANES I

1971-1975

25.14

13.85

NHANES II

1976-1980

25.16

13.95

NHANES III

1988-1994

26.40

21.62

Survey

Period

NHES Id

a

The surveys are as follows: National Health Examination Survey I (NHES I), National Health and
Nutrition Examination Survey I (NHANES I), National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey II
(NHANES II), and National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey III (NHANES III). Survey
weights are employed in all computations.
b

Weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared.

c

Percentage with body mass index equal to or greater than 30.

d

In computations with NHES, two pounds are subtracted from actual weight since examined persons were
weighed with clothing.

43

Table 2
Definitions, Means, and Standard Deviations of Variables a

Variable

Definition

Body mass index

Weight in kilograms divided by height in meters squared

Obese

Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if body mass index is
equal to or greater than 30
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is black but
not Hispanic
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is Hispanic

Black non-Hispanic
Hispanic
Other race
Male
Some high school
High school graduate
Some college
College graduate
Married
Divorced

Mean and
Standard Deviationa

Dichotomous variable if respondent’s race is other than white
or black
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is male
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent completed
at least 9 years but less than 12 years of formal schooling
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent completed
exactly 12 years of formal schooling
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent completed
at least 13 years but less than 16 years of formal schooling
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent graduated
from college
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is married

Widowed

Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is divorced
or separated
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if respondent is widowed

Household income

Real household income in thousands of 1982-84 dollars

Age

Age of respondent

Time

Time in years, 1984 equals one

Restaurants

Number of fast-food restaurants and full-service restaurants
per ten thousand persons in respondent’s state of residenceb

44

26.015
(4.959)
0.175
(0.380)
0.092
(0.288)
0.085
(0.279)
0.033
(0.179)
0.499
(0.500)
0.092
(0.289)
0.330
(0.470)
0.262
(0.440)
0.263
(0.440)
0.613
(0.487)
0.089
(0.284)
0.066
(0.249)
29.460
(24.627)
43.381
(17.119)
9.547
(4.243)
13.252
(1.529)

Table 2 (continued)
Definitions, Means, and Standard Deviations of Variables a

Variable

Definition

Fast-food price

Real fast-food meal price in respondent’s state of residence in
1982-84 dollarsb

2.903
(0.220)

Full-service restaurant price

Real full-service restaurant meal price in respondent’s state
of residence in 1982-84 dollarsb
Real food at home price in respondent’s state of residence in
1982-84 dollars: weighted average of prices of 13 food
items, weights are shares of each item in total food
expenditures based on expenditure patterns of
midmanagement (middle-income) householdsb
Real cigarette price in respondent’s state of residence in
1982-84 dollars
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if smoking is prohibited
in private workplaces in respondent’s state of residence
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if smoking is prohibited
in state and local government workplaces in respondent’s
state of residence
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if smoking is prohibited
in restaurants in respondent’s state of residence
Dichotomous variable that equals 1 if smoking is prohibited
in other public places such as elevators, public transportation,
and theaters in respondent’s state of residence
Age-race-gender-education-and marital-status-specific
expected real hourly wage rate in 1982-84 dollars in
respondent’s state of residence: real hourly wage rate of
employed persons according to these characteristics
multiplied by probability of employment according to the
same characteristics
Age-race-gender-education-and marital-status-specific
expected weekly hours of work in respondent’s state of
residence: weekly hours of work of employed persons
according to these characteristics multiplied by probability of
employment according to the same characteristics

5.971
(1.172)
1.258
(0.121)

Food at home price

Cigarette price
Private
Government

Restaurant
Other
Hourly wage c

Weekly hoursc

Mean and
Standard Deviation

a

Standard deviation in parenthesis. Sample size is 1,111,074 except for hourly wage and weekly hours
where sample size is 722,090. BRFSS sample weights are used in calculating the mean and standard
deviation.
b

See text for more details.

c

Mean and standard deviation pertain to people 25 through 64 years of age.

45

1.287
(0.257)
0.343
(0.475)
0.564
(0.496)
0.546
(0.498)
0.688
(0.463)
7.146
(3.319)

30.429
(8.609)

Table 3
Body Mass Index Regressions, Persons 18 Years of Age and Older
Independent Variables
Black
Hispanic
Other race
Male
Some high school
High school graduate
Some college
College graduate
Married
Divorced
Widowed
Household income
Household income squared
Age
Age squared
Time
Time squared

(1)
1.635
(57.29)
0.717
(25.33)
-0.422
(-7.39)
0.890
(54.66)
-0.109
(-3.48)
-0.507
(-17.32)
-0.582
(-19.45)
-1.153
(-35.75)
0.190
(12.19)
-0.412
(-19.91)
0.267
(10.15)
-0.034
(-33.08)
0.0002
(22.80)
0.345
(164.84)
-0.003
(-153.32)
0.085
(11.25)
0.003
(7.59)

Restaurants (full-service + fast
food)
Restaurants squared

46

Dependent Variable: BMI
(2)
(3)
1.638
1.635
(57.59)
(57.36)
0.737
0.720
(26.06)
(25.50)
-0.405
-0.420
(-7.12)
(-7.39)
0.890
0.891
(54.39)
(54.61)
-0.109
-0.111
(-3.49)
(-3.55)
-0.503
-0.509
(-17.17)
(-17.40)
-0.572
-0.583
(-19.14)
(-19.51)
-1.150
-1.154
(-35.67)
(-35.84)
0.186
0.190
(11.95)
(12.18)
-0.411
-0.412
(-19.86)
(-19.94)
0.262
0.267
(9.98)
(10.16)
-0.035
-0.034
(-32.88)
(-33.05)
0.0002
0.0002
(23.12)
(22.80)
0.346
0.345
(165.72)
(164.91)
-0.003
-0.003
(-153.94)
(-153.42)
0.046
(3.89)
0.004
(8.27)
0.660
0.203
(9.58)
(4.04)
-0.012
-0.006
(-5.23)
(-4.31)

Table 3 (continued)
Body Mass Index Regressions, Persons 18 Years of Age and Older
Independent Variables
Fast food restaurant price

Dependent Variable: BMI
-1.312
-0.481
(-1.75)
(-0.94)
0.149
0.058
(1.21)
(0.69)
-0.705
-0.177
(-4.45)
(-1.65)
0.051
0.017
(4.22)
(2.14)
-5.890
-2.581
(-3.67)
(-2.26)
2.052
0.871
(3.60)
(2.06)
0.320
0.738
(0.89)
(2.62)
0.052
-0.228
(0.45)
(-2.48)
0.020
-0.042
(0.50)
(-1.59)
0.118
0.030
(1.67)
(0.65)
-0.026
-0.039
(-0.47)
(-0.96)
0.051
0.019
(0.95)
(0.49)

Fast food restaurant price
squared
Full service restaurant price
Full service restaurant price
squared
Food at home price
Food at home price squared
Cigarette price
Cigarette price squared
Private
Government
Restaurant
Other

R-square
F-statistic
Sample size

0.082
1480.75
1,111,074

0.081
1242.38
1,111,074

0.082
1226.43
1,111,074

Note: All regressions include state dummies. t-ratios are in parentheses. Huber (1967) or robust standard errors on
which they are based allow for state/year clustering. Intercepts are not shown.

47

Table 4
Obese Regressions, Persons 18 Years of Age and Older
Independent Variables
Black
Hispanic
Other race
Male
Some high school
High school graduate
Some college
College graduate
Married
Divorced

Widowed
Household income
Household income squared
Age
Age squared
Time
Time squared
Restaurants (full-service + fast
food)
Restaurants squared

Dependent Variable: Obese
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.089
0.089
0.089
(43.51)
(43.68)
(43.51)
0.026
0.027
0.026
(13.37)
(14.01)
(13.48)
-0.018
-0.017
-0.018
(-5.23)
(-4.96)
(-5.23)
-0.002
-0.003
-0.002
(-2.49)
(-2.53)
(-2.47)
-0.011
-0.011
-0.011
(-4.42)
(-4.45)
(-4.50)
-0.044
-0.043
-0.044
(-19.47)
(-19.40)
(-19.56)
-0.049
-0.049
-0.049
(-21.40)
(-21.20)
(-21.47)
-0.084
-0.084
-0.084
(-34.27)
(-34.30)
(-34.38)
0.004
0.004
0.004
(3.44)
(3.29)
(3.44)
-0.029
-0.029
-0.029
(-20.31)
(-20.26)
(-20.34)
0.010
0.010
0.010
(5.38)
(5.25)
(5.39)
-0.003
-0.003
-0.003
(-35.72)
(-35.56)
(-35.64)
0.0000
0.0000
0.0000
(26.04)
(26.32)
(25.99)
0.018
0.018
0.018
(113.83)
(114.45)
(113.91)
-0.0002
-0.0002
-0.0002
(-110.12)
(-110.61)
(-110.22)
0.004
0.001
(6.95)
(1.44)
0.0002
0.0003
(7.53)
(8.14)
0.039
0.014
(8.29)
(3.71)
-0.001
-0.0004
(-4.41)
(-3.73)

48

Table 4 (continued)
Obese Regressions, Persons 18 Years of Age and Older
Independent Variables
Fast food restaurant price

Dependent Variable: Obese
-0.047
-0.001
(-0.78)
(-0.02)
0.004
-0.001
(0.40)
(-0.16)
-0.050
-0.019
(-4.09)
(-1.96)
0.004
0.002
(3.94)
(2.32)
-0.420
-0.208
(-3.74)
(-2.12)
0.148
0.074
(3.66)
(2.02)
0.020
0.058
(0.81)
(2.79)
0.004
-0.017
(0.51)
(-2.60)
0.001
-0.003
(0.25)
(-1.15)
0.001
-0.004
(0.12)
(-1.25)
0.0005
-0.0003
(0.11)
(-0.10)
0.008
0.006
(1.97)
(1.76)

Fast food restaurant price
squared
Full service restaurant price
Full service restaurant price
squared
Food at home price
Food at home price squared
Cigarette price
Cigarette price squared
Private
Government
Restaurant
Other

R-square
F-statistic
Sample size

0.042
726.13
1,111,074

0.041
608.45
1,111,074

0.042
601.97
1,111,074

Note: All regressions include state dummies. t-ratios are in parentheses. Huber (1967) or robust standard errors on
which they are based allow for state/year clustering. Intercepts are not shown.

49

Table 5
Elasticities of Body Mass Index and the Probability of Being Obese with Respect to Selected Variablesa

Independent Variable

Body Mass Index

Restaurants

Obesity Probability

0.174

0.946

Fast-food restaurant price

-0.050

-0.394

Full-service restaurant price

-0.022

-0.076

Food at home price

-0.035

-0.342

0.022

0.223

Cigarette price
a

Computed at weighted sample means.

50

Table 6

Persons 25 through 64 Years of Age, Real Hourly Wage or Weekly Hours Worked Included

Independent Variable
Hourly wage
Hourly wage squared

No

Dependent Variable: BMI
(2)
(3)
-0.034
(-2.07)
0.009
(9.60)
-0.150
(-20.21)
0.003
(25.21)
Yes
No

-0.152
(-20.41)
0.003
(25.23)
Yes

0.073
705.00

0.074
696.95

0.075
708.84

(1)
-0.023
(-1.37)
0.009
(9.23)

Weekly hours
Weekly hours squared
Include time and time
squared
R-square
F-statistic
Sample size

722,090

722,090

Independent Variable
Hourly wage
Hourly wage squared

722,090

722,090

No

Dependent Variable: Obese
(2)
(3)
0.004
(4.01)
0.0002
(4.41)
-0.005
(-11.12)
0.0001
(15.58)
Yes
No

-0.005
(-11.31)
0.0001
(15.59)
Yes

0.041
377.59

0.041
373.48

0.041
376.22

(1)
0.005
(4.74)
0.0002
(3.99)

Weekly hours
Weekly hours squared
Include time and time
squared
R-square
F-statistic
Sample size

0.074
717.13

(4)

722,090

722,090

51

0.041
380.29
722,090

(4)

722,090

Table 7

Impacts of Selected Factors on Body Mass Index and Percentage Obese,
Persons 18 Years of Age and Older, 1984-1999
Factor

Race/Ethnicity
Schooling
Marital status
Age
Household income
Trend
Restaurants
Fast-food restaurant price
Full-service restaurant price
Food at home price
Cigarette price
Clean indoor air laws
Total predicted change

Body Mass Index
Observed Change = 2.13
(1)
(2)
0.08
0.08
-0.06
-0.06
-0.03
-0.03
0.23
0.23
-0.09
-0.08
2.06
1.46
0.09
0.08
0.13
0.44
0.09
2.06

2.42

a

In percentage points.

52

(3)
0.08
-0.06
-0.03
0.23
-0.08
1.73
0.21
0.03
-0.02
0.06
0.09
-0.02
2.23

Obese
Observed Changea = 12.99
(1)
(2)
0.35
0.36
-0.42
-0.42
-0.13
-0.13
1.13
1.14
-0.50
-0.50
12.39
8.77
0.48
0.49
0.86
2.96
0.57
12.82

14.57

(3)
0.35
-0.42
-0.13
1.13
-0.50
9.79
1.54
0.17
-0.09
0.41
0.88
-0.04
13.09

Table 8
Impacts of Selected Factors on Body Mass Index, Percentage Overweight, and Percentage Obese,
Persons 25 through 64 Years of Age, 1984-1999
Factor

Body Mass Index
Observed Change = 2.05
(1)
(2)
(3)

Race/Ethnicity
Schooling
Marital status
Age
Household income
Trend
Restaurants
Fast-food restaurant price
Full-service restaurant price
Food at home price
Cigarette price
Clean indoor air laws
Hourly wage
Weekly hours
Total Predicted change

0.10
-0.10
-0.03
0.10
-0.09
1.55
0.10
0.08
0.15
0.37
0.09
0.11

0.10
-0.09
-0.03
0.10
-0.09
1.80
0.26
0.04
-0.02
0.08
0.02
-0.02
0.11

2.43

2.25

0.09
-0.07
-0.03
0.10
-0.08

(4)

1.56
0.10
0.08
0.14
0.44
0.09

0.09
-0.07
-0.03
0.10
-0.08
1.77
0.29
0.04
-0.01
0.07
0.09
-0.02

0.02
2.46

0.02
2.26

a

In percentage points.

53

Obese
Observed Changea = 13.45
(1)
(2)
(3)
0.48
-0.67
-0.14
0.56
-0.49
9.39
0.53
0.53
0.94
2.71
0.62
0.73

0.46
-0.66
-0.14
0.55
-0.50
9.77
2.20
0.23
-0.04
0.49
0.69
0.02
0.69

15.18

13.77

0.43
-0.50
-0.18
0.56
-0.44

(4)

9.49
0.49
0.57
0.90
3.12
0.61

0.42
-0.50
-0.18
0.56
-0.46
9.58
2.37
0.23
0.00
0.43
1.09
0.03

0.29
15.36

0.26
13.84

Table 9

Impacts of Selected Factors on Body Mass Index and Percentage Obese
NHES I – NHANES II

Factor

Schooling
Marital status
Age
Family income
Trend
Restaurants
Food at home price
Cigarette price
Clean indoor air laws
Total predicted change

Factor

Schooling
Marital status
Age
Family income
Trend
Restaurants
Food at home price
Cigarette price
Clean indoor air laws
Hourly wage
Weekly hours
Total predicted change

A. Persons 18 Years of Age and Older
Body Mass Index
Obese
Observed Change = 0.25
Observed Changea =1.22

(1)
-0.18
-0.02
-0.07
-0.19
2.42

1.96

(2)
-0.18
-0.02
-0.07
-0.20
0.23
-0.02
-0.00
0.01
-0.24

(3)
-0.18
-0.02
-0.07
-0.20
2.01
0.05
-0.02
-0.00
-0.00
1.58

(1)
-1.39
-0.10
-0.33
-1.54
14.4

11.03

(2)
-1.39
-0.10
-0.33
-1.54
1.35
-0.09
-0.02
0.24
-1.91

(3)
-1.40
-0.10
-0.33
-1.54
11.19
0.34
-0.05
-0.02
0.12
8.21

B. Persons 25 through 64 Years of Age
Body Mass Index
Obese
Observed Change = 0.40
Observed Changea = 1.96

(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
-0.25 -0.25 -0.17 -0.17
-0.02 -0.02 -0.02 -0.02
0.01 0.01 0.02 0.02
-0.22 -0.22 -0.22 -0.22
2.09
2.05
0.24 0.06 0.24 0.61
-0.02 -0.03 -0.02 -0.02
-0.00 -0.00 -0.00 -0.00
0.01 -0.00 0.01 -0.00
0.05 0.04
-0.01 -0.01
-0.21 1.67 -0.18 1.69

54

(1)
-2.05
-0.13
0.07
-1.74
1.47
-0.16
-0.02
0.22
0.38

(2)
-2.01
-0.13
0.07
-1.72
11.19
0.46
-0.11
-0.02
0.13
0.35

-1.96

8.20

(3)
-1.56
-0.13
0.08
-1.73
1.49
-0.14
-0.02
0.21

(4)
-1.54
-0.13
0.08
-1.72
10.91
0.49
-0.08
-0.03
0.12

-0.04
-1.83

-0.04
8.07

Figure 1
Trends in Body Mass Index and Percentage Obese, Persons 18 Years of Age and Older,
Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System, 1984-1999
27.50

30.00

27.00
25.00
26.50
20.00
26.00

15.00

25.50

25.00
10.00
24.50
5.00
24.00

0.00

23.50
1984 1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999
Year

55

Body mass index
Obese

