NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FIRM-SPECIFIC RESOURCES, FINANCIAL-MARKET DEVELOPMENT
AND THE GROWTH OF U.S. MULTINATIONALS
Susan Feinberg
Gordon Phillips
Working Paper 9252
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9252
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002

We wish to thank Wayne Ferson, Robert McDonald, Vojislav Maksimovic, Raymond Mataloni, Oguzhan
Ozbas, John Popham, Antoinette Schoar, Lemma Senbet, Scott Shane, Peter Wysocki, Bernie Yeung, William
Zeile and seminar participants at Boston College, the Center for Economic Studies, Department of Commerce,
MIT finance and organizations seminars and the University of South Carolina for helpful comments. The
statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational corporations reported in this study was conducted
at the International Investment Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis, United States Department of
Commerce, under arrangements that maintained legal confidentiality requirements. Views expressed are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the Department of Commerce or the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Susan Feinberg and Gordon Phillips. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.

Firm-Specific Resources, Financial-Market Development and the Growth
of U.S. Multinationals
Susan Feinberg and Gordon Phillips
NBER Working Paper No. 9252
October 2002
JEL No. F1, G3
ABSTRACT
We study the resource allocation decisions of U.S. multinational corporations (MNCs). We
examine how established MNCs grow across countries and how firm-specific resources and host
country financial-market development influence MNC growth. We find evidence of intra-firm tradeoffs to growth in MNCs that have limited organizational capital and high R&D, and MNCs with low
external and internal financing. In countries with less developed capital markets, we find significant
within-MNC trade-offs to growth between affiliates and their U.S. parents. These trade-offs diminish
over time as local capital markets develop. Our evidence indicates that access to financing and
organizational capital are important resources for MNC affiliate growth.

Susan Feinberg
R.H. Smith School of Business
University of Maryland
Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
feinberg@glue.umd.edu

Gordon Phillips
R.H. Smith School of Business
University of Maryland
Van Munching Hall
College Park, MD 20742
and NBER
gphillips@rhsmith.umd.edu.

Multinational corporations are increasingly an important source of production and employment in industrialized countries (OECD, 1999). Existing research shows that U.S. multinational corporations (MNCs) have higher accounting profits and higher stock market valuations, higher advertising and R&D, and higher Tobin’s qs than do firms that only produce
and sell domestically.1 However, we know little about what influences the international
growth and operating decisions of established MNCs across networks of aﬃliates. Despite
the obvious importance of MNCs’ resource allocation choices, much of the research on MNC
expansion has focused primarily on initial foreign investment decisions.2 Similarly, policy
makers have focused more on luring initial foreign investments than on creating environments
in which existing MNC subsidiaries can become more globally competitive.
Our research focuses on the importance of firm- and market-specific factors to MNCs’
allocation of resources across networks of aﬃliates. We draw on the theory of the conglomerate firm and its resource allocation decisions across markets to study the growth of MNCs
as networks of aﬃliates. We first study whether there are geographic trade-oﬀs to growth
across aﬃliates (and parents) within the MNC, similar to the intra-industry trade-oﬀs to
growth in U.S. conglomerate firms shown in Maksimovic and Phillips (2002).3 Second, we
examine the extent to which these trade-oﬀs vary systematically based on MNC and country
characteristics.
We wish to determine how the growth of MNC aﬃliates is related to firm-specific factors
shown by previous research to be important for the emergence of multinational operations.4
For example, we examine how growth diﬀers among aﬃliates of MNCs that are more R&Dintensive, since R&D indicates the presence of knowledge assets. We also study variations
in growth among aﬃliates that diﬀer in their access to capital. The market-specific factors
that we examine are capital market development and host country contracting eﬀectiveness.
We test our predictions using disaggregated panel data from the U.S. Department of
Commerce on 8,106 foreign aﬃliates of 862 U.S. MNC parent companies in 41 countries.
1

See Vernon (1971), Dunning (1973), Kim and Lin (1986), and Morck and Yeung (1991). Errunza and
Senbet (1981, 1984) show that the value of multinationality increases with the extent an MNC sells overseas.
2
See Baldwin (1988), Dixit (1989), and Wheeler and Mody (1992).
3
Denis, Denis and Yost (2002) document the extent of global diversification by U.S. firms and extend
work by Bodnar, Tang and Weintrop (1999) in studying the valuation eﬀects of MNCs in the stock market.
4
See Buckley and Casson (1976), Dunning (1973), Ethier (1986), Helpman (1982), and Rugman (1981).

1

An important feature of this data is that it contains detailed information about foreign
aﬃliates’ trade and financing both within the MNC and in local markets. Thus, we can
directly examine how internal financial and product markets aﬀect MNC growth. Previous
literature on U.S. conglomerate firms has only been able to indirectly infer the extent of
internal capital and product market flows.5
We examine two central questions about MNC growth. First, do MNC aﬃliates grow
together, or do they compete for scarce resources from their U.S. parents, as parents choose
to allocate resources based on aﬃliates’ relative eﬃciency and demand growth? We refer to
this latter case as within-MNC trade-oﬀs to growth.
To address this first question, we draw on theories of the MNC and theories of conglomerate firms that focus on trade-oﬀs in the allocation of resources across multiple markets.
Domestic conglomerate firms allocate their scarce resources according to the returns to scale
in the use of these resources and to the demand growth in their markets. We therefore
examine whether there are similar trade-oﬀs among divisions of MNCs, and whether these
trade-oﬀs vary for MNCs that are more R&D intensive or have potentially diﬀerential access
to financing.
Second, we examine whether MNCs’ resource allocation decisions vary with diﬀerences
in financial-market and institutional development in the aﬃliates’ local markets. Although
recent research examines the impact of financial market development and the legal environment on country economic development and the growth of domestic firms6 , we know little
about the impact of financial markets on the growth of established MNC aﬃliates.
Using panel data on the entire population of U.S. MNCs - disaggregated at the individual
foreign aﬃliate level for each MNC parent - our empirical analysis demonstrates that MNC
growth is strongly related to aﬃliate eﬃciency. The eﬃciency of an MNC aﬃliate, relative
to other same-industry aﬃliates of a given U.S. parent and relative to other same-industry
aﬃliates in the same country, strongly predicts the aﬃliate’s growth, especially when there
is demand growth in the aﬃliate’s local market.
We also find evidence of trade-oﬀs across aﬃliates within MNCs, particularly for MNCs
5

For evidence on investment patterns by diversified firms see Shin and Stulz (1998), Scharfstein (1998),
Rajan, Servaes and Zingales (2000), and Maksimovic and Phillips (2002).
6
See the evidence provided in King and Levine (1993), Levine (1997), LaPorta, Lopez de-Silanes, Shleifer,
and Vishny (1997), Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998), Rajan and Zingales (1998), and Wurgler (2000).

2

with small aﬃliate networks. Indeed, trade-oﬀs to growth in small MNC networks exist
regardless of whether the MNC is R&D-intensive. In contrast, we do not find evidence of
trade-oﬀs to growth in MNCs with large networks. R&D and access to capital may enable
large MNCs to grow without extensive trade-oﬀs across aﬃliates. Our evidence suggests
that smaller MNCs have limited financial and organizational resources. These limitations
can cause an individual aﬃliate’s growth to be aﬀected by demand growth in other markets
where the MNC has eﬃcient aﬃliates.
We find that a country’s capital market development aﬀects MNC aﬃliate growth. In
countries with less-developed financial markets, we find that aﬃliates of MNCs with small
networks are constrained in their growth when they rely more on their parents for financing.
Our results also show that in countries with less-developed financial markets, aﬃliate
growth increases with improvements in host-country contracting eﬀectiveness. This result is
particularly strong for aﬃliates that conduct a larger proportion of their transactions with local firms. We also find that in countries with rapidly developing financial markets, trade-oﬀs
to growth within aﬃliate networks diminish over time. Thus, better contracting eﬀectiveness and growing financial markets may signal the potential for rapid future development
and enable local firms to transact more business with MNC aﬃliates.
Our paper makes two significant contributions. First, we provide evidence on how MNCs
grow across aﬃliate networks when they must cope with potentially scarce firm-specific
resources. Although the firm-specific resources that we examine (R&D and access to capital)
may be important to the initial emergence of MNCs, these resources have not been examined
in the context of their importance to subsequent MNC growth.
Second, our paper also provides evidence on how MNC growth is aﬀected by hostcountry financial and institutional development. We find a positive relation for the growth
of established MNC aﬃliates and higher contracting eﬀectiveness. Trade-oﬀs within MNCs
diminish over time in countries with rapidly developing financial markets.
The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section, we discuss the models of resource
allocation that provide the framework for our empirical analysis. Section II describes the
data and econometrics, and Section III presents the empirical results and discussion. Section
IV concludes.

3

I. A Framework for MNC Resource Allocation
The common element in theories of the MNC is the idea that MNCs are formed because
there are firm-specific assets or scarce resources that cannot (or cannot except at a high cost)
be licensed or contracted in arms-length transactions to other firms (Buckley and Casson,
1976; Dunning, 1973; Ethier, 1986; Helpman, 1984; Rugman, 1981). Although Helpman’s
work explains the emergence of the MNC, it does not describe how a multi-plant, multicountry firm can grow, once it has established international production.
These scarce resources, the firm-specific advantages such as organizational ability, knowledge assets developed through R&D, and superior access to capital, generate multi-plant scale
economies that firms exploit internationally to take advantage of diﬀerences in factor endowments between countries. The extent to which these scarce resources can be utilized across
an MNC’s international network depends on the nature of the resource and the returns to
scale in its exploitation.
Our research investigates whether MNC growth involves resource allocation trade-oﬀs
across aﬃliates in diﬀerent countries. We examine whether resource trade-oﬀs exist within
MNCs, and if the trade-oﬀs vary based on the type of scarce resources that MNCs possess.
Finally, we look at how characteristics of the countries in which the MNCs operate (in
particular financial market and institutional development) aﬀect MNC growth and intrafirm trade-oﬀs.
Generalizing from the Maksimovic and Phillips (2002) study on the inter-industry resource allocation decisions of domestic conglomerates, we can make inferences about MNC
growth. From a steady state, MNC aﬃliates in particular countries will grow when they receive a positive change in demand. This change in demand can come from either an increase
in real GDP or a beneficial change in exchange rates. More eﬃcient aﬃliates will be better
positioned to grow in response to positive demand growth in their local markets.
Across multiple countries, an MNC will grow its aﬃliates until the value of a marginal
investment is equalized across the countries in which it operates. The extent to which a
given aﬃliate’s growth is aﬀected by demand growth in the countries of the MNC’s other
aﬃliates will depend on the extent to which the MNC’s scarce resource faces locally constant
or decreasing returns to scale. If the exploitation of the scarce resource faces constant or
locally constant returns to scale, a positive change in demand in one market should have no
4

eﬀect on the growth of aﬃliates in other markets (with increasing returns to scale, a positive
change in demand should have a positive eﬀect on aﬃliates in other markets). However,
when the scarce resource faces decreasing returns to scale, the MNC may face trade-oﬀs to
growth across markets. With decreasing returns to scale in the use of the scarce resource,
and therefore trade-oﬀs to growth, an MNC will reallocate resources in favor of countries
with relatively higher growth where it has eﬃcient aﬃliates.
Our tests of MNC resource allocation thus focus on the relative eﬃciency and demand
growth of MNC units. Empirically, this implies testing for trade-oﬀs to growth using interactions between relative eﬃciency and demand. In contrast, other studies of U.S. conglomerate
firms’ domestic resource allocation do not condition on the relative eﬃciency of business units
(Lamont (1997), Scharfstein (1998) and Shin and Stulz (1998)).
When we apply the Maksimovic and Phillips (2002) model to MNCs, we predict that
an MNC will grow less in one aﬃliate when the opportunity cost of allocating its scarce
resources to a diﬀerent aﬃliate is higher. Thus, the growth and eﬃciency of a particular
aﬃliate may aﬀect an MNC’s decision to grow in other aﬃliates or in the parent itself.
The theories of resource allocation decisions under diﬀering assumptions about returns
to scale in the use of scarce resources suggest tests of the following hypotheses:
Hypothesis 1: MNC Aﬃliate growth follows a specific pattern:
The growth of an aﬃliate (of a given MNC parent) in a given country is
(i.) higher, the more eﬃcient the aﬃliate is and the greater the demand growth
in its local market;
(ii.) lower (higher), when the MNC’s other aﬃliates have higher (lower) relative
eﬃciency and greater relative demand growth, and the MNC faces decreasing returns to scale in the use of its firm-specific scarce resources—either organizational
capital, R&D, or access to financial capital.
If the scarce resources face constant or increasing returns to scale, the growth of
an aﬃliate in a given country will not be diminished by demand growth in other
countries where the MNC has eﬃcient aﬃliates.
We also expect that trade-oﬀs to growth within the MNC will vary according to the type
of scarce resource the MNC possesses. We examine the variation in trade-oﬀs to growth for
5

MNCs that diﬀer in their R&D-intensity and access to financing. In addition, an MNC’s
organizational capital, for which we use the size of its aﬃliate network as a proxy, should
aﬀect intra-firm trade-oﬀs to growth, given organizational resources should be higher for
MNCs that manage complex, geographically dispersed networks.
MNCs that compete on the basis of knowledge assets developed through R&D are likely
to grow with fewer intra-firm trade-oﬀs. Since knowledge assets can be exploited throughout
the MNC’s network of aﬃliates with constant or increasing returns to scale, these may not
face the same increasing costs as firm resources such as organizational talent or access to
financial capital. Indeed, a key reason in the literature for the emergence of MNCs is the
“public good” nature of knowledge-based resources and the multi-plant economies of scale
they generate. (Helpman, 1984)
However, we expect that an MNC’s organizational capital will aﬀect its ability to maximize the benefits of its R&D. Firms with greater organizational capital may face lower costs
of attaining larger size, as emphasized by Lucas (1978) and Williamson (1975), and organizing across multiple markets, as in Maksimovic and Phillips (2002). Therefore, it is likely
that larger firm size, generally, and larger aﬃliate networks for MNCs, signals the presence
of greater organizational capital. As regards the exploitation of knowledge assets, evidence
in the U.S. by Himmelberg and Petersen (1994) show that small, high-R&D firms in the U.S.
face financial/organizational constraints that limit their ability to maximize the benefits of
R&D.
Organizational capital is perhaps even more critical to an MNC’s ability to transfer
knowledge assets across dispersed international networks of aﬃliates. Smaller MNCs might
not have the financial and/or organizational capital necessary to exploit R&D across their
networks. Therefore, we examine whether trade-oﬀs to growth across an MNC’s aﬃliates
vary by both R&D and size. If smaller firms face organizational constraints in exploiting
knowledge assets created through R&D, we expect that among high-R&D MNCs, withinfirm trade-oﬀs to growth should be larger when aﬃliate networks are small. Thus, a positive
change in demand in a particular market makes it more valuable for high-R&D MNCs with
small aﬃliate networks to reallocate limited resources to that market and away from other
markets.
We summarize these predictions in the following hypothesis:

6

Hypothesis 2: The importance of knowledge-based resources.
(i.) If MNCs face constant or increasing returns to scale in the international
transfer of knowledge-based resources, we expect few or no intra-MNC trade-oﬀs
to growth in R&D-intensive MNCs (relative to low-R&D MNCs).
(ii.) If financial and/or organizational capital are important in the exploitation
of knowledge assets and are scarce for smaller firms, we expect larger trade-oﬀs to
growth in R&D-intensive MNCs with small aﬃliate networks vs. R&D-intensive
MNCs with large aﬃliate networks.
Access to financing is often hypothesized to be an important MNC resource. Researchers
have argued that MNCs and their foreign aﬃliates have access to lower cost debt financing
(Shapiro, 1978; Reeb, et al., 2001).
The issue of whether access to financing faces constant or decreasing returns will have
implications for trade-oﬀs to growth across aﬃliates within the MNC similar to those for
knowledge assets. If financial capital is a scarce resource that faces increasing costs, we
expect MNCs will allocate resources into markets where they have eﬃcient aﬃliates and
increasing local demand, and out of markets where aﬃliates are less eﬃcient or have negative
demand growth. By contrast, if aﬃliates can obtain high-quality financing regardless of their
eﬃciency relative to other aﬃliates of the same MNC (or to the parent itself), we would not
expect to see intra-firm trade-oﬀs to growth.
In our context, if MNC network size is a signal of superior organizational capital, then
larger firms may be able to access capital more easily. Hence, for MNCs with superior access
to capital (for which we use local and parent financing as proxies), larger networks should
further reduce the trade-oﬀs to growth across markets.
We summarize these predictions in the following hypothesis:

Hypothesis 3: The importance of financial capital as a firm-specific resource.
(i.) If MNCs face a constant cost of accessing financial capital, we expect few or
no intra-MNC trade-oﬀs to growth in MNCs based on their extent of financing
from both local markets and U.S. parents.

7

(ii.) If MNCs face an increasing cost of accessing financial capital, we expect
higher intra-MNC trade-oﬀs to growth. If size is important in accessing capital
markets, we expect the largest finance-related trade-oﬀs to growth for aﬃliates of
MNCs that have small aﬃliate networks.
Finally, we examine how financial market development and host-country contracting
eﬀectiveness influence MNC aﬃliate growth. Access to financing may be a more important
MNC resource in an international context because host-country firms without well-developed
capital markets may have diﬃculty obtaining the financing to grow.
For U.S. MNCs, most MNC aﬃliate borrowing is in local markets. Thus, the problem of
limited local access to finance for MNCs with smaller networks is likely to be more acute in
less developed capital markets. If local access to capital is limited, aﬃliates may rely more
their U.S. parents to finance local operations. Under this scenario, we might expect aﬃliate
growth to increase with MNC parent financing. However, if parent financing is limited, then
reliance on parent financing may also increase trade-oﬀs within the MNC when the parent’s
own opportunities, or opportunities in other eﬃcient aﬃliates, improve. Again, we expect
these trade-oﬀs to be more pronounced for MNCs with small aﬃliate networks in countries
where local financial markets are less developed.
We summarize these predictions in the following hypothesis:
Hypothesis 4: The importance of local financial market development
For MNC aﬃliates in less developed financial markets, we expect that:
(i.) aﬃliate growth will increase with parent financing.
(ii.) trade-oﬀs to growth within the MNC will increase with dependence on parent
financing, assuming an increasing cost of accessing external finance.
(iii.) if organizational capital is important to an MNC’s ability to obtain local
financing, trade-oﬀs to growth will be larger in MNCs with small aﬃliate networks.
The ability to internalize contracts is considered to be a key advantage of MNCs, particularly MNCs that are located in countries with weak domestic institutions and/or less
developed capital markets (Caves, 1982). Thus, improvements in host-country contracting
8

eﬀectiveness could diminish this advantage, and impede MNC growth. However, for MNC
aﬃliates that transact more with local firms (versus transacting more within the MNC),
host-country institutional development, especially improvements in contracting eﬀectiveness,
should increase aﬃliate growth, since the cost of doing business with local firms declines. We
expect that this relation will be particularly strong in countries with less developed capital
markets.
We summarize these predictions on the eﬀect of local institutional development/contracting
eﬀectiveness in the following hypothesis.
Hypothesis 5: The importance of institutional development.
For MNC aﬃliates in less developed financial markets, we expect the following:
(i.) Aﬃliate growth will increase with improvements in host country contracting
eﬀectiveness—for aﬃliates that transact more with local firms.
(ii.) Better host country contracting eﬀectiveness will have little or no eﬀect on
the growth of aﬃliates that conduct a high volume of purchases and sales within
the MNC, as they can internalize contracting costs.
In the next section, we describe the data, variables and estimation techniques we use to
test our hypotheses, and we present results in section III.

II. Data and Methodology
A. Data
We obtain our data set from the Benchmark and Annual Surveys of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad, which is administered by the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), United
States Department of Commerce. These surveys are the most comprehensive data available,
with income statement, balance sheet, and employment data, on the activities of U.S.-based
MNCs and their foreign aﬃliates. For this study, we use the BEA data disaggregated at
the individual foreign aﬃliate level for each MNC from 1983-1996. The BEA data includes
foreign aﬃliates that report sales in more than 120 two- to-three-digit industry codes across
multiple countries. The aﬃliate data can also be linked to data on the U.S. parents.
We use data on both aﬃliates and parents in this study, and include only wholly-owned
aﬃliates. This last criterion aﬀects only 3,620 observations in our data set and does not
9

aﬀect our results. Our final regression sample includes 34,384 aﬃliate-year observations on
8,106 aﬃliates in 41 countries of 862 U.S. parents. We present more specific details of the
BEA data and how we construct the sample in the data appendix to this paper.

B. MNC-Specific Variables
Our key predictions focus on the relation between aﬃliate relative eﬃciency and aﬃliate
growth. Our predictions relate to the interaction between aﬃliate relative eﬃciency and demand growth and intra-MNC trade-oﬀs, which we measure by the interaction of the eﬃciency
of the parent and other aﬃliates in the MNC network and their relative demand growth.
For clarity, we refer to the focal aﬃliate, about which our predictions focus, as aﬃliate i.
Our discussion below proceeds as follows. We first describe our dependent variable then
discuss the eﬃciency and eﬃciency*demand growth interaction variables. Next, we describe
our measures of MNC resources (R&D, access to finance, organizational capital). Finally,
we discuss our measures of financial market development and contracting eﬀectiveness, and
conclude with a description of the control variables in our model.7

B1. Dependent Variable:
Our dependent variable, Empchgijcp , is the log change in employment of aﬃliate i (the
“focal aﬃliate”) in industry j in country c of U.S. MNC parent, p, from time (t-1) to t.
We use a log change to mitigate heteroskedasticity, because the number of employees (and
change in employment) varies considerably in the sample of aﬃliates. We use employment
change as a measure of growth since it is the only local quantity-based input variable we can
observe directly, and, unlike variables such as assets or sales, it is not directly aﬀected by
exchange rates.
We also estimate the model using change in aﬃliate real assets as a robustness test. We
find similar results and discuss these results along with other robustness tests in the results
section.

B2. Eﬃciency of Foreign Aﬃliates and MNC Parents:
We test our key predictions using interaction variables between aﬃliate and parent
eﬃciency and demand growth (as captured by GDP growth). Under Hypothesis 1, we expect
that the growth of aﬃliate i (as measured by Empchgijcp ), will depend on the interaction
7

All MNC variables in our regressions are lagged. All dollar variables are expressed in 1982 dollars, using
industry-specific price deflators from the BLS. We note that all foreign aﬃliate data reported to the BEA is
already expressed in current U.S. dollars.

10

between its own relative eﬃciency and the GDP growth in its local market. In addition, if
an MNC faces decreasing returns to scale in the use of its firm-specific resources, we expect
that other aﬃliates’ relative demand growth interacted with their relative eﬃciency will be
negatively associated with the growth of aﬃliate i. The negative relation arises because the
MNC allocates resources away from aﬃliate i when its other aﬃliates have more attractive
growth opportunities.
We calculate four measures of eﬃciency, two for the focal aﬃliate, a third for the other
“sibling” aﬃliates of the MNC and the fourth for the U.S. MNC parent. All four eﬃciency
measures use the same basic definition of eﬃciency. These measures can be interpreted as
labor value-added, and all are industry and year adjusted. We discuss these measures in
detail in the data appendix.
We calculate two direct measures of eﬃciency for aﬃliate i. First, we calculate aﬃliate
i’s within-MNC (industry and year adjusted) eﬃciency. This variable captures aﬃliate i’s
eﬃciency relative to other same-industry aﬃliates within aﬃliate i’s MNC. We calculate
our second measure of aﬃliate i’s eﬃciency relative to other MNC aﬃliates in the same
industry in the same country-year. Our third measure of aﬃliate eﬃciency, other aﬃliate
eﬃciency, is a weighted average of the eﬃciency of all the aﬃliates of a given MNC parent
(excluding aﬃliate i). Our final measure of eﬃciency is the industry-year-adjusted eﬃciency
of aﬃliate i’s U.S. parent. We note that we expect both measures of aﬃliate i’s eﬃciency
to be positively associated with aﬃliate i’s growth. Our main predictions for other aﬃliate
and U.S. parent eﬃciency center around the interactions between these eﬃciency variables
and the other aﬃliates’ and the parent’s relative demand growth.

Interaction Variables:
We use three key interaction variables to capture potential trade-oﬀs within the MNC.
First, we multiply aﬃliate i’s within-MNC eﬃciency by local demand growth, which we
measure as the log change in country c’s real GDP from time (t-1) to t. We use the change
in GDP (rather than changes in real exchange rates) to measure local demand growth, since
the average proportion of aﬃliate sales in the local market is over 75 percent.8 Second, we
multiply other aﬃliates’ relative eﬃciency by their relative demand growth. We measure
other aﬃliates’ relative demand growth by taking the sales-weighted average of the one8

The change in real exchange rates was used in the interaction variables in an earlier version of this paper.
It is still included as an independent variable.

11

period real GDP changes for all aﬃliates (other than aﬃliate i) of a given parent, less
aﬃliate i’s own demand change. Finally, we multiply the U.S. parent’s eﬃciency by the
parent’s relative demand growth. The parent’s relative demand growth is calculated as the
U.S. parent’s one-period real GDP change (change in U.S. real GDP from (t-1) to t) less
aﬃliate i’s one-period real GDP change.

B3. Types of MNC Firm-Specific Resources:
We examine three diﬀerent types of firm-specific resources/characteristics: knowledge
assets, as captured by R&D; access to financial capital; and organizational capital. As
detailed in Hypotheses 2 and 3, we predict that the more these resources are scarce and face
decreasing returns to scale, the more trade-oﬀs there will be across aﬃliates within MNCs.
1. Research and Development
We use the (lagged) amount of R&D conducted by U.S. MNC parents to classify MNCs
into high and low R&D firms. We do so by splitting the sample of parent firms into two
sets based on whether their R&D-to- sales ratio is above or below the median parent R&Dto-sales ratio by year. The number of aﬃliates in each of these subsamples is diﬀerent as
parents above and below the median have diﬀering numbers of aﬃliates.
2. Financial Resources: Aﬃliate Financing
We use BEA aﬃliate data on the (lagged) amount of debt financing, from local sources
and the U.S. parents, as proxies for the aﬃliate’s access to capital.

Debt financing is a

good proxy for access to capital as most financing (both provided by its parents and from
local markets) for aﬃliates is in the form of debt capital. In addition as reported in Table
I, debt-to-asset ratios for aﬃliates are very high, 53.8 percent on average.

These ratios

are substantially higher than debt-to-asset ratios for U.S. firms reported on COMPUSTAT,
which average only 27.2 percent over the same time period. Ideally we would like additional
information on paid in equity capital but this information is only available for the subset
of incorporated aﬃliates (typically the larger aﬃliates). If access to financial capital faces
constant returns for the MNC, we expect to see few or no intra-firm trade-oﬀs to growth for
MNC aﬃliates based on the extent of total debt (local and parent) financing.
3. Organizational Resources: Aﬃliate Network Size
We use the (lagged) number of aﬃliates of an MNC parent to capture an MNC’s organizational capital. In using this proxy, we assume that MNCs that operate more extensive
12

networks have developed the skills, routines, and general organizational ability necessary to
manage the network. We examine whether aﬃliates from larger MNC networks have fewer
trade-oﬀs to growth.

B4. Aﬃliate Sales within the MNC:
To measure aﬃliate i’s intra-firm transactions, we use the (lagged) ratio of aﬃliate total
trade (imports and exports) with other divisions of the MNC divided by aﬃliate i’s sales.
By definition, aﬃliates that conduct a higher proportion of transactions within the firm
transact less with local firms and are relatively sheltered from the host country institutional
environment. We predict that improvements in a country’s contracting eﬀectiveness will be
positively associated with the growth of aﬃliates that conduct a smaller volume of purchases
and sales within the MNC, because the aﬃliates internalize contracting costs. We also use
this variable as a control in all our regressions. We expect that aﬃliates that have been
established solely to produce an input to the U.S. parent’s production will show little or no
response to conditions in its local market (and potentially to its own eﬃciency).

C. Country-Specific Financial and Institutional Variables
In our initial analysis of the eﬀects of financial market and institutional development,
we first examine the relation between aﬃliate growth, within-MNC trade-oﬀs, and hostcountry stock market capitalization. Second, we examine whether the impact of contracting
eﬀectiveness diﬀers in countries with high versus low stock market capitalization. Third, we
look at how changes in the development of capital markets over a 12-year period aﬀect MNC
growth.
We use several variables as proxies for the level of a country’s capital market and institutional development. We construct these variables by using data from the IMF International
Financial Statistics Yearbook, the Annual IFC Emerging Stock Markets Fact Book, and
IRIS. We use the (real) size of the capital markets at the end of the year divided by real
GDP. We also examine the robustness of our results to an alternative measure of capital
market development. We use a measure of bank credit availability (claims on the private
sector by deposit money banks divided by GDP). For institutional development, we use
an annual measure of “contracting eﬀectiveness” from IRIS Country Risk Guide, which is
available from 1982-95.9 This variable is an ordinal measure ranging from zero to ten.
9

This data was first used in Clague, Keefer, Knack and Olson (1996). It has also been used in an

13

We calculate the change in market capitalization from the average of the 1983-1986
period to the average of the 1993-1996 period. To avoid any specific year driving our results,
we use a three-year average for the beginning and ending periods. If MNCs are focusing
on countries that have the potential for long-term growth, we expect that higher growth in
capital-market development will be associated with higher MNC aﬃliate growth.

D. Control Variables
We control for aﬃliate size by using the log sales of aﬃliate i at (t-1). Our other control
variables include all main eﬀects for variables that are interacted. In other words, although
our predictions focus on the interaction terms, we present the eﬃciency and demand change
variables in our model separately.
Next, we use several country control variables. Unless otherwise indicated, all our regressions include country fixed eﬀects to control for unobserved time-invariant country differences, such as factor endowments or the distance from the U.S., that might influence our
results.
In addition to the one-period real GDP change, we use the following country control
variables in our model:
(1.) Change in real exchange rate: We measure the change in the exchange rate in
country c as the log change in the real trade-weighted CPI-based exchange rate from time
(t-1) to t.10 Given negative changes represent real depreciations and thus positive exchange
rate changes, a negative sign on this variable indicates a “positive” relation.
(2.) Long run GDP growth: We measure long-run GDP growth as the log change in real
GDP from time (t-5) to time t. Holding aﬃliate eﬃciency constant, we expect that long-run
growth in country c will be positively associated with aﬃliate growth.
(3.) Taxes: We also control for country-level tax eﬀects by including an eﬀective tax
variable that varies by country and year. Our eﬀective tax rate is the median value, for each
country and year, of aﬃliate taxes paid divided by taxable income. See Desai (1999) for an
explicit treatment of tax eﬀects.
international asset pricing paper by Lombardo (2001), who was kind enough to provide us with this data.
10
We are grateful to Anthony Turner of the IMF for providing us with real exchange rate data. More
information on the construction of the real exchange rate series used here can be found in Tuner and Golub
(1997). We also ran the regressions using a real unit-labor based real exchange rate series also from Tuner
and Golub. The results (not reported here) did not diﬀer from those obtained using the CPI-based real rate,
and the CPI-based rate is a longer series.

14

(4) We control for time using a trend, which we calculate as year-1983.

E. Estimation
We estimate the following panel regression model:
Yi(t−(t−1)) = βo + β1 Xi(t−1) + β2 Zi(t−(t−1)) + Ci + τt + nit i=1,2,...N; t = 1,2,...14 (1)
where Yi(t−(t−1)) is the log change in employment of aﬃliate i. Xi(t−1) is a matrix of lagged
firm-specific variables and interactions including two measures of aﬃliate i’s eﬃciency (one
relative to aﬃliate i’s MNC-industry, the other relative to aﬃliate i’s country-industry), the
eﬃciency of other aﬃliates in aﬃliate i’s network, the eﬃciency of aﬃliate i’s U.S. parent.
Xi(t−1) also includes the key interaction variables: aﬃliate i’s eﬃciency interacted with its
demand growth and other aﬃliates’ eﬃciency and U.S. parent eﬃciency interacted with their
relative demand growth, and aﬃliate i’s log sales. Zi(t−(t−1)) is a matrix of country variables
including a one- and five-year GDP change, a country-year tax rate and the change in the
exchange rate. Ci is a vector of country fixed eﬀects and τt is a time trend.
nit is the error term, which consists of two components: nit = ui + eit , where ui ˜N(0,
σu2 ) is a vector of unobserved time-invariant aﬃliate-specific characteristics (aﬃliate random
eﬀects) which are i.i.d. over time and across firms. eit is assumed to vary over time and
across firms.
We estimate Equation (1) by using a GLS (random eﬀects) estimator on an unbalanced
panel. We use GLS rather than fixed eﬀects so that we can include time-invariant country
eﬀects in our model. A random eﬀects estimator is also more eﬃcient than fixed eﬀects when
some variables are at the industry level with firm level panel units (Moulton, 1986). As a
robustness check of our regression model, we added industry dummy variables to the basic
specification. We found no qualitative diﬀerences for this specification, and thus only report
random eﬀects estimates with country fixed eﬀects. The results of our regression models are
reported in Tables 4-10 and will be discussed in detail in the next section.

III. Results
A. Sample Summary Characteristic
Table I summarizes the key firm- and market-specific variables that we examine. We
present summary statistics in this table for the whole sample and also by MNC R&Dintensity.
15

Insert Table I - MNC Aﬃliate Characteristics
Panel A of Table I shows that high R&D parents have larger aﬃliate networks, and the
individual aﬃliates are larger in terms of sales. Table 1 also shows that average aﬃliate debt
is significantly higher from local (rather than parent) borrowing, despite the aﬃliates being
part of a U.S. MNC. However, aﬃliates of high-R&D MNCs use significantly more debt from
the parent and less debt from local borrowing. Overall, aﬃliates of high R&D MNC parents
have less debt financing. High R&D MNC aﬃliates also internalize more of their trade. The
within-MNC trade of high R&D MNC aﬃliates trade is over 10 percent higher than in low
R&D MNCs.
Panel B of Table I shows characteristics of the countries in which the U.S. MNCs operate.
Inspection of the results indicates that MNCs primarily operate in the highest stock market
capitalization countries. These countries also have higher one- and five-year real GDP growth
rates.
Insert Table II - U.S. MNC Foreign Aﬃliate Characteristics and R&D
Table II breaks out the statistics by MNC R&D and network size. We find that the
characteristics of high R&D MNCs documented in Table I are more pronounced for MNCs
with small networks of aﬃliates. High R&D MNCs with small networks borrow less overall
and borrow more from their parents than all other groups. High R&D MNCs with large
networks borrow the next lowest overall and the second highest from their parents. High
R&D MNCs also have the highest percentage of their sales within the MNC. These findings
indicate that R&D is a resource that is hard to collateralize and borrow against in the
external market. Further, R&D appears to be a firm-specific resource that is harder to buy
or sell in arms-length contracts as aﬃliates of high R&D MNCs have a significantly lower
fraction of their sales to local parties.
Table III presents aﬃliate growth by the initial eﬃciency of the aﬃliates, using aﬃliate
i’s eﬃciency relative to other MNC aﬃliates in the same industry, in the same countryyear. Eﬃciency quartiles are determined by the median of the aﬃliates’ initial eﬃciency for
the first three years they appear in the sample. We then track the aﬃliates’ employment
growth for the next nine years until 1996, or until they drop out of the sample. In Panel
A, we present aﬃliate growth rates for the top and bottom quartiles of initial eﬃciency. In
16

Panel B, we focus on those firms in the top two and bottom two quartiles of capital market
development. Capital market development quartiles are determined by ranking countries by
their stock market capitalization in each year.
Insert Table III - MNC Allocation of Resources by Aﬃliate Eﬃciency
In Table III, Panel A shows that aﬃliates with the highest initial eﬃciency had the
highest average growth rate over all subsequent periods. Panel B shows that the higher
growth of high-eﬃciency aﬃliates is more pronounced in countries with low capital market
development. The aﬃliates in eﬃciency quartile four (the highest eﬃciency quartile) grow
22.19 percent over a nine-year period, compared to 4.07 percent for the relevant group in high
capital market countries. This diﬀerence between high and low capital market development
countries may indicate the possibility of more growth opportunities for eﬃcient aﬃliates
in low financial-market development countries, because local firms may be less competitive
than local firms in high stock market capitalization countries.

B. Growth of U.S. MNCs: Firm-Specific Resources
Table IV presents our base specification and estimates it for the full sample and for the
sample split by the size of the MNCs network of aﬃliates in the prior year. Our main tests
in Table IV examine the predictions of Hypotheses 1. First, we predict a positive association
between aﬃliate i’s growth and its relative eﬃciency*GDP growth. Second, we predict that
if firm-specific resources of the MNC face decreasing returns-to-scale, aﬃliate growth should
be negatively related to the MNC’s other aﬃliates’ eﬃciency*relative demand growth. If
trade-oﬀs exist relative to the parent, we expect the coeﬃcient on the interaction of the
parent’s eﬃciency*relative demand growth to be negative.
Insert Table IV - Growth of MNC Aﬃliates
The results in column 1 in Table IV show that, consistent with Hypothesis 1, more
eﬃcient aﬃliates grow more in response to demand growth. This result is indicated by the
significant coeﬃcient on the Relative Eﬃciency (MNC-industry-year)*GDP growth interaction.
We also find a strong positive association between aﬃliate growth and the absolute
eﬃciency of other aﬃliates within the MNC. Not only do more eﬃcient aﬃliates grow significantly more, but aﬃliates from MNCs with more eﬃcient networks of aﬃliates and more
17

eﬃcient U.S. parents also have significantly higher growth. From these results, it appears
that there is a skill to operating foreign aﬃliates that is associated with higher growth, both
globally and in the home country.
When we examine the interaction variables, we find evidence of trade-oﬀs within the
MNC, as postulated in part (ii) of Hypothesis 1. We find a significant negative coeﬃcient on
the other aﬃliates’ eﬃciency interacted with their relative demand growth. This negative
coeﬃcient could indicate that there are trade-oﬀs to growth within the MNC as well as scarce
resources with decreasing returns-to-scale.
We note that we are testing for a diﬀerential slope for the response to demand changes
based on relative within-MNC eﬃciency. Thus, the significant negative coeﬃcient shows
that aﬃliates grow less (from a base level of growth given by the control variables) if other
aﬃliates are eﬃcient and receive a positive demand shock. This finding is consistent with
intra-MNC trade-oﬀs to growth.
In columns 2 and 3 we test the predictions of Hypothesis 2 by splitting the sample by
the R&D-to-sales ratio of the MNC parent. For aﬃliates of low-R&D parents, we find a
significant interaction eﬀect between other aﬃliates’ eﬃciency and their relative demand
growth. This finding is consistent with there being trade-oﬀs to growth among those aﬃliates of MNCs that do not compete on the basis of greater knowledge assets. Surprisingly,
the results in column 3 show that aﬃliates of high-R&D MNCs may compete for resources
with their parents. This finding shows in the significant negative coeﬃcient on parent eﬃciency*relative demand growth. This result is surprising if we view R&D as a resource that
has constant or increasing returns to scale. This result is examined further in Table V.
Table V examines the R&D results by the size of the MNC’s network. Table V uses the
previous R&D classifications and splits these subsamples at the median MNC network size
in the prior year.
Insert Table V - Eﬀect of Size and R&D
Columns 1 and 2 in Table V show that there are trade-oﬀs with other aﬃliates within
the MNC network in both high and low R&D MNCs with small networks. The interaction
variable, other aﬃliate eﬃciency*relative GDP growth, is strongly significant and negative.
These results show that within-MNC trade-oﬀs are concentrated in the MNCs with small
18

networks of aﬃliates, regardless of R&D. This result indicates that an aﬃliate of a small
network MNC grows less when other eﬃcient aﬃliates within the same network have high
relative demand growth. This finding gives evidence of scarce resources with decreasing
returns-to-scale within the MNC. We also find evidence of a very strong positive association
between aﬃliate growth and aﬃliate eﬃciency*GDP growth. Regardless of MNC R&D,
eﬃcient aﬃliates from MNCs with small networks are highly responsive to demand growth,
perhaps because they can get more resources to grow if they have strong demand and are
eﬃcient enough to respond to it.
Consistent with the part (ii) of Hypothesis 2, there is evidence of within-MNC tradeoﬀs in high R&D MNCs with small networks as shown in column 2. The focal aﬃliate in
these MNCs appears to compete with both the parent and other aﬃliates for scarce resources.
These results show that the trade-oﬀ we find in Table IV between aﬃliate growth and parent
eﬃciency*relative demand growth exists only in MNCs with small networks. Aﬃliates of
high-R&D MNCs with large networks show no intra-firm trade-oﬀs to growth.
We also find a strong positive eﬀect of aﬃliate i’s eﬃciency for MNCs with high R&D
and small aﬃliate networks, especially eﬃciency relative to other aﬃliates within the MNC.
These results support R&D as being a scarce resource with a high value that the MNC
allocates to the most eﬃcient aﬃliates when the MNC network is small and the MNC has
high R&D. Perhaps similar to Himmelberg and Petersen’s (1994) results for small, high-R&D
firms in the U.S., it may be the case that small MNCs lack the financial and organizational
resources necessary to exploit their R&D throughout a global network. The fact that we find
no trade-oﬀs to growth among the aﬃliates of high-R&D MNCs with large networks gives
some evidence that if the aﬃliates attain a certain size, MNCs can transfer R&D throughout
their networks with constant returns to scale.

C. Access to Financing as a Scarce Resource
In Table VI, we test Hypothesis 3 on the importance of access to financial capital as
an MNC resource. We propose that aﬃliates with less access to financing may face more
competition for resources with other aﬃliates in the MNC network. We split the previous
size-based samples at the median of aﬃliate financing. Since current period financing may
be correlated with aﬃliate productivity and opportunities, we spilt the sample based on
aﬃliates’ prior-year financing and include eﬃciency variables.

19

Insert Table VI - Aﬃliate Financing
The results in the first column of Table VI support part (ii) of Hypothesis 3, that there
are more within-MNC trade-oﬀs to growth for aﬃliates with less financing within small
network MNCs. The coeﬃcient on other aﬃliate eﬃciency*relative demand growth is highly
significant and negative. This result supports the conclusion that aﬃliates with less financing
compete more for resources with other aﬃliates of the MNC.
Table VIb presents the economic significance of the regression results from Table VI.
First, for each of the regressions in columns one to four, we vary from the tenth to the
90th percentile the aﬃliate’s own eﬃciency and the interaction of aﬃliate eﬃciency*demand
growth, while holding all other variables constant at their respective sample medians. Second, we vary from the tenth to the 90th percentile the MNC’s other aﬃliates’ and parent’s
eﬃciency and the interaction of these eﬃciency variables with parent and other aﬃliate relative demand growth, again holding all other variables at their respective sample medians.
We find that the regression results for the trade-oﬀ variables have both economically
important diﬀerences and statistical significance. In the bottom panel of Table VIb we
examine the economic significance of the MNC parent and other aﬃliates’ eﬃciency on
aﬃliate employment growth for MNCs with large and small aﬃliate networks with high and
low financing. We find that for aﬃliates from small MNC networks with low financing, as we
go to the 90th percentile of other aﬃliates’ and MNC parent’s eﬃciency, growth is reduced
from 0.84 percent to -0.76 percent, a range of 1.6 percentage points per year. In contrast,
the last two rows of Table VIb show that in MNCs with large networks, the eﬀect of other
aﬃliates’ and MNC parent’s eﬃciency on aﬃliate growth is relatively small, regardless of the
aﬃliates’ use of financing. As we go from the tenth to the 90th percentiles of other aﬃliate
and parent eﬃciency*relative demand growth, we see that the growth of aﬃliates of MNCs
with large networks varies slightly less than 0.2 percentage points for those with low use
of parent and local financing and only 0.32 percentage points for those with higher use of
parent and local financing. Thus, we find that the economic importance of trade-oﬀs within
the MNC is greater for MNCs with small aﬃliate networks.

20

D. Market-Specific Factors: Financial Markets and Institutions
In Hypothesis 4, we extend our findings on aﬃliate financing by examining two related
issues. First, we ask if aﬃliate growth increases with parent financing in countries with
less developed capital markets. We examine both stock and bank credit measures of capital
market development.11 Since MNC aﬃliates can borrow from their U.S. parents for operations in countries where local financing may be limited, we could expect that aﬃliates with
greater access to capital from within the MNC will grow more. However, we also predict in
Hypothesis 4 that greater parent financing may be associated with increased trade-oﬀs to
growth within the MNC, because parent financing may be withdrawn if growth opportunities
elsewhere within the MNC improve. If organizational size is important to an MNC’s ability
to obtain financing, we also expect parent financing to be associated with greater intra-firm
trade-oﬀs to growth for aﬃliates of MNCs with small networks.
Because we predict aﬃliates can more easily substitute local for parent financing in
countries with developed capital markets, our predictions in Hypothesis 4 focus on aﬃliate
growth in low-stock market capitalization countries.12
Insert Table VII - Source of Financing and Financial Market Development
We test Hypothesis 4 in two steps. First, we create a variable that measures the percentage of financing obtained from the focal aﬃliate’s U.S. parent. A priori, we predicted
that since internal MNC financing could be withdrawn from the focal aﬃliate for opportunities elsewhere within the MNC, there should be greater within MNC trade-oﬀs to growth
for aﬃliates with greater parent financing. However, the degree to which the MNC might
take advantage of these opportunities should depend on whether it has eﬃcient aﬃliates (or
U.S. operations) and large relative demand growth in the respective locations. Therefore,
we create a three-way interaction variable: percentage parent financing*other aﬃliate (U.S.
parent) eﬃciency*other aﬃliate (U.S. parent) relative demand growth. We estimate the regressions in separately, because the two three-way interactions are too collinear to estimate in
one equation. The interaction of percentage parent financing*other aﬃliate eﬃciency*other
11

The results using the measure of bank credit availability (claims on the private sector by deposit money
banks divided by GDP) are similar thus we just report and discuss those based on stock market capitalization.
12
The results of these specifications for the high stock market capitalization countries are available from
the authors (as are other specifications which are discussed, but not presented here).

21

aﬃliate relative demand growth is insignificant for both large and small MNC networks.
Consequently, we show only the results for the specifications that include the interaction of
percentage parent financing*parent eﬃciency*parent relative demand growth. Evidently, the
growth of aﬃliates that receive more parent financing in less developed financial markets is
aﬀected more when there are growth opportunities in the U.S. market than in other foreign
markets.
We find that, contrary to our expectations as postulated in part (i) of Hypothesis 4, aﬃliate growth does not increase with parent financing in countries with less developed financial
markets. The coeﬃcient on percentage parent debt financing, although not significant, actually has a negative sign for aﬃliates from large MNC networks. The sign is positive, but
the coeﬃcient is still not significant, for aﬃliates from small MNC networks.
We find, perhaps surprisingly, that in low stock market capitalization countries, there are
significant within-MNC trade-oﬀs to growth between aﬃliates and their U.S. parents. This
result holds for aﬃliates of MNCs with small and large networks. It may be the case that
growth in low stock market capitalization countries is suﬃciently intense in “headquarters
services” (Helpman, 1984) to show some decreasing returns to scale.
However, there is an interesting diﬀerence in the trade-oﬀs in the large and small
MNC network subsamples. For aﬃliates of MNCs with large networks, U.S. parent eﬃciency*relative demand growth is negatively associated with the growth of the focal aﬃliate.
However, the trade-oﬀ appears to be unrelated to the extent to which the focal aﬃliate
obtains financing from its parent.
In contrast, for aﬃliates from MNCs with small networks, the negative trade-oﬀs with
U.S. parents depend on the percentage of financing the aﬃliates receive from parents. The
three-way interaction variable (eﬃciency of U.S. parent interacted with parent relative demand growth and the percentage financing from the parent) is significant and negative for
small network aﬃliates in low stock market capitalization countries. This result is consistent
with the parts (ii) and (iii) of Hypothesis 4.
Our findings thus suggest that when MNCs grow in low stock market capitalization
countries, both the financial and organizational resources from the parent are critical to
growth. MNCs with small networks appear to be particularly lacking the internal financial
resources to grow without trade-oﬀs in low stock market capitalization countries. In contrast,

22

MNCs with large networks appear to face decreasing returns to organizational resources when
growing in these markets.
In Table VIII we test the importance of host country contracting eﬀectiveness, as discussed in Hypothesis 5. We predict that better host country contracting eﬀectiveness, particularly in low stock market capitalization countries, will benefit those MNC aﬃliates that
transact more with local firms, because better host-country institutions should facilitate
trade between local firms and MNC aﬃliates. We expect little or no eﬀect of better hostcountry contracting eﬀectiveness on the growth of aﬃliates that conduct more transactions
within the MNC.
To test this hypothesis, we split the countries into two groups based on stock market
capitalization/GDP (as in the previous table), and we include in the specification the annual
measure of a country’s contracting eﬀectiveness obtained from IRIS.
Insert Table VIII - Contracting Eﬀectiveness
Our results in column 1 show that greater contracting eﬀectiveness within the low stock
market capitalization countries has a positive eﬀect on MNC aﬃliate growth. Improved
contracting eﬀectiveness is not associated with aﬃliate growth in high stock market capitalization countries, as shown in column 4.
We then split the sample of aﬃliates into quartiles based on intra-MNC trade in the
low market capitalization subsample. Since most aﬃliates trade very little within the MNC
(the median is close to zero), we use the 75th percentile to split aﬃliates into high intraMNC trade and low trade. Firms at the 75th percentile conduct approximately 25 percent
of trade within the MNC. Consistent with Hypothesis 5, we find that the positive result for
contracting eﬀectiveness appears only for aﬃliates that conduct most of their transactions
with local firms. In addition, as shown in column 3, the negative coeﬃcient on the interaction
of U.S. parent eﬃciency*relative GDP growth implies that trade-oﬀs within the MNC in low
stock-market capitalization countries are significant only for aﬃliates that trade extensively
within the MNC.
Thus, it appears that MNCs that internalize more transactions may be relatively protected from weak domestic institutions. However, when domestic institutions improve, these
aﬃliates do not grow as much as aﬃliates that trade more with local firms - a result complementary to La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny’s (1997) finding that domestic
23

firms in countries with stronger institutions have the ability to grow more. This result also
appears to be the case for MNC aﬃliates, but only for those aﬃliates that transact more
with local firms.

E. Dynamic Eﬀects: The Eﬀect of an Increase in Stock Market Development
We further expand our analysis by considering the eﬀects of changes in capital market
development over time. We examine the proposition (related to Hypothesis 4) that as capital
markets develop, MNC aﬃliates will face fewer within-firm trade-oﬀs as they should find it
easier to raise capital locally. Given that local borrowing is an important source of aﬃliate
financing, development of local capital markets should enable aﬃliates to grow more in
response to demand growth. Local firms will also be able to trade more with MNC aﬃliates
when capital markets develop. Conversely, it may be the case that MNC aﬃliates will grow
less in response to demand growth as capital markets develop, because competition from
local firms intensifies.
To explore these ideas, we examine aﬃliate growth in countries that have had very high
stock market growth over the sample window from 1983-1985 to 1994-1996. We do so by
using the median stock market-capitalization- to-GDP growth over a three-year period for
beginning and ending values. We examine all aﬃliates in the upper quartile of stock market
growth. We then split this sample of aﬃliates into two periods, an early period from 19831989 and a late period from 1990-1996. Table IX presents the regression results for these
two time periods.
Insert Table IX - Increases in Stock Market Development
We find several interesting results in Table IX. First, eﬃcient MNC aﬃliates grow more
in response to positive demand changes in the later period, as is evident in the significant
positive coeﬃcient on the aﬃliate’s relative eﬃciency*GDP growth. Second, as shown by
the significant negative coeﬃcient on U.S. parent eﬃciency*GDP growth in the early period
and insignificant coeﬃcient in the later period, aﬃliates face lower within-MNC trade-oﬀs
to growth as local capital markets develop. These findings support the proposition that
MNC aﬃliates are able to do more business with local firms and to raise more capital locally
as financial markets develop. The reduced trade-oﬀ to growth in relation to U.S. parents
in the later period extends our earlier results in which we find that aﬃliates in low stock
24

market capitalization countries appear to compete for resources with their U.S. parents. It
may be the case that growing an aﬃliate in these markets requires considerable financial
and organizational resources, particularly from U.S. headquarters, that become less critical
as local markets develop.
Table IXb presents the economic significance of the regression results from Table IX.
First, holding all other variables constant at their respective sample medians for the regressions in Table IX, we vary the aﬃliate’s own eﬃciency and the interaction of aﬃliate
eﬃciency*GDP growth from the tenth to the 90th percentile. Second, we vary from the
tenth to the 90th percentile the MNCs’ other aﬃliates’ and the MNC parents’ eﬃciency and
the interaction of these eﬃciency variables with parent and other aﬃliates’ relative demand
growth, again holding constant all other variables at their respective sample medians.
We find that the regression results have economic importance in addition to statistical
significance. Table IXb shows that higher aﬃliate eﬃciency is associated with considerably
higher aﬃliate employment growth. Aﬃliate growth increases from -4.38 percent to 2.3
percent, an increase of 6.68 percentage points per year, as eﬃciency and demand increase
from the tenth to the 90th percentile for MNCs in the later period.
When we examine the economic significance of the parent and other aﬃliates’ eﬃciency
on aﬃliate growth in the two periods, we find that the economic importance of the tradeoﬀs within the MNC exist primarily in the first period in countries with large increases in
stock-market development. In the first period, aﬃliate growth is reduced from 1.77 percent
to 0.56 percent as we go from the tenth to the 90th percentile of other-aﬃliate and MNC
parent eﬃciency. Again, these results support the notion that organizational resources are
necessary to grow MNC aﬃliates in developing economies.
The last row of Table Xb shows that the eﬀect of the parent and other aﬃliates’ eﬃciency
on aﬃliate growth in the later period is relatively small, and becomes positive as we go from
the tenth to the 90th percentile. Thus, we find that the economic importance of trade-oﬀs
within the MNC is higher for MNC aﬃliates when local capital markets are less developed.

F. Robustness of our Results
We check to see if our results are robust to alternate measures of aﬃliate growth and
aﬃliate eﬃciency. We examine whether the growth in real aﬃliate assets responds to the
same eﬃciency and trade-oﬀ variables as the growth in employment. Overall, we find similar
25

results, despite aﬃliate assets potentially suﬀering from country diﬀerences in accounting
rules and exchange rate movements. These diﬀerences may be mitigated to the extent foreign
aﬃliates of U.S. MNCs follow U.S. accounting procedures (as is required by the BEA). We
do find stronger significance for the change in exchange rates in these regressions. This
finding is perhaps not surprising, given that assets are translated back into U.S. dollars at
end-of-year exchange rates. Using employment growth avoids this problem. As we discuss in
the data appendix, we also explore several alternative measures of aﬃliate eﬃciency, using
simpler cash flow based measures of eﬃciency, and find similar results.
Second, we examine the possible eﬀect of measurement error in the eﬃciency and relative
GDP growth variables. We wish to be sure that there is no systematic bias in eﬃciency
measures when there are either very few or very many aﬃliates within the MNC. In the
former case, our main concern is that there would be no “comparison” aﬃliates within the
MNC in the same industry-year as the focal aﬃliate. In the latter case, our concern is that
by pooling either eﬃciency or demand growth across multiple aﬃliates - some of which had
positive eﬃciency (or demand growth) and some of which had negative eﬃciency (or demand
growth)-we would create “noisy” measures of eﬃciency and/or demand growth.
On the first issue of too few aﬃliates, fewer than one tenth of one percent of MNCs in
our sample do not have multiple aﬃliates in the same industry, and our results are robust to
the exclusion of these firms. Moreover, the median number of aﬃliates in the same industry
for MNCs in the “small network” subsample is five.13
For both demand growth and eﬃciency measures in MNCs with many aﬃliates, we also
examine discrete variables (-1,0,1) that indicate whether the other aﬃliates’ eﬃciency is
lower, equal to, or greater than, the aﬃliate in question. We also use only the largest other
aﬃliate’s eﬃciency as a measure of alternative opportunities available to the MNC. In both
cases we obtain similar results to those reported here.
Third, we explore the robustness of our results to possible alternative explanations. We
consider the fact that the observed “trade-oﬀs” within MNCs might be optimizing behavior,
in the sense that MNCs can shift production in and out of diﬀerent countries as cost or
13

To some extent, this is because smaller MNCs are more likely to have estimated data, and we removed
all estimated observations from our sample. However, we still have a wide range in the number of aﬃliates
per MNC. Specifically, since we use only reported data, and all our aﬃliate and MNC variables are lagged,
we are conditioning on an aﬃliate appearing at least twice consecutively, with no estimated data.

26

demand conditions change throughout the global network of aﬃliates. If our results are
picking up “optimizing” production shifts, we would expect to find the following patterns.
First, there should be considerably less shifting of production among diversified MNCs, as
these are less likely to have plants in diﬀerent countries that can easily manufacture the
same products. Second, we should find more production shifting in larger MNCs, as these
are more likely to have multiple plants that can produce the same things. We should also
observe considerably more production shifting among MNCs that trade extensively intrafirm, as these MNCs have established the mechanisms to shift production and transfer the
output from diﬀerent plants throughout the network.
To explore these ideas, we create measures of both MNC intra-firm trade and diversification. (The diversification measure is based the BEA’s 2-3 digit industry codes, which
correspond primarily to three-digit SIC codes, with some two-digit level codes.).
We run the basic specification from Table IV and split aﬃliates into high and low
categories of intra-MNC trade and also into high and low categories based on parent diversification. The benefit of using actual intra-MNC trade is that this measure can directly
capture whether firms are truly diversified and potentially have no product-market connections between MNC divisions. Using SIC codes or other industry classification codes will
not capture vertical integration or other forms of trade within firms.
We examine whether less diversified MNCs (and MNCs that operate in related industries) face larger or smaller trade-oﬀs within the network. We find more significant trade-oﬀs
in MNCs that operate in more related industries and trade more intra-firm. This result
appears to be consistent with “optimizing” production shifting.
However, when we examine the high and low intra-MNC trade and diversification samples by the size of the MNC network, we find that MNC size has an important influence on
the eﬀects of relatedness. We find significant within-MNC trade-oﬀs for aﬃliates of small
MNC networks with highly diversified parents. This finding is opposite to the expected
pattern under the production-shifting scenario. We also find no significant trade-oﬀs for
aﬃliates of large-network MNCs, regardless of the MNCs’ level of intra-firm trade.
Another possible explanation is that the trade-oﬀs we find may be driven by diversified
firms misallocating resources - although the results suggest that eﬃcient aﬃliates in countries
with positive changes in demand receive more, not less resources. However, our results are

27

unaﬀected by product-line diversification, measured by either industry codes or by identifying
MNCs that do not trade much within the firm. We find no trade-oﬀs for aﬃliates of highly
diversified MNCs with large aﬃliate networks.
Thus, we conclude that our results support the existence of trade-oﬀs to growth within
the MNC that stem primarily from resource constraints, and that our results are robust to
the extent of intra-MNC trade and diversification.

IV. Conclusions
In this paper, we examine MNC growth across networks of aﬃliates. We examine how
changes in local demand and demand in the MNC’s other markets aﬀect MNC aﬃliate
growth. Our results for MNC growth, aﬃliate financing patterns, and financial-market
development provide evidence on the kind of resources that create advantages for MNCs.
Our tests indicate whether firm-specific resources face decreasing returns to scale - and thus
cause trade-oﬀs to growth - in their application within the MNC.
We examine the importance of MNC R&D, organizational resources, and access to financing. Our primary findings on these firm-specific resources are:
1. Small, high-R&D MNCs face significant trade-oﬀs to growth within the MNC.
2. Trade-oﬀs within MNCs with small aﬃliate networks are particularly important when
aﬃliates have less combined host-country and parent financing.
3. MNCs with large aﬃliate networks face few intra-firm trade-oﬀs to growth.
These results provide evidence that organizational and financial resources are important
to an MNC’s ability to exploit knowledge assets created through R&D. Our findings are
consistent with large-network MNCs possessing organizational and financial capital that are
in scarce supply for MNCs with smaller aﬃliate networks. MNCs with large aﬃliate networks
seem to face few intra-MNC trade-oﬀs to growth.
Relating our results to Helpman’s (1984) theory of the MNC, given we find no tradeoﬀs to growth in high-R&D MNCs with large aﬃliate networks, it may be the case that
knowledge assets and “headquarters services” face constant returns to scale. However, it

28

seems to be the case that to achieve growth without trade-oﬀs across aﬃliate networks, an
MNC must possess significant organizational and financial resources.
Our second major set of results shows that country financial market development and
institutional development aﬀect aﬃliate growth and within-MNC trade-oﬀs. Our findings
on the importance of host-country financial and institutional development are:
1. In countries with less-developed financial markets, our evidence is consistent with aﬃliates competing for resources with their U.S. parents. These parent-aﬃliate trade-oﬀs
are particularly acute for MNCs with small networks and greater aﬃliate reliance on
parent financing.
2. In countries with less-developed financial markets, MNC aﬃliates benefit from improvements in host-country contracting eﬀectiveness. This result is particularly significant
for those aﬃliates that trade extensively with local firms.
3. In countries with rapidly developing financial markets, intra-MNC trade-oﬀs diminish
and aﬃliate growth becomes more sensitive to own-eﬃciency and local market demand
over time.
These results are consistent with the proposition that MNC aﬃliates benefit from access
to more local financing and the ability to trade more with domestic firms. MNC aﬃliates
that conduct more transactions within the firm are relatively sheltered from host-country
institutions, with no significant benefits found from improvements in institutions. MNC
aﬃliates that operate in countries with well-developed capital markets have smaller withinMNC trade-oﬀs and are not aﬀected by changes in host-country contracting eﬀectiveness.
Overall, our evidence is consistent with access to financing and organizational capital
being important resources for MNC growth. Our results also provide support for the proposition that stronger host-country institutions and financial-market development benefit MNCs.

29

REFERENCES
Allen, Franklin and Douglas Gale, 2000, Financial contagion, Journal of Political Economy
108(1) 1-33.
Baldwin, Richard E., 1988, Hysteresis in import prices: The beachhead eﬀect, American
Economic Review 78(4): 773-78.
Bodnar, Gordon M., Charles Tang, and Joseph Weintrop, 1999, Both sides of corporate
diversification: The value impacts of global and industrial diversification, Working
paper, Johns Hopkins University.
Buckley, Peter and Marc Casson, 1976, The Future of the MNC. New York: Holmes &
Meier.
Caves, Richard E., 1982, Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis. London: Cambridge University Press.
Clague, Christopher, Philip Keefer, Stephen Knack and Mancur Olson, 1996, Property
and contract rights under democracy and dictatorship, Journal of Economic Growth
1, 243-276.
Coase, Ronald, 1937, The nature of the firm, Economica 4: 386-405.
Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Vojislav Maksimovic, 1998, Law, finance, and firm growth, Journal of Finance 53: 2107-2137.
Denis, David J., Diane K. Denis and Keven Yost, 2002, Global Diversification, Industrial
Diversification, and Firm Value, forthcoming Journal of Finance.
Desai, Mihir, 1999, The Substitutability of Foreign and Domestic Capital: Evidence from
TRA, Mimeo, Harvard University.
Dixit, Avinash, 1989, Hysteresis, import penetration, and exchange-rate pass-through,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 2: 205-228.
Dunning, John, 1973, The determinants of international production, Oxford Economic Papers 25: 289-336.
Errunza, Vihang R. and Lemma W. Senbet, 1981, The eﬀects of international operations on
the market value of the firm: Theory and Evidence, Journal of Finance 36: 401-417.
Errunza, Vihang R. and Lemma W. Senbet, 1984, International corporate diversification,
market valuation, and size-adjusted evidence, Journal of Finance 39: 727-743.

Fazzari, Stephen M., R. Glen Hubbard, and Bruce C. Peterson, 1988, Financing constraints
and corporate investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 145-195.
Feinberg, Susan E. and Michael P. Keane, 2001, U.S. Canada trade liberalization and MNC
production location, The Review of Economics and Statistics 83(1): 118-132.
Helpman, Elhanan, 1984, A simple theory of international trade with multinational corporations, Journal of Political Economy 92: 451-471.
Himmelberg Charles P. and Bruce C. Petersen (1994) R&D and Internal Finance: A Panel
Study of Small Firms in High Tech Industries, Review of Economics and Statistics
76(1):38-51.
Kim, Wi Saeng and Esmeralda O. Lyn, 1986, Excess market value, the multinational corporation, and Tobin’s q ratio, Journal of International Business Studies 17: 119-126.
King, Robert, and Ross Levine, 1993, Finance and growth: Schumpeter might be right,
Quarterly Journal of Economics 108(3), pp. 717-37.
Lamont, Owen, 1997, Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital Markets,
Journal of Finance 52, 83-109.
LaPorta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert W. Vishny, 1997,
Legal determinants of external finance, Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.
Levine, Ross, 1997, Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda,
Journal of Economic Literature 35(2): 688-726.
Lombardo, Davide, 2001, Is there a cost to poor institutions?, Mimeo, Stanford University.
Lucas, Robert, 1978, On the size distribution of firms, Bell Journal of Economics 9: 508523.
Maksimovic, Vojislav and Gordon Phillips, 2002, Do conglomerate firms allocate resources
ineﬃciently across industries? Theory and Evidence, Journal of Finance 57, 721-67.
Mataloni, Raymond J. and Lee Goldberg, 1994, Gross product of U.S. multinational companies, Survey of Current Business 72(2): February.
Morck, Randel and Bernard Yeung, 1991, Why investors value multinationality, Journal of
Business April: 165-188.
Moulton, Brent, 1986, Random group eﬀects and the precision of regression estimates,
Journal of Econometrics 32, pp. 385-397.

OECD, 1999, Measuring Globalization: The Role of Multinationals in OECD Economies.
Paris, France: OECD.
Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales, 1998, Financial dependence and growth, American
Economic Review 559-586.
Rugman, Alan, 1981, Inside the Multinationals: The Economics of Internal Markets. London: Croom Helm.
Scharfstein, David S., 1998, The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets II: Evidence from
Diversified Conglomerates, NBER working paper 6352.
Scharfstein, David S., and Jeremy C. Stein, 2000, The dark side of internal capital Markets:
divisional rent-seeking and ineﬃcient investment, Journal of Finance 55, 2537-2564.
Shin, H. and Rene Stulz, 1998, Are Internal Capital Markets Eﬃcient? Quarterly Journal
of Economics, v113, 531-52.
Turner, Anthony and Stephen Golub, 1997, Towards a system of multilateral unit labor costbased competitiveness indicators for advanced, developing and transition economies,
International Monetary Fund, working paper 97-151.
Vernon, Raymond, 1971, Sovereignty at Bay: The Multinational Spread of U.S. Enterprises.
New York: Basic Books.
Wheeler, David and Ashoka Mody, 1992, International investment location decisions: The
case of U.S. Firms, Journal of International Economics 33: 57-76.
Williamson, Oliver E., 1975, Markets and Hierarchies. New York: Free Press.
Wurgler, Jeﬀrey, 2000, Financial markets and the allocation of capital, Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 187-214.

Data Appendix
This appendix contains the details on how we constructed the sample used in our study
and how we measured aﬃliate eﬃciency.
We used the BEA data over the 14-year window from 1983-1996. We made several
alterations to the BEA population to construct the panel used in this research. First, because
the BEA conducts two diﬀerent surveys (the Benchmark and Annual Surveys) with diﬀerent
reporting requirements in terms of aﬃliate size, reported data were not available for all
the aﬃliates throughout the 14-year period. The Benchmark Surveys, conducted in 1977,
1982, and again in 1989 and 1994, included the whole population of MNCs and their foreign
aﬃliates, and smaller aﬃliates were required to report data. But in the Annual Surveys,
many of the small aﬃliates that reported data in the 1989 and 1994 Benchmark Surveys
were exempt from filing. In cases in which aﬃliates reported data in a Benchmark Survey
but were exempt from the Annual Surveys, the BEA carried them forward by estimating
data.14
As a result of this sampling procedure, many of the observations for smaller aﬃliates were
estimated for most of the 14-year period. In an initial screen, we removed all estimated data
from our sample. (See Feinberg and Keane, 2001, for a detailed discussion of the BEA panel.)
After this screen, our panel contained approximately 155,000 aﬃliate-year observations out
of a population of 256,000.
In our second screen, we kept only aﬃliates in countries for which we had real exchange
rate data. Approximately 18,800 observations were dropped in this screen, but our remaining sample of 137,000 aﬃliate-year observations accounted for 95 percent of total aﬃliate
sales (among aﬃliates that reported data). In other words, the number of aﬃliates that reported data in countries dropped from our sample in this step was relatively small. For the
regressions reported, we also excluded data for which we were not able to calculate aﬃliate
eﬃciency, as described later in this section. We did calculate eﬃciency for approximately
109,600 aﬃliate-year observations. For these aﬃliate observations, we were able to calculate
a measure of parent eﬃciency for 92,200 aﬃliate-year observations.
Because we specified our dependent variable (aﬃliate employment growth) as a change,
14

These individual aﬃliates which are carried forward are small and are thus are not likely to have a
significant impact on the BEA’s published data at the industry or country level.

and because we used lagged independent variables, we removed aﬃliates with missing data
and/or non-consecutive observations from our sample. This screen resulted in the removal
of a large number of aﬃliate-year observations, because many aﬃliates only had only one or
two non-consecutive reported data points (typically, one for each Benchmark year, 1989 and
1994).
We also excluded aﬃliates in which the parent had only a partial ownership stake. This
criterion aﬀected only 3,620 aﬃliate-year observations and did not change significantly any
of our reported results.
Finally, we excluded the bottom and top one percent of observations for each of the
growth and eﬃciency variables. Given the high correlation in outliers across these variables
based on this outlier screen, we excluded approximately three percent of the data. Our final
regression sample includes 34,384 aﬃliate-year observations on 8,106 aﬃliates of 862 U.S.
parents producing in 41 countries.
We measured aﬃliate eﬃciency as [(Real aﬃliate gross product)/aﬃliate employment] at
time (t-1), where gross product was an economic accounting measure of an aﬃliate’s valueadded constructed by the BEA (see Mataloni and Goldberg, 1994). This measure of gross
product is the sum of local aﬃliate costs plus aﬃliate profits in production. The advantage
of this measure over a cash-flow accounting measure is that it is not as subject to potential
accounting allocation of non-production and overhead costs across countries by the parent.
We deflated this measure by industry-level price deflators to get a real dollar measure and
then divided by aﬃliate employment. We used this basic measure of eﬃciency to calculate
three measures of aﬃliate eﬃciency, two relative eﬃciency measures for aﬃliate i, and an
eﬃciency measure for the other aﬃliates in aﬃliate i’s network.
For robustness, we also explored several alternative measures of aﬃliate eﬃciency in
addition to the ones discussed here. (We do not report results using the other measures, but
they are available on request.) The alternative measures showed no systematic diﬀerences
from the measure we use here. The other measures were closer to cash flow measures of
eﬃciency [(aﬃliate sales - cost of goods sold)/aﬃliate employment] and [(aﬃliate sales employee compensation)/aﬃliate employment]. Both these measures were also divided by
sales, rather than employment, as the third and fourth measures.
Our first measure of aﬃliate eﬃciency was within-MNC (industry and year adjusted)

eﬃciency. Because we predicted that MNCs will allocate resources to aﬃliates with a comparative advantage within the MNC, this variable measures aﬃliate i’s eﬃciency in a given
year relative to other aﬃliates in the same MNC in the same industry as aﬃliate i. We
calculated aﬃliate i’s within-MNC eﬃciency by subtracting from aﬃliate i’s eﬃciency the
average eﬃciency of other same-industry aﬃliates of the same parent as aﬃliate i. We expected that aﬃliates that were relatively more eﬃcient within the MNC would have higher
growth. We note that in addition to predicting absolutely higher growth for aﬃliates with
higher within-MNC eﬃciency, our hypotheses predicted that MNCs will allocate resources
to aﬃliates that were relatively more eﬃcient and have positive changes in demand. Accordingly, we calculated an interaction between aﬃliate i’s within-MNC eﬃciency and its
demand change.
Our second measure of aﬃliate eﬃciency is the eﬃciency of aﬃliate i relative to other
MNC aﬃliates in the same industry in the same country-year. We constructed this measure
by subtracting from aﬃliate i’s eﬃciency the average eﬃciency of unrelated MNC aﬃliates
in the same country, year, and industry as aﬃliate i. We expected that MNCs would allocate
more resources to aﬃliates which were relatively eﬃcient (compared with other same-industry
aﬃliates) within a given host country.
The third measure of aﬃliate eﬃciency is a weighted average of the eﬃciency of all
the aﬃliates of a given MNC parent (excluding aﬃliate i). To construct this measure, we
summed together (eﬃciency*sales) for all aﬃliates (other than aﬃliate i) of a given parent,
p, and divided by the total sales of all the aﬃliates of parent p (other than aﬃliate i). Our
main predictions for other aﬃliate eﬃciency center around the interaction between other
aﬃliate eﬃciency and the other aﬃliates’ demand changes.
Our final measure of eﬃciency is for the U.S. parent. We measured parent p’s eﬃciency
by (sales - employee compensation)/employment (at time (t-1)),15 and we industry- and
year- adjusted this measure by subtracting from parent p’s eﬃciency the mean eﬃciency
of all U.S. parents in the same industry-year. Again, our main prediction for this variable
focuses on the interaction between parent p’s eﬃciency and its relative change in demand.
15

We use this measure of parent eﬃciency rather than real gross product because we do not have a full
series of gross product data for U.S. parents. We do not expect this should bias our results for parent
eﬃciency given that similar measures of aﬃliate eﬃciency used in earlier specifications yielded the same
results as the gross product-based measures.

Table I
Sample Characteristics of U.S. MNC Foreign Affiliates, 1983-1996

Productivity variables are industry- and year-adjusted. Affiliate efficiency is a labor value-added measure and is
calculated as real affiliate gross product divided by affiliate employment. We calculate parent efficiency as sales
less cost of goods sold divided by parent employment. Percentages of total debt from the parent and local
sources do not add up to 100%, because firms can borrow from other countries and from other sources in the
U.S. We convert all sales and cost data into 1982 dollars using BLS three-digit industry deflators. We obtain
capital market development data from the IFC. Quartiles are determined by ranking countries by their stock

market capitalization each year. High and low R&D groups are based on the median parent R&D for each year.
Multinational affiliate data are from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Sample of Firms
All Affiliates

Affiliates of
MNCs with
Low R&D

35,018

27,973

2,142,239

3,095,396

8,106

2,173

Efficiency of affiliate (median)
relative MNC-industry-year

0.0

0.0

0.0

Efficiency of affiliate (median)
relative country-industry-year

0.0

0.0

-0.6

For highest efficiency (above 50th percentile) affiliates
Average affiliate employee growth rate
Average MNC parent growth rate

0.6%
2.7%

0.2%
2.6%

0.7%
2.8%

Average efficiency of MNC parent
Average efficiency of other affiliates in network

21.9
4.1

42.8
2.5

R&D to sales ratio of MNC parent (average)

5.5%

2.4%

6.4%

a

Debt to asset ratio for affiliates (average)

53.8%

57.7%

52.3%

a

% debt from parent (average)

16.5%

13.5%

17.4%

a

% debt from local borrowing (average)

65.2%

68.3%

64.3%

a

% affiliate sales within MNC (average)

19.5%

15.7%

26.0%

a

% Sales in local country (Average, outside MNC)

78.5%

85.3%

76.4%

a

Panel A: Affiliate Characteristics
Affiliate size (median, 1982 $000)
MNC parent size (median, 1982 $000)
Number of affiliates

a

Affiliates of
MNCs with
High R&D
37,016
1,999,663
6,014

d

a

14.8
4.6 a

Countries with the
Lowest
Highest
Stock Market Capitalization / GDP

Panel B: Country Characteristics

All Countries

Average change in real GDP (1 year)

3.76%

3.31%

4.17%

Average change in real GDP (5 year)

14.36%

12.96%

15.70%

Average stock market capitalization / GDP

0.431

0.130

0.712

Number of MNC affiliates

8,106

2,956

6,260

d

Difference in means between low and high R&D groups significantly different from zero at the 1% level.
All reported averages are significantly different from zero at the 1% level, using standard error of the mean.

d

Total number of affiliates summed across groups is greater than the total as MNC parents (Panel A) and countries (Panel B) can change groups.
Countries in the sample include: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany
Greece, Hong Kong, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway,
Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Singapore, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Turkey, United Kingdom and Venezuela.

Table II
U.S. MNC Foreign Affiliate Characteristics and R&D, 1983-1996

All efficiency variables are industry- and year-adjusted. Affiliate efficiency is a labor value-added measure and is
calculated as real affiliate gross product divided by affiliate employment. We calculate parent efficiency as sales
less cost of goods sold divided by parent employment. Percentages of total debt from the parent and local sources
do not add up to 100%, because firms can borrow from other countries and from other sources in the U.S.
We convert all sales and cost data into 1982 dollars using BLS three-digit industry deflators. Capital market
development data is obtained from the IFC. U.S. multinational data is from the Bureau of Economic Analysis.
Sample of Firms
MNCs with
Small Number of Affiliates &
Low R&D
High R&D
Affiliate size (median, 1982 $000)

MNCs with
Large Number of Affiliates &
Low R&D
High R&D

26,376

30,059

30,968

43,645

1,374,788

741,936

7,038,920

3,421,576

Number of affiliates

1,242

3,262

1,173

3,665

Efficiency of affiliate - 50th percentile
relative MNC-industry-year
Efficiency of affiliate - 50th percentile
relative country-industry-year

0.00

0.00

-3.56

-2.16

0.00

-2.71

0.00

0.00

MNC parent size (median, 1982 $000)

For highest efficiency (above 50th percentile) affiliates
Affiliate employee growth rate (average)
0.40%
MNC Parent Growth Rate (average)
3.18%
Efficiency of MNC parent (average)
31.56
Efficiency of other affiliates (average)
0.37

1.28%
2.11%
14.14
4.29

R&D to sales ratio of MNC parent (average)

2.0%

5.3%

a

2.6%

d

7.2%

a,d

Debt to asset ratio for affiliates (average)

55.4%

49.0%

a

62.4%

d

54.8%

a,d

% debt from parent (average)

14.2%

19.5%

a

12.8%

d

15.2%

a,d

% debt from local borrowing (average)

70.3%

65.6%

a

66.0%

d

63.3%

a,d

% affiliate sales within MNC (average)

14.8%

25.5%

a

16.6%

d

26.4%

a,d

% affiliate sales to local parties
(average, outside MNC)

84.9%

74.8%

a

85.8%

77.6%

a,d

c
a
a

0.00%
1.94%
53.84
4.54

d
d
d

0.34%
3.18%
15.29
4.72

a,d
a,-

Means are significantly different from zero at the 5% level or lower using standard error of the mean.
a,c

Difference in means between low and high R&D groups, within size groups, sig. different from zero at the 1%, 10% level.

d

Difference in means across size groups, for low and high R&D, significantly different from zero at the1% level.

Table III
MNC Allocation of Resources by Foreign Affiliate Efficiency
This table presents affiliate growth by the initial efficiency of the affiliate of U.S. multinational firms. Efficiency and growth rates are
country-, industry- and year-adjusted. We determine efficiency quartiles by the median of affiliate's initial efficiency for the first
three years they appear in the database. We then track the growth in the number of employees for the next nine years, until 1996 or
until they exit the database. In Panel A, we present affiliate growth rates for the top and bottom quartiles of initial efficiency. In Panel
B, we focus on those firms in the highest two and lowest two quartiles of financial-market development. Financial-market development quartiles are determined by ranking countries by their stock market capitalization in each year. We obtain multinational affiliate
data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis and financial-market development data from the IFC.
Panel A: Affiliate Growth in Employment
Years after three year beginning period
Year +1

Year +3

Year +5

Year +9

Quartile 1: Firm growth rate
Number of affiliates

-1.58%
788

-0.99%
478

-0.43%
293

-3.68%
57

Quartile 4: Firm growth rate
Number of affiliates

2.38%
927

Growth rate of affiliate division
By quartile of initial efficiency
(Quartile 1 is lowest efficiency quartile)

a

5.49%
640

a

7.32%
387

a

8.43%
174

b

Panel B: Affiliate Growth in Employment by Financial-Market Development Quartiles
Years after three year beginning period
Year +1

Year +3

Efficiency Quartiles in countries with low capital market development
b
Quartile 1: Firm growth rate
-4.06%
Number of affiliates
239

Quartile 4: Firm growth rate
Number of affiliates

2.17%
298

-9.92%
123

b

Year +5

Year +9

-1.94%
74

0.56%
18

3.49%
158

9.20%
123

2.13%
351

-2.16%
216

a

22.19%
33

Efficiency Quartiles in countries with high capital market development
Quartile 1: Firm growth rate
Number of affiliates

-0.38%
540

Quartile 4: Firm growth rate
Number of affiliates

2.49%
624

b

6.61%
478

a

a,b,c indicates significant change from year 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

6.94%
260

-5.56%
38

a

4.07%
75

a

Table IV
Growth of MNC Affiliates
This table presents regressions of affiliate growth in employment on affiliate efficiency and demand changes. Affiliate
efficiency variables are lagged and industry- and year-adjusted. Affiliate efficiency is a labor value-added measure
and is calculated as real affiliate gross product divided by affiliate employment. We calculate parent efficiency as
as sales less cost of goods sold divided by parent employment. MNC integration is the percentage of affiliate sales
exported to and imported from the rest of the MNC. High (low) parent R&D represent the top (bottom) 50th of
R&D at the MNC parent level. Exchange rate (GDP) change is the log change in year-end exchange rates (GDP).
Relative GDP changes are relative to the MNC's other affiliates. The local effective tax rate is the median taxes
paid over taxable income by country, industry, and year for all affiliates. All regressions contain a time trend, random
firm effects, and country dummy variables. All coefficients and standard errors for efficiency variables are multiplied
by 1,000. (Standard errors are in parentheses.)
All Affiliates
Affiliate Efficiency Variables
Efficiency - relative MNC-industry-year
Efficiency - relative country-industry-year
Key Intra-MNC Trade-off Variables
Relative efficiency (MNC-Ind-Year)*GDP change
Efficiency of U.S. parent * relative GDP change of U.S parent
Efficiency of other affiliates * relative GDP change of
of other affiliates
MNC and Country Control Variables
Efficiency of US parent
Efficiency of other affiliates in the MNC
Affiliate MNC integration (lagged)
(coefficient*100)
Log sales (lagged)
Exchange rate change
GDP change
Long-run (5-year) GDP growth
Relative GDP change of other affiliates
Relative GDP change of U.S. parent
Local effective tax rate
Trend
Constant
2

0.116
(0.05)
0.157
(0.03)

a

5.999
(1.34)
-0.692
(0.45)
-3.533
(1.66)

a

0.033
(0.02)
0.261
(0.05)
0.881
(0.91)
-0.015
(0.00)
-0.004
(0.02)
0.568
(0.15)
0.121
(0.03)
0.235
(0.11)
0.176
(0.11)
-0.056
(0.03)
-0.001
(0.00)
0.121
(0.02)

b

a

b

a

a

a

a

b

c

b

a

p -value for X test of joint significance of variables
0.00
Number of observations
34384
Number of affiliates
8106
a,b,c
significantly different from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Low Parent
R&D
0.085
(0.07)
0.102
(0.05)
4.679
(2.37)
0.530
(0.81)
-5.938
(3.28)
-0.005
(0.04)
0.288
(0.09)
-0.349
(2.80)
-0.016
(0.00)
0.026
(0.48)
0.261
(0.33)
0.068
(0.08)
0.256
(0.26)
-0.366
(0.27)
-0.300
(0.08)
-0.001
(0.00)
0.202
(0.05)
0.00
8150
2173

High Parent
R&D

b

b

c

a

a

a

a

0.112
(0.06)
0.218
(0.04)

c

6.539
(1.68)
-1.332
(0.57)
-2.259
(1.94)

a

0.054
(0.03)
0.213
(0.07)
1.107
(0.92)
-0.013
(0.00)
-0.021
(0.02)
0.684
(0.16)
0.123
(0.03)
0.215
(0.12)
0.329
(0.12)
0.004
(0.03)
-0.001
(0.00)
0.084
(0.03)

b

0.00
26557
6014

a

b

a

a

a

a

c

a

c

a

Table V
Effect of Size and R&D
This table presents regressions of affiliate growth in employment on affiliate efficiency and demand changes. Efficiency
variables are lagged and industry- and year-adjusted. Affiliate efficiency is a labor value-added measure and
calculated as real affiliate gross product divided by affiliate employment. We calculate parent efficiency as sales less
cost of goods sold divided by parent employment. MNC integration is the percentage of affiliate sales exported to
and imported from the rest of the MNC. Low (high) R&D and small (large) number of affiliates represent the bottom
(top) 50th percentile of each variable. Exchange rate (GDP) change is the log change in year end exchange rates
(GDP). Relative GDP changes are relative to the MNC's other affiliates. The local effective tax rate is the median
taxes paid over taxable income by country, industry, and year for all affiliates. All regressions contain a time trend,
random firm effects, and country dummy variables. All affiliate- and MNC-level variables are lagged. All coefficients
and standard errors for efficiency variables are multiplied by 1,000. (Standard errors are in parentheses.)
Small Number of Affiliates
Low R&D
High R&D

Affiliate Efficiency Variables
Efficiency - relative MNC-industry-year
Efficiency - relative country-industry-year
Key Intra-MNC Trade-off Variables
Relative efficiency (MNC-Ind-Year)*GDP change
Efficiency of U.S. parent * relative GDP change of
U.S. parent
Efficiency of other affiliates * relative GDP change o
of other affiliates
MNC and Country Control Variables
Efficiency of US parent
Efficiency of other affiliates in the MNC
Affiliate MNC integration (lagged)
(coefficient*100)
Log sales (lagged)
Exchange rate change
GDP change
Long-run (5-year) GDP growth
Relative GDP change of other affiliates
Relative GDP change of U.S. parent
Local effective tax rate
Trend
Constant

Large Number of Affiliates
Low R&D
High R&D

0.167
(0.13)
0.038
(0.07)

0.351 a
(0.12)
0.184 a
(0.07)

0.104
(0.09)
0.137 b
(0.07)

0.044
(0.07)
0.223 a
(0.06)

9.692 a
(3.43)
1.346
(1.18)
-8.536 b
(3.89)

7.854 a
(3.05)
-1.941 b
(0.94)
-7.840 a
(2.66)

-0.597
(3.41)
0.003
(1.13)
-1.347
(5.98)

5.306 a
(2.03)
-1.218
(0.73)
3.191
(2.87)

0.021
(0.05)
0.332 a
(0.09)
-1.894
(3.12)
-0.021 a
(0.01)
0.023
(0.07)
0.302
(0.42)
0.089
(0.10)
0.105
(0.30)
-0.235
(0.36)
-0.380 a
(0.10)
0.005 b
(0.00)
0.230 a
(0.07)

0.045
(0.04)
0.320 a
(0.09)
-0.678
(1.44)
-0.020 a
(0.00)
-0.033
(0.03)
1.043 a
(0.23)
0.030
(0.05)
0.177
(0.15)
0.563 a
(0.18)
0.035
(0.05)
-0.001 a
(0.00)
0.142 b
(0.05)

-0.065
(0.06)
0.447 c
(0.25)
0.707
(4.77)
-0.009
(0.007)
-0.042
(0.07)
0.243
(0.60)
0.060
(0.12)
0.274
(0.49)
-0.311
(0.42)
-0.188
(0.12)
-0.004 c
(0.00)
0.148 c
(0.08)

0.063 c
(0.04)
0.143
(0.13)
2.068 c
(1.22)
-0.011 a
(0.00)
-0.007
(0.02)
0.482 c
(0.24)
0.170 a
(0.04)
0.264
(0.21)
0.166
(0.16)
-0.008
(0.04)
-0.001
(0.00)
0.068 b
(0.03)

0.00
3656
1173

0.00
15125
3665

p -value for X 2 test of joint significance of variables
0.00
0.00
Number of observations
4121
11432
Number of affiliates
1242
3262
a,b,c
significantly different from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

Table VI
Affifliate Financing
This table presents regressions of affiliate growth in employment on affiliate efficiency and demand changes. Efficiency
variables are lagged and industry- and year-adjusted. Affiliate efficiency is a labor value-added measure
calculated as real affiliate gross product divided by affiliate employment. We calculate parent efficiency as sales less
cost of goods sold divided by parent employment. MNC integration is the percentage of affiliate sales exported to
and imported from the rest of the MNC. Low (high) financing and small (large) number of affiliates represent the
bottom (top) 50th percentile of each variable (lagged). Exchange rate (GDP) is the log change in year-end exchange
rates (GDP). Relative GDP changes are relative to the MNC's other affiliates. The local effective tax rate is the median
taxes paid over taxable income by country, industry, and year for all affiliates. All regressions contain a time trend,
random firm effects, and country dummy variables. All affiliate- and MNC-level variables are lagged. All coefficients
and standard errors for efficiency variables are multiplied by 1,000. (Standard errors are in parentheses.)
Small Number of Affiliates
Low
High
Local & Parent Financing

Affiliate Efficiency Variables
Efficiency - relative MNC-industry-year
Efficiency - relative country-industry-year
Key Intra-MNC Trade-off Variables
Relative Efficiency (MNC-Ind-Year)*GDP change
Efficiency of U.S. parent * relative GDP change of
U.S. parent
Efficiency of other affiliates * relative GDP change of
of other affiliates
MNC and Country Control Variables
Efficiency of US parent
Efficiency of other affiliates in the MNC
Affiliate MNC integration (lagged)
(coefficient*100)
Log sales (lagged)
Exchange rate change
GDP change
Long-run (5-year) GDP growth
Relative GDP change of other affiliates
Relative GDP change of U.S. parent
Local effective tax rate
Trend
Constant

0.097
(0.12)
0.108
(0.06)
9.933
(2.98)
-0.509
(1.07)
-11.194
(2.98)
0.040
(0.05)
0.256
(0.08)
0.457
(1.74)
-0.014
(0.00)
-0.030
(0.04)
0.973
(0.28)
0.056
(0.07)
0.333
(0.19)
0.307
(0.24)
-0.017
(0.06)
0.002
(0.00)
0.079
(0.05)

c

a

a

a

a

a

c

Large Number of Affiliates
Low
High
Local & Parent Financing

0.253
(0.13)
0.172
(0.07)

c

10.790
(3.69)
-0.835
(0.89)
-4.482
(3.61)

a

0.059
(0.04)
0.304
(0.10)
-0.483
(1.99)
-0.018
(0.005)
0.011
(0.04)
0.668
(0.29)
0.026
(0.07)
0.167
(0.20)
0.304
(0.22)
-0.063
(0.08)
-0.002
(0.00)
0.157
(0.06)

p -value for X 2 test of joint significance of variables
0.00
0.00
Number of observations
7710
7728
Number of affiliates
2838
2940
a,b,c
significantly different from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

a

a

a

a

a

0.178
(0.07)
0.129
(0.05)

a

3.968
(2.67)
-0.777
(0.88)
1.186
(4.09)

3.487
(2.17)
-1.084
(0.77)
1.164
(3.21)

c

-0.031
(0.05)
-0.016
(0.19)
-0.072
(1.92)
-0.002
(0.004)
-0.016
(0.03)
0.593
(0.34)
0.063
(0.06)
0.203
(0.29)
0.291
(0.24)
0.081
(0.06)
-0.003
(0.00)
-0.057
(0.05)

0.027
(0.04)
0.438
(0.15)
3.842
(1.57)
-0.019
(0.00)
-0.026
(0.03)
0.267
(0.29)
0.256
(0.05)
0.355
(0.25)
-0.076
(0.19)
-0.104
(0.06)
-0.001
(0.00)
0.217
(0.04)

-0.073
(0.09)
0.222
(0.06)

0.00
8520
2962

a

c

c

0.00
10181
3356

b

a

b

a

c

a

c

a

Table VIb
Economic Significance of Regression Results
This table presents the predicted annual employee growth rate using the coefficient estimates from Table VI, columns
one to four as indicated. We vary productivity and demand interaction variables from the 10th to the 90th percentiles.
All other variables are held at the medians for the respective samples. Country dummy variables vary with the respective
observation.
Varying Affiliate (own) Efficiency & Demand Interaction Variable
Affiliate Efficiency & Demand Interaction
10th
at the:
Percentile
MNCs with small affiliate networks

25th
Percentile

Median
Level

75th
Percentile

90th
Percentile

& low use of parent/local financing (column 1)

-1.49%

-0.42%

0.03%

0.42%

1.47%

& high use of parent/local financing (column 2)

-2.71%

-0.98%

-0.16%

0.35%

1.74%

& low use of parent/local financing (column 3)

-2.62%

-1.82%

-1.52%

-1.26%

-0.57%

& high use of parent/local financing (column 4)

-2.57%

-1.17%

-0.39%

0.05%

1.11%

25th
Percentile

Median
Level

75th
Percentile

90th
Percentile

MNCs with large affiliate networks

Varying Other Affiliate & Parent Interaction Demand Variables
Other Affiliate & Parent Interaction Variables
10th
at the:
Percentile
MNCs with small affiliate networks
& low use of parent/local financing (column 1)

0.84%

0.23%

0.03%

-0.16%

-0.76%

& high use of parent/local financing (column 2)

0.17%

-0.06%

-0.16%

-0.23%

-0.46%

& low use of parent/local financing (column 3)

-1.42%

-1.50%

-1.52%

-1.54%

-1.61%

& high use of parent/local financing (column 4)

-0.25%

-0.35%

-0.39%

-0.43%

-0.57%

MNCs with large affiliate networks

Table VII
Source of Affiliate Financing and Financial Market Development
This table presents regressions of affiliate growth in employment on affiliate efficiency and demand changes. All efficiency
variables are lagged and industry- and year-adjusted. Affiliate efficiency is a labor value-added measure and is
calculated as real affiliate gross product divided by affiliate employment. We calculate parent efficiency as sales less
cost of goods sold divided by parent employment. MNC integration is the percentage of affiliate sales exported to and
imported from the rest of the MNC. Low (high) market capitalization and small (large) number of affiliates represent
the bottom (top) 50th percentile of each variable. Exchange rate (GDP) change is the log change in year end exchange
rates (GDP). Relative GDP changes are relative to the MNC's other affiliates. The local effective tax rate is the median
taxes paid over taxable income by country, industry, and year for all affiliates. All affiliate- and firm-specific variables are
lagged one period. All regressions contain a time trend, random firm effects, and country dummy variables. All coefficients
and standard errors for efficiency variables are multiplied by 1,000. (Standard errors are in parentheses.)
Low Stock Market Capitalization
Small Number of Affiliates
Large Number of Affiliates

Affiliate Efficiency Variables
Efficiency - relative MNC-industry-year
Efficiency - relative country-industry-year
Key Intra-MNC Trade-off Variables
Relative Efficiency (MNC-Ind-Year)*GDP change
Percentage parent debt financing

Efficiency of U.S. Parent * relative GDP change of
U.S. parent
Interacted with % parent debt financing
Efficiency of other affiliates * relative GDP change
of other affiliates
MNC and Country Control Variables
Efficiency of US parent
Efficiency of other affiliates in the MNC
Affiliate MNC integration (lagged)
(coefficient*100)
Log sales (lagged)
Exchange rate change
GDP change
Long-run (5-year) GDP growth
Relative GDP change of other affiliates
Relative GDP change of U.S. parent
Effective local tax rate
Trend
Constant

0.058
(0.17)
0.658
(0.13)
6.370
(3.85)
0.025
(0.03)
-1.499
(1.23)
-12.326
(6.64)
-5.307
(3.88)

-0.061
(0.07)
0.231
(0.16)
-4.720
(2.80)
-0.010
(0.01)
0.031
(0.04)
1.111
(0.46)
0.201
(0.08)
1.116
(0.28)
-0.260
(0.35)
-0.212
(0.09)
0.002
(0.00)
-0.022
(0.31)

a

c

b

c

b

b

a

b

0.018
(0.08)
0.162
(0.08)

b

3.749
(2.08)
-0.022
(0.03)

c

-1.547
(0.87)
-3.190
(4.06)
5.266
(3.81)

c

0.019
(0.05)
0.176
(0.20)
3.517
(2.31)
-0.012
(0.005)
-0.028
(0.03)
0.483
(0.36)
0.273
(0.07)
0.627
(0.30)
-0.099
(0.25)
-0.104
(0.07)
-0.002
(0.00)
0.053
(0.15)

p -value for X 2 test of joint significance of variables
0.00
0.00
Number of observations
3748
6504
Number of affiliates
1392
1939
a,b,c
significantly different from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

b

a

b

c

Table VIII
Contracting Effectiveness
This table presents regressions of affiliate growth in employment on affiliate efficiency and contracting effectiveness.
Contracting effectiveness is an annual country-level index of the ability to enforce and write contracts. Affiliate efficiency
variables are lagged and industry- and year-adjusted. Affiliate efficiency is a labor value-added measure and is
calculated as real affiliate gross product divided by affiliate employment. We calculate parent efficiency as sales less
cost of goods sold divided by parent employment. MNC integration is the percentage of affiliate sales exported to and
imported from the rest of the MNC (lagged), with the top 25th percentile the cutoff for high MNC integration. Low (high)
stock market capitalization represents the bottom (top) 50th percentile of stock market capitalization/GDP. Exchange
rate (GDP) change is the log change in year end exchange rates (GDP). Relative GDP changes are relative to the MNC's
other affiliates. The local effective tax rate is the median taxes paid over taxable income by country, industry, and year for
all affiliates. Affiliate- and MNC-level variables are lagged. All regressions contain a time trend and random firm effects.
All coefficients and standard errors for the efficiency variables are multiplied by 1,000. (Standard errors are in parentheses.)
Low Stock Market Capitalization
Low IntraHigh IntraAll Affiliates MNC Trade
MNC Trade

Affiliate Efficiency Variables
Efficiency - relative MNC-industry-year
Efficiency - relative country-industry-year
Key Intra-MNC Trade-off Variables
Relative Efficiency (MNC-Ind-Year)*GDP change
Efficiency of U.S. Parent * relative GDP change of
U.S. parent
Efficiency of other affiliates * relative GDP change
of other affiliates
MNC and Country Control Variables
Index of Contracting Effectiveness (country level)

Efficiency of US parent
Efficiency of other affiliates in the MNC
Affiliate MNC integration (lagged)
(coefficient*100)
Log sales (lagged)
Exchange rate change
GDP change
Long-run (5-year) GDP growth
Relative GDP change of other affiliates
Relative GDP change of U.S. parent
Effective local tax rate
Trend
Constant

-0.013
(0.08)
0.318
(0.07)

a

5.610
(2.29)
-1.697
(0.71)
1.313
(2.96)

b

0.006
(0.002)

b

-0.011
(0.04)
0.224
(0.13)
-0.460
(1.77)
-0.004
(0.00)
-0.009
(0.03)
0.631
(0.29)
0.271
(0.05)
0.783
(0.21)
-0.142
(0.21)
-0.151
(0.05)
-0.004
(0.00)
0.001
(0.04)

b

c

b

a

a

a

a

-0.027
(0.09)
0.332
(0.08)

a

5.662
(2.69)
-1.149
(0.81)
0.485
(3.52)

b

0.007
(0.003)

b

0.000
(0.05)
0.231
(0.15)
-19.988
(5.59)
-0.006
(0.00)
-0.028
(0.03)
0.558
(0.36)
0.294
(0.06)
0.670
(0.28)
-0.126
(0.24)
-0.094
(0.06)
-0.005
(0.00)
0.019
(0.05)

p -value for X 2 test of joint significance of variables
0.00
0.00
Number of observations
9401
7043
Number of affiliates
2715
2252
a,b,c
significantly different from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

a

a

b

a

High Stock
Market
Capitalization

0.125
(0.17)
0.198
(0.15)

0.141
(0.06)
0.096
(0.04)

b

5.002
(4.20)
-4.136
(1.50)
1.193
(5.34)

5.899
(1.79)
-0.289
(0.67)
-7.148
(2.21)

a

a

0.006
(0.004)

-0.003
(0.00)

-0.073
(0.08)
0.127
(0.24)
6.280
(2.63)
0.002
(0.006)
-0.014
(0.04)
0.709
(0.51)
0.247
(0.09)
1.146
(0.35)
-0.300
(0.40)
-0.343
(0.09)
-0.003
(0.00)
-0.047
(0.07)

0.059
(0.03)
0.321
(0.06)
0.075
(1.01)
-0.010
(0.00)
-0.002
(0.03)
0.569
(0.18)
0.129
(0.04)
0.086
(0.14)
0.253
(0.14)
-0.004
(0.03)
-0.001
(0.00)
0.105
(0.04)

0.00
2358
1222

b

a

a

a

0.00
21342
5657

a

a

b

a

a

a

a

c

a

Table IX
Increases in Stock Market Development
This table presents regressions of affiliate growth for countries with low initial (1983-1985) stock market and high
subsequent growth in stock market capitalization over a twelve year period. The sample is divided into two periods,
1983-1989 and 1990-1996. Affiliate efficiency variables are lagged and industry- and year-adjusted. Affiliate
efficiency is a labor value-added measure and is calculated as real affiliate gross product divided by affiliate
employment. We calculate parent efficiency as sales less cost of goods sold divided by parent employment.
Exchange rate (GDP) change is the log change in year-end exchange rates (GDP). Relative GDP changes are
relative to the MNC's other affiliates. The local effective tax rate is the median taxes paid over taxable income by
country, industry, and year for all affiliates. All regressions contain a time trend, random firm effects and country
dummy variables. All coefficients and standard errors for efficiency variables are multiplied by 1,000.
All affiliate- and MNC-level variables are lagged. (Standard errors are in parentheses.)
Countries with high increase in
Stock Market Capitalization divided by GDP
Early Period
Late Period

Affiliate Efficiency Variables
Efficiency - relative MNC-industry-year
Efficiency - relative country-industry-year
Key Intra-MNC Trade-off Variables
Relative Efficiency (MNC-Ind-Year)*GDP change
Efficiency of U.S. Parent * relative GDP change of U.S parent
Efficiency of other affiliates * relative GDP change of other affiliates
MNC and Country Control Variables
Efficiency of US parent
Efficiency of other affiliates in the MNC
Log sales (lagged)
Exchange rate change
GDP change
Long-run (5-year) GDP growth
Relative GDP change of other affiliates
Relative GDP change of U.S. parent
Effective local tax rate
Trend
Constant
p -value for X 2 test of joint significance of variables
Number of observations
Number of affiliates
a,b,c
significantly different from 0 at the 1%, 5%, and 10% levels, respectively.

0.088
(0.09)
0.302 b
(0.13)

0.262 b
(0.12)
0.205 b
(0.10)

-0.877
(1.15)
-2.676 a
(0.42)
1.927
(1.66)

10.749 a
(3.49)
-1.265
(0.95)
-3.068
(4.25)

0.032
(0.08)
0.285
(0.22)
-0.011 c
(0.006)
0.036
(0.03)
0.086
(0.51)
0.467 a
(0.11)
0.397
(0.40)
-0.291
(0.44)
-0.138 c
(0.08)
-0.007
(0.00)
0.107
(0.11)

-0.022
(0.06)
0.596 a
(0.18)
-0.018 a
(0.006)
-0.043
(0.05)
0.463
(0.42)
0.228 c
(0.12)
0.264
(0.33)
-0.016
(0.31)
-0.086
(0.17)
-0.001
(0.00)
0.092
(0.12)

0.00
3209
977

0.00
4627
1406

Table IXb
Economic Significance of Regression Results for Table IX
This table presents the predicted annual employee growth rate using the coefficient estimates from Table IX. We vary
efficiency and demand interaction variables from the 10th to the 90th percentiles. All other variables are held at the
medians for the respective samples. Country dummy variables vary with the respective observation.
Predicted Annual Employee Growth Rates for Countries with High Increases in Stock Market Development
10th
25th
Median
75th
Percentile
Percentile
Level
Percentile
Varying Affiliate (own) Efficiency & Demand Interaction Variable

90th
Percentile

Early years (1984-1989)

-0.77%

0.03%

0.38%

0.58%

1.25%

Late years (1990-1996)

-4.31%

-1.91%

-0.42%

0.39%

2.18%

Varying Other Affiliate & Parent Interaction Demand Variables
Early years (1984-1989)

0.76%

0.50%

0.38%

-0.23%

-1.67%

Late years (1990-1996)

0.19%

-0.25%

-0.42%

-0.57%

-0.98%

