NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CORPORATE DEMAND FOR LIQUIDITY
Heitor Almeida
Murillo Campello
Michael S. Weisbach
Working Paper 9253
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9253
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002

We thank Viral Acharya, Charlie Hadlock, George Pennacchi and seminar participants at the Atlanta Finance
Forum, the University of Illinois, New York University, and the New York Federal Reserve Bank for helpful
comments and suggestions. We also thank Steve Kaplan and Luigi Zingales for providing us with their data.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
© 2002 by Heitor Almeida, Murillo Campello and Michael S. Weisbach. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.

Corporate Demand for Liquidity
Heitor Almeida, Murillo Campello and Michael S. Weisbach
NBER Working Paper No. 9253
October 2002
JEL No. G31, G32, D23, D92
ABSTRACT
This paper proposes a theory of corporate liquidity demand and provides new evidence on
corporate cash policies. Firms have access to valuable investment opportunities, but potentially
cannot fund them with the use of external finance. Firms that are financially unconstrained can
undertake all positive NPV projects regardless of their cash position, so their cash positions are
irrelevant. In contrast, firms facing financial constraints have an optimal cash position determined
by the value of today’s investments relative to the expected value of future investments. The model
predicts that constrained firms will save a positive fraction of incremental cash flows, while
unconstrained firms will not. We also consider the impact of Jensen (1986) style overinvestment on
the model’s equilibrium, and derive conditions under which overinvestment affects corporate cash
policies. We test the model’s implications on a large sample of publicly-traded manufacturing firms
over the 1981-2000 period, and find that firms classified as financially constrained save a positive
fraction of their cash flows, while firms classified as unconstrained do not. Moreover, constrained
firms save a higher fraction of cash inflows during recessions. These results are robust to the use of
alternative proxies for financial constraints, and to several changes in the empirical specification.
We also find weak evidence consistent with our agency-based model of corporate liquidity.
Heitor Almeida
Stern School of Business
New York University
44 W 4th Street
New York, NY 10012
halmeida@stern.nyu.edu
Michael S. Weisbach
University of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
and NBER
weisbach@uiuc.edu

Murillo Campello
University of Illinois
340 Wohlers Hall
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61820
m-campe @uiuc.edu

I

Introduction

One of the most important decisions a financial manager makes is how liquid a firm’s balance sheet
should be. Given an inflow of cash to the firm, a manager can choose to reinvest the cash in physical
assets, to distribute the cash to investors, or to keep the cash inside the firm. In fact, managers
choose to hold a substantial portion of their assets in the form of cash and liquid securities; in 1999,
for the 25 nonfinancial companies in the Dow Jones index, the average ratio of cash and equivalent
securities to annual capital expenditures was 227%, and for 11 of the 25 the ratio was at least
97%. The financial press has been critical of these large cash holdings, and suggests that they are
a manifestation of agency problems.1 However, the diﬃculty with these sorts of criticisms is that
they are made without a sense of what cash holdings would be in the absence of agency problems.
As Keynes (1936) originally discussed, the major advantage of a liquid balance sheet is that it
allows firms to make value-increasing investments when they occur. However, Keynes also pointed
out that this advantage is limited by the extent to which firms have access to capital markets (p.
196). We present a model that formalizes this intuition. In it, a firm whose access to capital markets
is limited by the nature of its assets, may anticipate facing financing constraints when undertaking
investments in the future. Cash holdings are valuable because they increase the likelihood that
the firm will be able to fund those investments. However, increasing cash is also costly for such
a firm because it decreases the quantity of current investments that the firm can make. In other
words, cash yields a lower return than that associated with the firm’s physical investments precisely
because the firm foregoes current positive NPV projects in order to hold cash. In contrast to a firm
facing constrained access to the capital markets, an unconstrained firm (i.e., a firm that is able to
invest in all of its positive NPV projects) has no use for cash, but also faces no cost of holding cash.
Our model contains a number of empirical predictions for corporate cash policies. The cleanest
of those predictions concerns a firm’s propensity to save cash out of cash inflows, which we refer
to as the cash flow sensitivity of cash. Our model implies that a firm’s cash flow sensitivity of
cash depends on the extent to which the firm faces financing constraints: firms that are financially
unconstrained should not have a systematic propensity to save cash, while firms that are constrained
should have a positive cash flow sensitivity of cash. We also study whether these optimal cash policy
1

See, for example, “What to do with all that cash?”, Business Week, Nov/20/2000, and “Time pressure on six
continents”, Financial Times, Jan/22/2002.

1

implications remain when the firm can hedge against future cash flows. In a framework similar to
that of Froot et al. (1993), we analyze both hedging and cash policies. Unlike these authors, we
assume that the same frictions that make firms financially constrained also constrain their ability
to hedge. Although the analysis of cash policies becomes more involved when firms are allowed to
hedge, the main implications of our model continue to hold.
We also study the implications of agency arguments such as Jensen (1986) in the context of our
model. We do so because of the common view that large cash positions are a manifestation of agency
problems, and also because evidence from Blanchard et al. (1994), Harford (1999), and Lie (2000)
suggests that incremental cash is likely to be used on value-reducing investments, consistent with
the story that managers’ utilities are increasing with the quantity of the firm’s assets. Accordingly,
we model a situation in which an overinvestment-prone manager potentially distorts his firm’s cash
policies. Because the manager derives utility from value-reducing investments in addition to valueincreasing ones, he will save a portion of cash inflows to the firm that can exceed the amount of
savings needed to fund the first-best level of investment. Such policies ensure the manager’s ability
to undertake all the investments he desires in the future, even if he does not have access to capital
markets. Perhaps the most interesting implication of the agency model of liquidity is that the
eﬀect of overinvestment tendencies on firm’s cash policies will be most pronounced for firms that
are relatively unconstrained in the capital markets, but which do not have suﬃcient free cash flow
to fund the manager’s desired investment. Intuitively, the agency problem turns a firm that would
be unconstrained if it invested at the first best level into one that is eﬀectively constrained because
of the extra investment its manager would like to undertake.
We evaluate the implications of our theory on a sample of manufacturing firms between 1981
and 2000. Because the main predictions of our model concern diﬀerences between constrained
and unconstrained firms, we classify firms by the nature of their financial constraints using five
alternative approaches suggested by the literature. For each classification scheme, we estimate the
cash flow sensitivity of cash for both the constrained and the unconstrained firm subsamples. We
find that, under each of the five classification schemes, the cash flow sensitivity of cash is close to
and not statistically diﬀerent from zero for the unconstrained firms, but positive and significantly
diﬀerent from zero for the constrained firms. This finding is consistent with the implications of our
baseline (no agency) model. We further test the rationale of our theory by examining the empirical
2

behavior of firms’ propensity to save cash out of cash inflows over the business cycle. We find that
the cash flow sensitivity of cash of financially constrained firms is negatively associated with the
level of aggregate demand (i.e., constrained firms save more in recessions), while unconstrained firms
display no change in their cash policies over the cycle. Our model is consistent with this pattern of
changes in liquidity demand over the business cycle because aggregate demand fluctuations work as
exogenous shocks aﬀecting both the size of current cash flows as well as the relative attractiveness
of current investment vis-a-vis future investment.
We also empirically assess the extent to which agency considerations aﬀect the decision to retain
cash flows. To do so, we follow much of the literature in presuming that stock ownership and options
help improve managers’ incentives. Given this assumption, our model implies that the cash flow
sensitivity of cash should be related to managerial compensation packages, but only for those firms
that: a) have easy access to capital markets, and b) do not have large stockpiles of cash (“free
cash flow”). We find that the extent to which this relationship is supported in the data depends
on the measure of financial constraints we use. When we use dividend policy and size to measure
financial constraints, the coeﬃcient on cash flow interacted with ownership of stock and options is
negative and statically significant for financially unconstrained firms with low free cash flow, and
not significant for all other firms. These results are consistent with our theory, and suggest that
financially unconstrained firms whose managers are likely to have little or no incentives to adopt
value-maximizing policies seem to manage firm liquidity as if they were financially constrained.
The results are less compelling, however, when we use alternative measures of financial constraints
(such as bond and commercial paper ratings). In all, we interpret these findings as providing at
least weak evidence that agency problems at the margin can induce managers to hold excessive
cash, which accords with our agency view of liquidity.2
We are by no means the first ones to consider the issue of corporate liquidity and its eﬀects
on investment. Besides Keynes (1936), the idea that firms may underinvest because of insuﬃcient
liquidity and imperfect capital markets has been considered in several classic papers in the corporate
finance literature, such as Jensen and Meckling (1976), Myers (1977), and Myers and Majluf (1984).
More recently, Kim et al. (1998) present a model of cash holdings for firms which face costly external
financing. In their model, firms trade oﬀ an (exogenously assumed) lower return of holding liquid
2

This contrasts with Opler et al. (1999) who find little support for the eﬀect of agency on corporate cash policies.

3

assets and the benefit of relaxing financial constraints in the future. They use their model to derive
implications for the optimal level of cash holdings, arguing that firms which face higher costs of
external funds and have higher variance in future cash flows should hold more cash.3
A number of recent empirical studies examine the cross-section of cash reserves, and the factors
that appear to be associated with higher holdings of cash.4 These papers find that the levels
of cash tend to be positively associated with future investment opportunities, business risk, and
negatively associated with proxies for the cost of external finance and with the level of protection
of outside investors. While these studies focus on diﬀerences in the level of cash across firms, our
paper examines diﬀerences in the sensitivity of cash holdings to incremental changes in cash flow,
and the extent to which they are aﬀected by the firm’s financial status. We do so because our
analysis suggests that the theory has much clearer predictions about firms’ marginal propensity to
save/disburse out of cash flow innovations than about the amount of cash in their balance sheets.5
The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. Section II introduces a theory of corporate
liquidity demand. Section III presents the empirical tests of our theory’s main implications. Section
IV is a brief conclusion.

II

A Simple Theory of Liquidity Demand

A

The Basic Model: Cash as a Storage Technology

The first step of our analysis is to model corporate demand for liquid assets as a means of ensuring
the ability to invest in the future. In an imperfect capital market, saving for future expenditures might be valuable if the firm anticipates rising financing costs or if the firm anticipates that
the future investment opportunities will be particularly profitable. Our basic model is a simple
representation of a dynamic problem in which the firm has both present and future investment
opportunities. The key feature of the model is that cash flows from current assets might not be
3

Other related papers are John (1993), who studies the link between liquidity and financial distress costs, Baskin
(1987), who examines the strategic value of cash in games of product-market competition, and Acharya et al. (2002),
who consider the eﬀect of optimal cash policies on corporate credit spreads.
4
An incomplete list of papers includes Kim et. al. (1998), Opler et al. (1999), Pinkowitz and Williamson (2001),
Faulkender (2002), Ozkan and Ozkan (2002), and Dittmar et al. (2002). Opler et al. further examine the persistence
of cash holdings, and characterize what firms do with “excess” cash.
5
The strategy of analyzing corporate policies by looking at cross-sectional diﬀerences in cash flow sensitivities has
been used in the empirical literature largely initiated by Fazzari et al. (1988). While that literature has focused on
corporate policies such as working capital (Fazzari and Petersen (1993) and Calomiris et al. (1995)), and inventory
demand (Carpenter et al. (1994) and Kashyap et al. (1994)), it has remained silent on the issue of liquidity demand.

4

suﬃcient to fund all positive NPV projects, in the present and in the future. Hoarding cash may
therefore facilitate future investments. Of course, another way the firm can plan for the funding of
future investments is by hedging against future earnings. Alternatively, the firm may also adjust
its dividend policies or its borrowing. In all, our framework considers four components of financial
policy: liquidity management, hedging, dividend payments, and borrowing.
A.1

Structure

The model has three dates, 0, 1, and 2. At time 0, the firm is an ongoing concern whose cash
flow from current operations is c0 . At that date, the firm has the option to invest in a long term
project that requires I0 today and pays oﬀ F (I0 ) at time 2. Additionally, the firm expects to have
access to another investment opportunity at time 1. If the firm invests I1 at time 1, the technology
produces G(I1 ) at time 2. The production functions F (·) and G(·) have standard properties, i.e.,
are increasing, concave, and continuously diﬀerentiable. The firm also has existing assets which
will produce a cash flow equal to c1 in period 1. With probability p, the time 1 cash flow is high,
L
H
equal to cH
1 , and with probability (1 − p), equal to c1 < c1 . We assume that the discount rate is 1,

everyone is risk neutral, and the cost of investment goods equals 1. Finally, the investments I0 and
I1 can be liquidated at the final date, generating a payoﬀ equal to q(I0 + I1 ), where we assume that
q < 1. Define the total cash flows from investments as f (I0 ) ≡ F (I0 ) + qI0 , and g(I1 ) ≡ G(I1 ) + qI1 .
We suppose that the cash flows F (I0 ) and G(I1 ) from the new investments are not verifiable.
While the firm cannot pledge those cash flows to outside investors, it can raise external finance by
pledging the underlying productive assets as collateral. Following Hart and Moore (1994), the idea
is that the liquidation value of “hard” assets is verifiable and if the firm reneges on its debt creditors
will seize the physical assets. Assume that the liquidation value of those assets that can be captured
by creditors is given by (1 − τ )qI. τ ∈ (0, 1) is a function of factors such as asset tangibility, and
the legal environment that dictates the relations between debtors and creditors (see Myers and
Rajan (1998)). This parameter is an important element of our theory in that we want to separate
the behavior of firms which are financially constrained – and thus need to rely more on cash as
a storage technology – from financially unconstrained firms. Clearly, for a high enough τ , the
firm may pass up positive NPV projects for lack of external financing, and is therefore financially

5

constrained.6 In this set up, the firm is only concerned about whether to store cash from time 0
until time 1 as there is no new investment opportunity at time 2. We denote by C the amount of
cash the firm chooses to carry from date 0 to date 1.7 We assume that I0 , I1 > 0.
As a benchmark case, we solve for the optimal cash policy when the firm can fully hedge future
earnings. However, consistent with our assumptions about income contractibility, we also analyze
the more interesting situation in which only a fraction (1 − µ) of future earnings can be costlessly
pledged to external investors. In this case, the firm cannot credibly sign a contract in which it pays
8
more than (1 − µ)cH
1 in the high state. Under this richer environment, the underlying source of

incomplete contractibility (reflected in both τ and µ) caps the firm’s ability to transfer resources
both across time and across states.9
A.2

Analysis

When the interests of managers and shareholders converge, the objective is to maximize the expected lifetime sum of all dividends subject to several budget and financial constraints. The firm’s
problem can be written as
¡
¢
L
H
L
max d0 + pdH
s.t.
1 + (1 − p)d1 + pd2 + (1 − p)d2
C,h,I

6

(1)

In the Hart and Moore framework the optimal contract is most easily interpreted as collateralized debt. Our
conclusions, though, do not hinge on any particular element of that framework. So long as constrained firms have
limited capacity to issue equity (or if equity issues entail deadweight costs) our theory’s intuition will still hold. An
alternative framework that allows for equity finance is the moral hazard model of Holmstrom and Tirole (1997),
where it is not optimal for firms to issue equity beyond a certain threshold due to private benefits of control.
7
In principle, C can be negative as the firm may not only carry no cash from time 0 to time 1, but also borrow
against future earnings c1 . For practical purposes, one can think of C as a positive quantity. However, we will later
show that our main predictions about cash flow sensitivities of cash do not depend on C being necessarily positive.
8
To see how the hedging technology works, consider the case where cL
1 = 0. Suppose the firm has the same
investment opportunities in both states (L and H) at time 1. Because borrowing capacity is limited, the firm might
wish to transfer cash flows to state L. This can be accomplished, for example, by selling futures contracts on the
asset that produces the time 1 cash flow. In a frictionless world, the firm would be able to fully hedge by selling that
asset’s entire stream of cash flows in the futures market at time 0 and the firm would have locked in a payoﬀ of pcH
1
in both states. However, since the amount µcH
1 of cash flows is not contractible, the firm always has the option of
walking away with µcH
1 in state H. Thus, a perfectly hedged position through the use of futures contracts can only
H
happen if µcH
≤
pc
.
If on the other hand µ > p, then the hedging policy of the firm will be constrained.
1
1
9
One could think of τ (the borrowing constraint) and µ (the hedging constraint ) as highly correlated. In fact, our
analysis would yield similar results if we assumed they are equal. We, however, denote those parameters diﬀerently
so that the eﬀects of hedging on cash policies are made clear in the analysis.

6

d0 = c0 + B0 − I0 − C ≥ 0
dS1 = cS1 + hS + B1S − I1S + C ≥ 0, for S = H, L
dS2 = f (I0 ) + g(I1S ) − B0 − B1S , for S = H, L
B0 ≤ (1 − τ )qI0
B1S ≤ (1 − τ )qI1S , for S = H, L
phH + (1 − p)hL = 0
−hH

≤ (1 − µ)cH
1

The first two constraints restrict dividends (d) to be non-negative in periods 0 and 1. B0 and
B1 are the amounts of collateralized borrowing. Debt obligations are repaid at the time when the
assets they help finance generate cash flows, and their face values are constrained by the liquidation
value of those assets.10 hH and hL are the hedging payments. The hedging strategies we focus on
typically give hH < 0 and hL > 0. If the firm uses futures contracts, for example, we should think of
cS1 +hS as the futures payoﬀ in state S. The firm sells futures at a price equal to the expected future
spot value, and thus increases cash flows in state L at the expense of reducing cash flows in state
H
L
L
H. If the hedge ratio is equal to 1, then the firm is fully hedged and cH
1 + h = c1 + h = E0 [c1 ].

When the firm faces capital market imperfections not all future cash flows can be used for hedging
purposes, and the hedge ratio may be less than 1. Finally, note that the fair hedging constraint
phH + (1 − p)hL = 0 defines hH as a function of hL :
hH =

(p − 1) L
h .
p

We refer to hH as the firm’s “hedging policy”. This policy is constrained by the fact that the firm
cannot commit to pay out more than (1 − µ)cH
1 in state H.
A.2.1 First best solution The firm is financially unconstrained if it is able to invest at the first
best levels. The first best investment levels at times 0 and 1 (I0F B and I1F B ) are defined by:
f 0 (I0F B ) = 1
g 0 (I1F B,S ) = 1, for S = H, L.
10

This formulation implies that our financial constraint is a quantity constraint. Alternatively, we could study a
model in which firms face an increasing (deadweight) cost of external finance. As we will argue later, in our analysis
all constrained firms have a similar propensity to save cash (irrespective of how tight the constraint is), suggesting
that our results do not hinge on the formulation based on quantities.

7

When the firm is unconstrained its investment policy satisfies all the dividend, hedging, and borrowing constraints above for some financial policy (B0 , B1S , C, hH ). Except for a case when the
constraints are exactly binding at the first best solution, the financial policy of an unconstrained
firm will not matter. In particular, if a firm j is financially unconstrained, then its financial policy
H
(B0j , B1j , Cj , hH
j ) can be replaced by an entirely diﬀerent financial policy (B̂0j , B̂1j , Ĉj , ĥj ) with no

implications for firm value. Consequently, there is no optimal cash hoarding policy for a financially
unconstrained firm. To see the intuition, suppose the firm increases its cash holdings by a small
amount ∆C. Would that policy entail any costs? The answer is no. The firm can compensate for
∆C by paying a smaller dividend today. Are there benefits to the increase in cash holdings? The
answer is also no. The firm is already investing at the first best level at time 1, and an increase in
cash is a zero NPV project since the firm foregoes paying a dividend today for a dividend tomorrow
that is discounted at the market rate of return.
A.2.2 Constrained solution In the context of our model, it is easy to operationalize the notion of financial constraints; in particular, we define a firm to be financially constrained if its
investment policy is distorted from the first-best because of capital market frictions, i.e., if (I0∗ ,
I1∗ ) < (I0F B , I1F B ). For a financially constrained firm, holding cash entails both costs and benefits.
A financially constrained firm cannot undertake all of its positive NPV projects, so holding cash
is costly because it requires sacrificing some valuable investment projects today. The benefits of
cash occur because it allows the firm to finance future projects that might arise. Firms will choose
cash holdings to trade oﬀ these costs and benefits of cash, both of which are generated by the
same underlying reason (capital market imperfections). As a result of these countervailing eﬀects,
financial constraints will give rise to an optimal cash policy C ∗ . This is in stark contrast with the
“irrelevance of liquidity” result that holds for financially unconstrained firms.
In order to characterize the optimal cash holding of a constrained firm we have to determine
the optimal investment and financial policies of that firm. If the firm is financially constrained,
it will not be optimal to pay any dividends at times 0 and 1. Furthermore, borrowing capacity
will be exhausted in both periods and in both states at time 1. This must be the case, since
foregoing a dividend payment or borrowing an additional unit is a zero NPV project, and, recall,
the constrained firm is foregoing positive NPV projects. Using these facts, we can write the firm’s

8

optimization problem as follows:11
max f
C,hL

µ

c0 − C
1 − q + τq

¶

+ pg

Ã

cH
1 −

1−p L
p h

+C

1 − q + τq

hL ≤ (1 − µ)

!

+ (1 − p)g

µ

L
cL
1 +h +C
1 − q + τq

¶

s.t.

(2)

p H
c
1−p 1

Notice that we have collapsed the fair hedging condition and the hedging constraint into one
p H
equation. Moreover, note that the hedging constraint hL ≤ (1 − µ) 1−p
c1 need not bind. This

happens, for example, when the firm can transfer enough cash flows to state L such that there
is no constrained hedging demand. Now the firm’s problem reduces to an optimization in C and
hL , constrained by the maximum hedging available. As suggested above, we consider solving this
problem both with and without hedging constraints. To economize on notation, define λ ≡ 1−q+τ q.
Unconstrained hedging: Suppose the hedging constraint does not bind. Because hedging
is fairly priced the firm can eliminate its cash flow risk. This implies that the optimal amount of
L
12
hedging is given by hL = p(cH
1 −c1 ), which gives similar cash flows in both states (equal to E0 [c1 ]).
L
H
It is easy to see that the hedging constraint will not bind so long as (1 − p)(cH
1 − c1 ) ≤ (1 − µ)c1 .

If the optimal hedge is feasible, the optimal cash policy will be determined by:
f

0

µ

c0 − C
λ

¶

=g

0

µ

E0 [c1 ] + C
λ

¶

(3)

The left-hand side of Eq. (3) is the marginal cost of increasing cash holdings. If the firm hoards
cash it sacrifices valuable (positive NPV) current investment opportunities.13 The right-hand side
of Eq. (3) is the marginal benefit of hoarding cash under financial constraints. By holding more
cash the firm is able to relax the constraints on its ability to invest in the future.
How much of its current cash flow will a constrained firm save? This can be calculated from the
derivative

∂C
∂c0 ,

which we define as the cash flow sensitivity of cash. As we illustrate below, the cash

flow sensitivity of cash is a very useful concept in that it reveals a dimension of corporate liquidity
policy that is suitable for empirical analysis. The interpretation resembles that of the cash flow
sensitivity of investment used in the financial constraint literature (Fazzari et al. (1988)).
11

We replace the binding constraints in the objective function and eliminate the terms that are constant.
This is just a traditional “full-insurance” result. In order to check it, one can take the derivative of the objective
function with respect to hL and set it equal to zero.
13
These opportunities are valuable precisely because financial constraints force the marginal productivity of investment to be higher than the opportunity cost of capital.
12

9

The cash flow sensitivity of cash is given by:
∂C
f 00 (I0 )
>0
= 00
∂c0
f (I0 ) + g 00 (I1 )
This sensitivity is positive, indicating that if a financially constrained firm gets a positive cash flow
innovation this period, it will optimally allocate the extra cash across time, saving some resources
for future investments.
Importantly, note that the optimal cash holdings bear no obvious relationship with borrowing
capacity (the parameter τ ). This can be seen by examining the derivative:
∂C
−q(c0 − C)f 00 (I0 ) + q(E0 [c1 ] + C)g 00 (I1 )
=
,
∂τ
τ (f 00 (I0 ) + g 00 (I1 ))
which cannot be signed. The intuition is that higher debt capacity relaxes financial constraints
both today and in the future, yielding a similar eﬀect on the marginal value of cash across time.
An Example: A simple example can show in a more intuitive way the empirically testable implications of our model. Consider parametrizing the production functions f (·) and g(·) as follows:
f (x) = A ln(x)

and

g(y) = B ln(y)

(4)

This parametrization assumes that while the concavity of the production function is the same in
periods 0 and 1, the marginal productivity of investment may change over time.14 With these
restrictions, it is a straightforward task to derive an explicit formula for C:
C∗ =
where δ ≡

B
A

δc0 − E0 [c1 ]
,
1+δ

(5)

> 0. The cash flow sensitivity of cash is then given by

δ 15
1+δ ,

where the parameter δ

can be interpreted as a measure of the importance of future growth opportunities vis-a-vis current
opportunities. Eq. (5) shows that C is increasing in δ (i.e.,

∂C
∂δ

> 0), which agrees with the intuition

that a financially constrained firm will hoard more cash today if future investment opportunities
are more profitable. Note also that cash flow sensitivity of cash, given by

δ
1+δ ,

is independent of the

parameter τ . Since the optimal cash policy is determined by an intertemporal trade-oﬀ, a change
14
Similar results will hold for a more general Cobb-Douglas specification for the production function, namely
f (x) = Axα and g(x) = Bxα . The important assumption is that the degree of concavity of the functions f and g is
the same. Given this, the particular value of α is immaterial. We use the ln(·) specification because it simplifies the
algebra and economizes on notation.
15
Notice that the sensitivity does not depend on whether the cash balance C ∗ is positive or negative. Eq. (5) also
makes it clear that the sign of C ∗ depends on the the size of current versus expected future cash flows.

10

in borrowing capacity does not matter if the firm is already constrained. This analysis in turn
establishes a precise and monotonic empirical relationship between financial constraints and the
cash flow sensitivity of cash: constrained firms should display positive cash—cash flow sensitivities,
while unconstrained firms should not have a systematic propensity to save cash. For the purpose
of empirical testing, the degree of the financial constraints will not matter for already constrained
firms.16 Thus, the issue of non-monotonicity in the relationship between financial constraints and
cash policies is not a first-order concern for empirical analysis in this context.17 We explore these
properties of our theory in the tests of Section III.
Constrained hedging: If the hedging constraint binds, the amount of hedging is given by
p H
hL = (1 − µ) 1−p
c1 . In this case, the optimal cash policy is determined by:
Ã L
!
µ
¶
µ H
¶
p H
c1 + (1 − µ) 1−p
c1 + C
c0 − C
µc1 + C
max f
+ pg
+ (1 − p)g
C
λ
λ
λ

or
f

0

µ

c0 − C
λ

¶

= E0 [g 0 (I1 )].

(6)

(7)

The only diﬀerence from the previous Eq. (3) is that marginal productivity now varies across states
because of the constraint on hedging. The comparative statics are more involved with constrained
hedging, but our previous results remain. In the appendix, we use our previous parametrization to
derive the following results for hedge-constrained firms:
• If time 0 cash flow increases, then the firm hoards more cash (i.e., the cash flow sensitivity of
cash is positive):
∂C
>0
∂c0
• If future investment opportunities are more profitable than the current investment opportunities (δ is high), then the firm hoards more cash:
∂C
>0
∂δ
16

Notice that the cash flow sensitivity of cash is similar for all constrained firms, irrespective of how constrained
they are. This suggests that our conclusions do not hinge on our formulation of financial constraints as quantity
constraints. If the financial constraint manifests itself in terms of increasing costs of external finance, a change in the
cost would relax constraints by a similar amount today and in the future, generating very similar implications.
17
This result is important because it essentially avoids the theoretical critique advanced by Kaplan and Zingales
(1997, 2000) regarding the traditional interpretation of investment-cash flow sensitivities. See also the discussion in
Fazzari et al. (2000), Povel and Raith (2001), and Almeida and Campello (2002).

11

Also similarly to the case of perfect hedging, borrowing capacity will not aﬀect cash policies for
firms which are constrained. However, we now have an additional implication related to changes
in the hedging constraint:
• Firms which can hedge less hoard more cash:
∂C
>0
∂µ
The intuition for this last result is as follows. The cost of limited hedging is the diﬀerence in the
marginal value of funds across states in the future. The marginal value is higher in the state where
the firm has lower cash flows. An increase in µ increases funds in state H, but decreases funds in
state L. This increases the diﬀerence in the marginal value of funds across states, and causes the
firm to increase cash hoarding so as to rebalance the future marginal value in the two states.
In sum, the main implications of the basic model are still true when hedging is constrained.
While there is no optimal cash policy if the firm is financially unconstrained, the cash flow sensitivity
of cash is positive for constrained firms. Moreover, conditional on the fact that a firm is financially
constrained, borrowing capacity has no additional eﬀect on the optimal cash policy. Thus, cash
flow sensitivities of cash should be monotonically increasing in financial constraints. We state this
result in the form of a proposition.
Proposition 1 The cash flow sensitivity of cash of financially unconstrained and financially constrained firms have the following properties:
∂C
∂c0
∂C
∂c0

= 0 for financially unconstrained firms

(8)

> 0 for financially constrained firms

This is the main implication of the basic model that we test in the empirical section below.18
Two additional implications of the model are that constrained firms should hoard more cash if they
have more valuable future investment opportunities, and that cash and hedging are substitutes for
firms that are hedge-constrained. While we can empirically examine the first of these two additional
implications, data availability precludes us from studying the latter implication in this paper.
18

∂C
To be precise, when we say that ∂c
= 0 for financially unconstrained firms we do not mean to say that the
0
sensitivity must be always equal to zero in an economic sense. Rather, we imply that the cash policy of unconstrained
firms is undetermined, and thus their cash flow sensitivity should not be statistically diﬀerent from zero.

12

B

Agency Problems: Overinvestment Tendencies

Any model in which those in charge of running the day-to-day operations of the firm (managers)
have objectives that are diﬀerent from those who own the firm (shareholders) can be seen as an
agency model. For practical purposes, the more interesting types of agency problems are those in
which managers take actions that reduce shareholders’ wealth. Within this class of problems, most
of the research in corporate finance has investigated one type of agency problem: the overinvestment
problem (see Stein (2001) for a review). In this subsection, we build on our basic model of liquidity
demand and study how overinvestment-prone managers handle corporate liquidity.
There are alternative ways of modeling managers’ tendency towards overinvestment. As in Hart
and Moore (1995), we analyze a model in which managers enjoy private benefits that increase with a
firm’s investment. This assumption is plausible because executives’ salaries are typically increasing
in firm size, and because non-pecuniary benefits of control are likely to be more valuable in larger
firms. Implicitly, we are assuming that no feasible incentive contract, corporate governance system,
or other external threats can make managers internalize the full value consequences of ineﬃcient
investment decisions (see Jensen (1993) or Stein (2001) for more discussion).
A very simple way to introduce this type agency problem in our model is to assume that
managers make investment and financing decisions so as to maximize the following utility function:
£
¤
U M = (1 + θ) f (I0 ) + pg(I1H ) + (1 − p)g(I1L ) , where θ ≥ 0,

(9)

where θ is interpreted as a measure of the residual amount of agency problems which remains after
all feasible corrective mechanisms have been applied.19 Notice that the maximization program of
the previous subsection (Eq. (1)) is naturally nested in Eq. (9). In other words, our basic model is
a special case of Eq. (9) which obtains when there is no overinvestment problem (i.e., when θ = 0).
It is straightforward to verify that the particular agency problem we consider – a tendency to
overinvest – has no first-order eﬀect on the cash policy of financially constrained firms. Intuitively,
19

We borrow this formulation from Stein (2001) for ease of exposition. This is equivalent to assuming that managers
apply the following transformation to the investment functions f (·) and g(·):
f M (x)

=

(1 + θ)f (x)

gM (x)

=

(1 + θ)g(x)

A broader class of utilities would also lead to our main conclusions about cash management in the presence of
overinvestment tendencies.

13

a positive θ uniformly raises the marginal productivity of all investment opportunities (current and
future), thus the trade-oﬀ which determines optimal cash is the same irrespective of the value of θ.
The more interesting result on the influence of agency on cash management happens when the
firm is financially unconstrained. For a large θ, an unconstrained firm will behave as if it were
financially constrained. Intuitively, even when capital markets are perfect, investors will only be
willing to give funds to the firm up to a limit determined by the true payoﬀ from investment.
Consequently, there exists an “optimal” financial policy of a firm controlled by an overinvestmentprone manager, similarly to what we predict for a financially constrained firm.
In order to see this result, notice that we can write the program solved by a firm facing perfect
capital markets that is subject to agency problems as:
max (1 + θ)f (I0 ) − B0 + p[(1 + θ)g(I1H ) − B1H ] + (1 − p)[(1 + θ)g(I1L ) − B1L ] s.t.

C,I,hL

(10)

I0 = c0 + B0 − C
I1S = cS1 + hS + B1S + C, for S = H, L
B0 ≤ f (I0 )
B1S ≤

g(I1S ) for S = H, L

1−p L
h ≤ (1 − µ)cH
1
p
The firm can borrow up to the true value of the investments I0 and I1 . Recall, the functions f (·)
and g(·) include the cash flows from liquidation qI0 and qI1 . And we are implicitly setting τ = 1,
consistent with the idea that the firm faces perfect capital markets. Clearly, if θ = 0, the firm
would invest at the first best levels and would not have a systematic cash policy.20 Let us in turn
solve for the optimal investment and cash policies when θ > 0.
If managers are able to (over)invest as much as they wish, they would choose the levels of
investment to satisfy:

20

f 0 (Ib0 ) = g 0 (Ib1 ) =

1
< 1.
1+θ

Notice that profit maximization implies that if I0F B > 0:

f (I0F B ) ≥ I0F B
and thus the firm can finance the first best level of investment (similarly for I1 ).

14

The question is whether managers can finance these levels of investment. Consider the case of
unconstrained hedging. We can assume with no loss of generality that the firm will have the same
cash flow in both states at date 1 (equal to E0 [c1 ]). Now the condition guaranteeing that the firm
b such that:
is able to finance the investment levels Ib0 and Ib1 is that there exists a level of cash C
b
Ib0 ≤ c0 + f (Ib0 ) − C

b
Ib1 ≤ E0 [c1 ] + f (Ib1 ) + C

Summing the two equations we obtain the condition:

Ib0 − f (Ib0 ) + Ib1 − f (Ib1 ) ≤ c0 + E0 [c1 ]

(11)

The left hand-side of (11) is the negative NPV generated by the projects at the super-optimal
scales of production.21 The right hand-side can be interpreted as the firm’s “free cash flow”, or total
free resources available for investment. Since there is a tendency for overinvestment, shareholder
wealth is decreasing in the amount of firm’s free cash flows (Jensen (1986)). The expression simply
says that overinvestment will be limited by the availability of cash from current operations (c0 and
E0 [c1 ]). Free cash flow will enable mangers to invest in negative NPV projects even when the
market is not willing to finance those projects.
The overinvestment-prone firm will have a uniquely defined cash policy only if Ib0 − f (Ib0 ) +

Ib1 − f (Ib1 ) > c0 + E0 [c1 ] , that is, if total resources available for investment are not too large. If

b which allow the firm to invest at
condition (11) is met, then there are multiple cash policies C

the super-optimal levels (unless the condition is satisfied with an exact equality). Similarly to
financially unconstrained firms which invest optimally, these firms do not have a well-defined cash
policy. In other words, if these firms receive an additional cash inflow (i.e., c0 goes up), it is a
matter of indiﬀerence to such firms whether they save the additional cash or pay dividends.
If condition (11) is not obeyed then the firm behaves as if it were a financially constrained firm.
The borrowing constraints will be binding, and the firm will choose optimal cash and investment
policies according to:
max θf (I0 ) + θg(I1 ) s.t.

C,I0 , I1
21

It is possible that the investment projects are still positive NPV, even at the super-optimal scale. In this model,
only the marginal investments above I F B are necessarily negative NPV. The total NPV of the investment Ib may be
positive or negative. If it is positive, then the firm can always overinvest in this model. However, if the diﬀerence
between Ib and I F B is high enough then the total NPV should also be negative.

15

I0 = c0 + f (I0 ) − C
I1 = E0 [c1 ] + g(I1 ) + C
The only diﬀerence with respect to the constrained firm’s optimization problem (recall Eq. (2))
is that since the borrowing constraints are not linear in investment we cannot solve the constraints
explicitly for I0 and I1 . The intuition, though, is the same. The optimal cash balance C ∗ is
determined so as to equate the marginal productivity of investment at the two dates (note that θ
will not matter for this choice):
f 0 [I0 (C ∗ , c0 )] = g 0 [I1 (C ∗ )]
where I0 (C ∗ , c0 ) and I1 (C ∗ ) represent the optimal investment levels (I0∗ , I1∗ ) as functions of cash
and cash flows.22 It is easy to show that the cash flow sensitivity of cash is positive. Noting that
∂I0
∂c0

> 0,

∂I0
∂C

< 0 and

∂I1
∂C

> 0, diﬀerentiating the fist order condition allows us to write the cash

flow sensitivity of cash as:
0
f 00 (I0 ) ∂I
∂C ∗
∂c0
=
>0
∂I0
1
00
∂c0
g 00 (I1 ) ∂I
∂C − f (I0 ) ∂C

Our analysis formalizes Jensen’s (1986) argument about managerial overinvestment tendencies:
firms with plenty of free resources in hand (high c0 , E0 [c1 ]) will invest at the level Ibt , while firms

with less resources will only be able to invest at the lower level, It∗ , which is more desirable from
the perspective of shareholders – i.e., it is closer to the first best investment level.23
This analysis has testable implications for the eﬀect of overinvestment on cash policies. If a firm
is underinvesting because of limited access to the capital markets (i.e., is financially constrained),
then overinvestment tendencies have no distinct eﬀect on cash policies in general, and on the cash
flow sensitivity of cash in particular. This is because overinvestment does not aﬀect a constrained
firm’s trade-oﬀ between foregoing investment opportunities today and increasing investment tomorrow. Tests of the overinvestment hypothesis should thus focus on firms with good access to
external funds. But notice that in order for overinvestment to have an eﬀect on cash policies, it
is also necessary that the firm does not have too much internal resources (free cash flow). If one
22

Investment levels are determined directly from the binding constraints:
I0∗

=

I1∗

=

c0 + f (I0∗ ) − C ∗

E0 [c1 ] + g(I1∗ ) + C ∗

23
Notice that ItF B < It∗ < Ibt , with t = 1, 2. The first inequality is true because the constraints cannot be binding
for investment levels lower than ItF B , and the second follows from the condition in Eq.(11).

16

is able to empirically identify such firms, then the implication of our overinvestment model is that
the cash flow sensitivity of cash should be zero when overinvestment tendencies are not too strong,
but positive when the propensity to overinvest is high. In other words, the cash flow sensitivity of
cash should increase with empirical proxies for managerial tendencies to overinvest. We re-state
the implications of our agency-based liquidity demand model in the form of a proposition.
Proposition 2 Managerial overinvestment tendencies (captured by θ) will have the following effects on the sensitivity of cash holdings to cash flow:
∂C
∂c0 ∂θ
∂C
∂c0 ∂θ
∂C
∂c0 ∂θ

= 0 for financially constrained firms

(12)

> 0 for financially unconstrained firms with limited free cash flow
= 0 for financially unconstrained firms with abundant free cash flow

Empirically implementing the implications of this model is not a simple task.24 It requires us
to focus on a particular group of firms, and, moreover, requires us to be able to separate financial
constraints (limited access to capital markets) from resource constraints (free cash flow). Thus,
even when overinvestment tendencies are present, it might not be possible to empirically identify
their eﬀect on cash policies. This might help explain why previous papers like Opler et al. (1999)
have failed to find strong evidence for the eﬀect of the Jensen’s overinvestment problem on firm’s
optimal cash policies. In the next section, we empirically test our agency-based liquidity model.

III
A

Empirical Tests
Sample

We now test our model’s main predictions about the cash flow sensitivity of cash, and its relation to
financial constraints and the nature of agency problems inside the firm. To do so, we consider the
sample of all manufacturing firms (SICs 2000-3999) over the 1981-2000 period with data available
from COMPUSTAT’s P/S/T and Research tapes on total assets, sales, and holdings of cash and
marketable securities. Because we are interested in relating our findings on cash holdings to agency
problems, we require that the sample firms appear in the Standard & Poor’s ExecuComp dataset
for at least one year. Our final sample contains 1,026 firms yielding 11,135 firm-years.
24

Again, a more precise statement for the proposition above would be that the cash flow sensitivity of cash should
not be statistically diﬀerent than zero for the unconstrained firms with abundant resources, because such firms do
not have a systematic cash policy.

17

B

Measuring the Cash Flow Sensitivity of Cash and Financial Constraints

According to our basic theory, we should expect to find a strong positive relationship between
cash flow and changes in cash holdings for financially constrained firms. Unconstrained firms, in
contrast, should display no such sensitivity. In order to implement a test of this argument, we need
to specify an empirical model relating changes in cash holdings to cash flows, and also to distinguish
between financially constrained and unconstrained firms. We tackle each of these issues in turn.
B.1

An Empirical Model of Cash Flow Retention

To measure the cash flow sensitivity of cash, we estimate a model explaining a firm’s decision
to change its holdings of cash as a function of its sources and (competing) uses of funds. We
borrow insights from the literature on investment—cash flow sensitivities (e.g., Fazzari et al. (1988),
Carpenter and Fazzari (1993), Calomiris et al. (1995)) and on cash management (Opler et al. (1999)
and Harford (2000)), modeling the annual change in a firm’s cash to total assets as a function of
cash flows, capital expenditures, acquisitions, changes in non-cash net working capital (NWC ),
investment opportunities (proxied by Q) and size:
Cashi,t − Cashi,t−1
Assetsi,t−1

CashF lowi,t
Expendituresi,t
+ α2
Assetsi,t−1
Assetsi,t−1
Acquisitionsi,t
N W Ci,t − N W Ci,t−1
+α3
+ α4
Assetsi,t−1
Assetsi,t−1

= α0 + α1

(13)

+α5 Qi,t + α6 Ln(Assetsi,t ) + µi + εi,t .
Cash is COMPUSTAT’s data item#1. Following Opler et al. (1999), CashFlow is defined as
earnings before extraordinary items and depreciation, minus dividends: item #18 + item #14 −
item #19 − item #21.25 We use item #6 for Assets, item #128 for Expenditures, and item #129
for Acquisitions. NWC is receivables, plus inventories minus accounts payable (item#2 + item#3
− item#70). Finally, Q is computed as the market value of assets divided by book assets (item
#6 + (item #24 × item #25) − item #60) / (item #6).
Our theory’s predictions concern the change in cash holdings in response to a shock to cash flows,
captured by α1 in Eq. (13). We control for investment expenditures and acquisitions because firms
can draw down on cash reserves in a given year in order to pay for investments and acquisitions.
We thus expect α2 and α3 to be negative. We control for the change in net working capital
25

Results are very similar when we measure cash flows before dividends (item #14 + item #18).

18

because working capital can be a substitute for cash (Opler et al. (1999)),26 or it may compete
for the available pool of funds (Fazzari and Petersen (1993)). Our model also suggests that a
constrained firm’s cash policy should be influenced by the relative profitability of future investment
opportunities vis-a-vis current opportunities. We use Q as an empirical proxy for the relative
attractiveness of future investment opportunities. In principle, we would expect the coeﬃcient for
α5 to be positive for constrained firms and indistinguishable from zero for unconstrained firms. We,
however, recognize that Q may also capture other factors possibly related to liquidity demand and
re-state our priors about α5 : that coeﬃcient should be larger for constrained firms.27 Finally, we
control for size because there could be economies of scale in cash management (Opler et al. (1999)),
consistent with a negative estimate for α6 .
B.2

Financial Constraints Criteria

Testing the implications of our model requires separating firms according to the financial constraints
they face. Unfortunately, the literature is not clear on the best way to identify those constraints.
There are a number of plausible approaches to sorting firms into ‘constrained’ and ‘unconstrained’
categories. Since we do not have strong priors about which approach is best, we use five alternative
schemes to partition our sample:
• Scheme #1: We rank firms based on their average annual dividend payout ratio over the
1981-2000 period and assign to the financially constrained (unconstrained) group those firms
in the bottom (top) three deciles of the payout distribution. The intuition that financially
constrained firms have significantly lower payout ratios follows from Fazzari et al. (1988),
among others. As in Fazzari et al., firms stay in a given group throughout the sample period.
• Scheme #2: We rank firms based on their average real asset size over the 1981-2000 period and
assign to the financially constrained (unconstrained) group those firms in the bottom (top)
three deciles of the size distribution. This approach resembles Gilchrist and Himmelberg
26

Lines of credit and loan commitments are another potential substitute for cash. Unfortunately, we do not have
data on these cash alternatives. We will later include changes in short-term borrowings in our regressions.
27
It would be a problem to our tests if the quality of Q as a proxy for future opportunities influencing liquidity
demand varied precisely along the lines of the sample partitions we use below. This type of concerns have become
a major issue in the related investment—cash flow literature, as the “well-established” evidence of higher cash flow
sensitivities of constrained firms has been attributed to measurement errors in Q that happen to be more relevant
in samples of constrained firms (see, e.g., Erickson and Whited (2000)). Fortunately to our strategy, this critique
implies that, contrary to our hypothesis, we should find α5 to be smaller in the constrained firm subsample.

19

(1995), who also distinguish between groups of financially constrained and unconstrained
firms on the basis of firm size.
• Scheme #3: We retrieve data on firms’ bond ratings and assign to the financially constrained
group those firms which never had their public debt rated during our sample period.28 Financially unconstrained firms are those whose bonds have been rated during the sample period. Related approaches for characterizing financial constraints are used by Whited (1992),
Kashyap et al. (1994), and Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1995).
• Scheme #4: We retrieve data on firms’ commercial paper ratings and assign to the financially
constrained group those firms which never had their issues (if any) rated during our sample
period. Firms that issued commercial papers receiving ratings at some point during the sample
period are considered unconstrained. This approach follows from the work of Calomiris et al.
(1995) on the characteristics of commercial paper issuers.
• Scheme #5: We construct an index of firm financial constraints based on Kaplan and Zingales
(1997) and separate firms according to this index as follows. First, using the original data
from Kaplan and Zingales, we run a ordered probit regression which models the probability
each one of the five categories of financial constraints in their paper as a function of a firm’s
cash flows, Q, leverage, and dividend payout.29 Next, the coeﬃcient estimates from this
regression are used in our data (employing those author’s variable definitions) to construct a
linear index of firm financial constraints, which we call “KZ Index”:
KZ Index = −1.126961 × CashF low + 0.2643228 × Q

(14)

+3.480773 × Leverage − 35.78327 × Dividends.
Firms in the bottom (top) three deciles of the KZ Index ranking are considered financially
unconstrained (constrained). In the spirit of Kaplan and Zingales, we allow firms to change
their status throughout the sample period by ranking firms on an annual basis. See Lamont
et al. (2001) or Baker et al. (2002) for a similar approach.
Table 1 reports the number of firm-years under each of the ten financial constraints categories
used in our analysis. According to the dividend payout scheme, for example, there are 2,507 finan28
29

Comprehensive coverage on bond ratings by COMPUSTAT only starts in the mid-1980s.
We thank Steve Kaplan and Luigi Zingales for kindly providing access to their data.

20

cially constrained firm-years and 4,075 financially unconstrained firm-years. More interestingly, the
table also displays the cross-correlation among the various classification schemes, illustrating the
diﬀerences in sampling across the diﬀerent criteria. Of the 2,507 firm-years considered constrained
according to dividends, 1,147 are also constrained according to size, while 452 are unconstrained.
Nearly half of the dividend-constrained firm-years are also constrained according to the bond rating
criterion, while the other half is unconstrained. Finally, note the remarkable discrepancy in financial constraint categorization provided by the KZ Index and all of the other measures, including
dividends. Only 18% (or 453) of the dividend-constrained firms are also constrained according to
the KZ Index, while about 23% of those firms are unconstrained according to the KZ Index.
B.3

Results

Table 2 presents summary statistics on the level of cash holdings of firms in our sample after
separating them into constrained and unconstrained categories. According to the dividend payout,
size, and the ratings criteria, unconstrained firms hold on average roughly 10% of their total assets
in the form of cash and marketable securities. This figure resembles that of Kim et al. (1998),
who report mean (median) holdings of 8.1% (4.7%). Constrained firms, on the other hand, hold
far more cash in their balance sheets; on average, some 30% of total assets. Mean and median
tests reject equality in the level of cash holdings across groups in all cases. The one classification
scheme that yields figures substantially diﬀerent from the others is the KZ Index, which tends to
classify firms that hold a lot cash as unconstrained. Notice that Kaplan and Zingales’ presumption
is that an unconstrained firm is one that has suﬃcient internal resources to fund its investments.
Our implementation of the KZ Index reflects their premises even though we have expunged cash
holdings from their original empirical model.
Table 3 presents the results obtained from the estimation of our baseline regression model
(Eq.(13)) within each of the above sample partitions. The model is estimated via OLS with firm
fixed-eﬀects and the error structure (estimated via Hubber-White) allows for residual correlation
within industry-years. In all cases the set of constrained firms display a statistically significant (at
better than 1% test level) positive sensitivity of cash to cash flow, while unconstrained firms show
insignificant cash sensitivities. The sensitivity estimates for constrained firms vary between 0.257
and 0.365. The median estimate, which is based on firm size (=0.311), suggests that for each dollar

21

of additional cash flow (normalized by assets), a constrained firm will save around 1/3 of a dollar,
while an unconstrained firm does nothing. Notice that the diﬀerence in cash flow sensitivities across
constrained and unconstrained firms is statistically significant at the 5% level or better in all cases
with only one exception (the KZ Index). These results are fully consistent with the prediction of
our basic model.
The Q-sensitivity of cash is always positive and significant for constrained firms, as predicted by
our model. This sensitivity is sometimes also positive and significant in the unconstrained sample,
but the magnitude of the coeﬃcient is always larger in the constrained sample and the cross-group
diﬀerences are statistically significant at the 5% level in four of the five cases. The coeﬃcients on
the control variables also have the expected signs in our regressions. Investments, acquisitions, and
size are negatively correlated with the change in cash. The coeﬃcient on the change in net working
capital is generally positive, but not always significant.
B.4

Robustness of the baseline results

We now subject our estimates to a number of robustness checks, in order to address potential
concerns about model specification and other estimation issues. First, because of the possibility
of outliers having undue influence on our results, we re-estimate our models using trimmed data
and (alternatively) via quantile regressions. Doing so does not materially aﬀect our findings. In
addition we address the issue of coeﬃcient stability over time by partitioning the data according to
whether the observations come from the 1980’s or the 1990’s. Again, our results remain, although
cross-sectional diﬀerences seem stronger in the first half of the sample.30
In addition, we present estimates of the cash flow sensitivity of cash using three alternative
empirical specifications in Table 4.31 At the top of the table (see first row) we report cash flow
sensitivities from a regression model that includes only the primitive elements of our basic theory
(CashFlow and Q) in the set of independent variables. The second specification we experiment with
adds changes in the ratio of short-term debt to total assets to the right-hand side of our baseline
model. We include this extra variable because of the possibility that firms use short-term debt to
build cash reserves. The third set of estimates in the table are from an alternative specification
30

Tabulated results for the outlier-robust and subperiod regressions are omitted for brevity, but are available from
the authors upon request.
31
Results from a larger set of alternative specifications are available upon request.

22

in which we move the lag level of cash/assets from the left-hand side to the right-hand side of our
baseline model, eﬀectively removing the constraint that lagged cash/assets should have a coeﬃcient
of 1. This last approach resembles more closely that in Opler et al. (1999).
In all, there are 15 pairs of constrained/unconstrained estimates in Table 4. In each case, the
estimated cash flow sensitivity of cash for the constrained firms is higher (often by a factor of 2 or
more) than for comparable unconstrained firms. All of the constrained firm subsamples return a
statistically significant coeﬃcient for cash flow, while none of the unconstrained cash flow estimates
are significant. The economic magnitude of the cash flow coeﬃcient for the constrained firms is
reasonably consistent, varying from 0.21 to 0.35 in most specifications. Overall, Table 4 suggests
that our results are robust to changes in model specification.
B.5

Dynamics of Liquidity Management: Responses to Macroeconomic Shocks

A potential objection to the results presented above arises from the endogeneity of a firm’s financial
decisions. Since choice variables such as investment in net working capital and fixed assets enter
the baseline cash equation, it is possible that the levels of the estimates presented in Table 3 are
biased. Notice, though, that our main finding concerns the relative sizes of coeﬃcients across two
subsamples of firms, and is not clear why any potential bias would occur diﬀerentially across the
two subsamples. In other words, any argument that endogeneity issues are responsible for our
results has to explain both why our estimates of cash flow sensitivities of cash are positively biased,
and also why these biases are related to our partitions by financial constraints.
One way of providing independent confirmation of the interpretation we propose (as opposed
to the above “endogenous bias story”) comes from examining exogenous shocks aﬀecting both
firms’ ability to generate cash flows as well as the shadow cost of new investment. Those shocks
should be economy-wide, simultaneously aﬀecting all firms in the sample at a given point in time
and thus providing for cross-sectional contrasts. We find that examining the path of cash flow
sensitivity of cash holdings over the business cycle allows for an alternative test of the idea that
financial constraints drive significant diﬀerences in corporate cash policies. To wit, if our conjecture
about those policies are correct, then we should see financially constrained firms saving an even
greater proportion of their cash flows during recessions. This should happen because these periods
are characterized both by an increase in the marginal attractiveness of future investment when

23

compared to current investments as well as a decline in current income flows. The cash policy of
financially unconstrained firms, on the other hand, should not display such pronounced patterns.
In other words, the responses of cash flow sensitivity of cash to changes in aggregate demand should
be stronger for financially constrained firms. This should happen regardless of the levels of those
estimates, and the test thus sidesteps concerns with endogeneity biases in the baseline equation.
To implement this test, we use a two-step approach similar to that used by Kashyap and Stein
(2000) and Campello (2002). The idea is to relate the sensitivity of cash to cash flow and aggregate
demand conditions by combining cross-sectional and times series regressions. The approach sacrifices statistical eﬃciency, but reduces the likelihood of Type I inference errors; that is, it reduces
the odds of concluding that cash holdings respond to cash flow along the lines of out theory when
they really don’t.32
The first step of our procedure consists of estimating the baseline regression model (Eq. (13))
every year separately for groups of financially constrained and unconstrained firms. From each
sequence of cross-sectional regressions, we collect the coeﬃcients returned for cash flow (i.e., α1 )
and ‘stack’ them into the vector Ψt , which is then used as the dependent variable in the following
(second-stage) time series regression:
Ψt = η +

2
X

φk Log(GDP )t−k + ρT rend + ut .

(15)

k=1

We are interested in the impact of aggregate demand, proxied by the real log of GDP, on the
sensitivity of cash to cash flow. The economic and the statistical significance of aggregate demand
P
can be gauged from the sum of the coeﬃcients for the lags of GDP,
φk , and from the t-statistics
of this sum. We allow for two lags of GDP to account for the fact that macroeconomic movements
spread out at diﬀerent speeds throughout diﬀerent sectors of the economy.33 A time trend (T rend)
is included to capture secular changes in cash policies. Finally, because movements in aggregate
demand and other macroeconomic variables often coincide, in ‘multivariate’ versions of Eq. (15) we
also include current inflation (log CPI) and interest rates (Fed funds rate) to ensure that our findings
are not driven by contemporaneous macroeconomic innovations aﬀecting the cost of money.34
32
An alternative one-step specification – with Eq. (15) below nested in Eq. (13) – would impose a more
constrained parametrization and have more power to reject the null hypothesis of cash policy irrelevance.
33
Not allowing for lagged responses could bias our results if the distribution of financially constrained firms happen
to be more concentrated in sectors of the economy that respond more rapidly to changes in demand. Our results are
largely insensitive to sensible variations in the lag structure of Eq. (15).
34
These series are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics and from the Federal Reserve (Statistical Release H.15 ).

24

The results from the two-stage estimator are summarized in Table 5. The table reports the
sum of the coeﬃcients for the two lags of GDP from Eq. (15), along with the t-statistics for the
sum. Panel A collects the results for financially constrained firms and Panel B reports results for
unconstrained firms. Additional tests for diﬀerences between coeﬃcients across groups are reported
in the bottom of the table (Panel C). Standard errors for the “diﬀerence” coeﬃcients are estimated
via a SUR system that combines the two constraint categories (p-values reported).
All of the GDP-response coeﬃcients for the constrained firms displayed in Panel A are negative
and statistically significant at the 5% level or better, suggesting that constrained firms’ cash policies
respond to shocks aﬀecting cash flows and the intertemporal attractiveness of investment along the
lines of our theory. In contrast, the response coeﬃcients for the unconstrained firms presented in
Panel B display no clear patterns, but with only one exception (the KZ Index), are uniformly lower
than those of Panel A. The diﬀerences between those sets of coeﬃcients in Panel C suggest that
the cash flow sensitivity of cash for financially constrained and unconstrained firms follow markedly
diﬀerent paths over the business cycle. These diﬀerences are consistent with the ideas in the model
of liquidity management we proposed above.
In order to gauge the economic significance of the estimates in Table 5, consider a scenario
in which the GDP falls by 1% over two years. Take two hypothetical firms, one constrained and
the other unconstrained according to size.35 Our multivariate regression estimates suggest that
while there is no eﬀect on the propensity of the unconstrained firm to hoard cash, the cash flow
sensitivity of the constrained firm increases by around 0.15 over the two years. Given that the
overall propensity to save cash flows estimated in Table 3 is around 0.3, the eﬀect of a recession on
the propensity to save appears to be substantial.

C

Agency Problems and Cash Holdings

Our model predicts that agency problems will lead otherwise unconstrained firms to display a
propensity to store greater portions of cash flows when management has poorly-aligned incentives.
This prediction holds only for those firms that become eﬀectively constrained because of the desire
of managers to overinvest. If the unconstrained firm has suﬃcient financial slack so that it can
invest up to the manager’s preferred point, its cash policy will be observationally equivalent to those
35

We use the size criterion here so as to be consistent with the discussion of the results of the previous table.

25

of financially unconstrained firms whose managers do not overinvest. In this subsection we examine
the main testable implication of our agency model (Proposition 2): that the cash flow sensitivity
of cash of financially unconstrained firms should be increasing in proxies for misalignment of CEO
incentives when those firms have limited internal resources (i.e., low free cash flow).
In implementing a test of our agency model of liquidity, our first task is finding suitable proxies
for: a) agency problems potentially associated with overinvestment tendencies, and b) Jensen’s
(1986) notion of “free cash flow”. We use CEO ownership as our proxy for the extent of agency
problems. We do so because of the idea that managerial ownership functions as a partial solution
to agency problems between managers and owners and because of studies documenting a relation
between firm value and management ownership (see, for example, Mørck et al. (1988) or McConell
and Servaes (1990)). Accordingly, increases in ownership potentially lead to less suboptimal managerial behavior, which in our case will translate into a decreased propensity to save cash flows.
To integrate this idea into our testing strategy, we estimate an augmented version of our baseline
regression model in which we allow for the interaction between CEO ownership and cash flow:
Cashi,t − Cashi,t−1
Assetsi,t−1

CashF lowi,t
Expendituresi,t
+ α2
Assetsi,t−1
Assetsi,t−1
Acquisitionsi,t
N W Ci,t − N W Ci,t−1
+α3
+ α4
Assetsi,t−1
Assetsi,t−1

= α0 + α1

(16)

+α5 Qi,t + α6 Ln(Assetsi,t ) + α7 CEO Ownershipi,t
µ
¶
CashF lowi,t
+ µi + εi,t .
+α8 CEO Ownershipi,t ×
Assetsi,t−1
Our theory suggests that the coeﬃcient α8 should be negative for financially unconstrained firms
with limited stocks of internal funds, but insignificant for either financially constrained firms or
unconstrained firms with abundant idle internal resources.
Our proxy for CEO ownership includes both stock and option holdings, with the data collected
from ExecuComp for the 1993-2000 period.36 To measure the sensitivity of CEO option holdings
to firm value, we follow the procedure suggested by Yermack (1995), which uses existing options as
a fraction of total shares outstanding as a proxy for incentives coming from option holdings.37 As
a sensitivity check, we replicate our results using only stock holdings to measure CEO ownership
with similar results to those reported here.
36

We use the adjustment factor provided by ExecuComp (item AJEX) to adjust CEO ownership for stock splits.
As in Aggarwal and Samwick (1999), we measure option holdings using in-the-money vested options (item INMONEX in ExecuComp).
37

26

Nearly all of the free cash flow measures used in previous work are based on the diﬀerence
between a firm’s cash flow and its current investments, “excess operating cash flow” (e.g., Fenn and
Liang (2001), Cristophe (2002), Opler and Titman (1993), and Lang et al. (1991)). We construct
two measures of free cash flow using a similar approach. The first such measure is based on the
estimate of the diﬀerence between firm cash flow and capital expenditures (both scaled by assets)
for firms in the same 2-digit SIC industry and in the same year. We denote by “high” (“low”)
free cash flow firms those firms in the top (bottom) quintiles of the industry-year distributions of
the “excess” operating cash flow. In our second measure, we denote a firm as a “high” free cash
flow firm when its excess operating cash flow is above the distribution median and its Q is below
the median Q. A “low” free cash flow firm has below median excess cash flow and above median
Q.

38,39

Rather than directly including our free cash flow measures in the empirical specification,

we partition the sample firms according to their relative ranking on those constructed proxies and
estimate Eq. (16) separately over those subsamples. This approach more closely relates to the
statement of Proposition 2 and facilitates the interpretation of the results – avoiding multiple
interaction terms in reported outputs – with little cost to estimation.
Table 6 reports estimates of Eq. (16) across subsamples of financially constrained and unconstrained firms, with the latter group further subdivided into “high” and “low” free cash flow firms.
Financial constraints are defined according to firm dividend policies through the 1981-2000 period
(scheme #1). Panel A in the table reports the results when the first measure of free cash flow (or
excess operating cash flow) is considered and Panel B does similarly for the second measure (which
also includes Q).
The first column in each of the panels in Table 6 shows that our main conclusions about the
cash policies of financially constrained firms remain for the 1993-2000 subsample and are insensitive
to managerial incentive issues. The second and third columns examine the implication of our
agency story more directly. The results in those columns indicate that managerial incentives do not
38
The only diﬀerence from the previous papers is that instead of using the median of the entire distribution of
excess cash flow and Q, we use industry-year medians as benchmarks to compute our measures of free cash flow.
While adjusting for industry and year eﬀects does not alter the nature of our findings, we believe this to be more
appropriate given that ignoring industry and year idiosyncractic diﬀerences might lead to biased sampling. Consider,
for instance, what happens with firms in durable goods industries. Given a fixed investment schedule, these firms
will (jointly) observe a steeper decline in cash flows during recession years relative to all other firms, and thus be
systematically labeled as “low” free cash flow in those periods, with the opposite occurring in booms.
39
We keep only industry-years with more than ten observations, so that the measure of centrality makes sense.

27

influence cash management of financially unconstrained firms when they have a wealth of internal
resources, but do alter those policies when internal resources are relatively scarce. Consistent with
our theory, the results in the third column show that the tendency to hold cash is decreasing in CEO
ownership. The fourth column in both panels of Table 6 shows that diﬀerences in the influence of
ownership on cash policies are significant across groups of high and low free cash flow firms. Indeed,
the diﬀerences in the coeﬃcient of the ownership—cash flow interaction term (α8 ) are significant at
better than 1% level in both panels. In terms of economic significance, our estimates imply that
an increase of 1% on CEO ownership reduces the cash flow sensitivity of cash of unconstrained-low
free cash flow firms by a factor between 0.025 and 0.075, depending on the measure of free cash
flow used. This eﬀect appears substantial given the point estimates we obtained for the cash flow
sensitivity of cash for constrained firms throughout our analysis (around 0.3).
While we interpret the results of Table 6 as consistent with the implications of our agency model,
we find that they hold only weakly when we replicate the same experiments using the other four
alternative measures of financial constraints. In particular, although the results hold well when
we partition on size and also – albeit more weakly – when we use bonds ratings for financial
constraint categorization, the same does not occur when we use either commercial paper ratings or
the Kaplan-Zingales criteria to classify firms into financial constraint categories (outputs omitted).
Overall, we take the empirical findings of this section as suggestive, but not conclusive evidence
in support of the agency view of corporate cash management. Further study on the extent which
agency problems aﬀect corporate decisions on liquidity appears to be well worth pursuing.

IV

Concluding Remarks

One of Keynes’ (1936) many important contributions is his notion that the liquidity of a firm’s
assets is not predetermined, but rather an important decision firms have to make. He suggested
that observed choices regarding liquidity will depend on firms’ access to capital markets and the
importance of future investments to the firms. This idea was echoed in a recent talk given by
Richard Passov, the Treasurer of Pfizer, who claimed that Pfizer keeps cash balances that are
larger than its long-term debt precisely because its assets are not easily collateralizable, and that
its future investments have a huge value to the company.40
40

Richard Passov, address to the National Forum on Corporate Finance, delivered on May 3, 2002 in Austin, Texas.

28

This paper models this idea formally, and tests it using data from publicly-traded manufacturing
firms. In the model, firms have access to investment opportunities, but potentially cannot fund
them. As in Froot et al. (1993, 1994), financial decisions are important because they enable firms
to undertake valuable investment opportunities. In the model’s equilibrium, cash holdings for an
unconstrained value-maximizing firm are irrelevant because such a firm can undertake all positive
NPV projects regardless of its cash position. However, value-maximizing firms that face financial
constraints have an optimal level of cash holdings, which are determined by a first-order condition
equating the value of the foregone marginal projects (the marginal cost of cash holdings) to the
expected value of additional projects the firm will be able to fund in the future (the marginal benefit
of cash holdings). This model contains the testable prediction that an unconstrained firm will not
have a systematic propensity to save out of incremental cash inflows, while a constrained firm will
save a positive portion of cash flows.
We also analyze the case where, as hypothesized by Jensen (1986), managers have incentives to
overinvest, especially from internally-generated funds. In this version of the model, the equilibrium
of a constrained firm is unaﬀected, because the overinvestment eﬀect alters preferences equally in
each period, so it does not aﬀect the intertemporal choice between investments. However, a firm
that is unconstrained can eﬀectively become constrained given agency considerations if cash flows
in each period are not suﬃcient to the allow the firm to undertake all the investments managers
would like to undertake. In this case, an otherwise unconstrained firm will act like a constrained
firm in that there will be an “optimal” level of cash holdings, and the firm will display a propensity
to save a positive portion of incremental cash inflows.
We examine the empirical implications of this model on a sample of 1,026 publicly-traded
manufacturing firms between 1981 and 2000. Using five alternative measures of financial constraints
suggested in the literature, we test the hypothesis that the propensity to save from cash inflows
is larger for the constrained firms than for the unconstrained ones. Consistent with the valuemaximizing model, we find that constrained firms save a positive fraction of cash flows, while
unconstrained firms do not display a systematic propensity to save cash flows. Moreover, we find
that the propensity of constrained firms to save incremental cash flows is larger in recessions than
in good economic times, consistent with the Keynes’ notion that when firms are more likely to be
financially constrained in the future they are more likely to save cash today.
29

Finally, we also test the implication of the agency version of the model that financially unconstrained firms whose managers are likely to have little or no incentives to adopt value-maximizing
policies manage firm liquidity as if they were financially constrained. The results for this test
depend on the particular measure of financial constraints used. We do, nonetheless, find some
evidence consistent with the agency view of corporate liquidity management.

30

References
Acharya, V., J. Huang, M. Subrahmanyam and R. Sundaram, 2002, “When Does Strategic Debt
Service Matter,?” mimeo.
Aggarwal, R. and A. Samwick, 1999, “The Other Side of the Trade-Oﬀ: The Impact of Risk on
Executive Compensation,” Journal of Political Economy, 107, pp. 65-105.
Almeida, H. and M. Campello, 2002, “Financial Constraints and Investment—Cash Flow Sensitivities: New Research Directions,” mimeo.
Baker, M., J. Stein, and J. Wurgler, 2002, “When Does the Market Matter? Stock Prices and the
Investment of Equity-Dependent Firms,” NBER Working Paper 8750.
Baskin, J., 1987, “Corporate Liquidity in Games of Monopoly Power,” Review of Economics and
Statistics, 69, 312-319.
Blanchard, O., F. Lopez-de-Silanes and A. Shleifer, 1994, “What Do Firms Do with Cash Windfalls?” Journal of Financial Economics, 36, pp. 337-60.
Calomiris, C., C. Himmelberg and P. Wachtel, 1995, “Commercial Paper and Corporate Finance:
A Microeconomic Perspective,” Carnegie Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 45,
pp. 203-50.
Campello, M., 2002, “Capital Structure and Product Markets Interactions: Evidence from Business
Cycles,” Journal of Financial Economics (forthcoming).
Carpenter, R., S. Fazzari and B. Petersen, 1994, “Inventory Investment, Internal-Finance Fluctuations, and the Business Cycle,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 6, pp. 75-122.
Cristophe, S., 2000, “The Value of U.S. MNC Earnings Changes from Foreign and Domestic
Operations,” Journal of Business, 75, pp. 67-94.
Dittmar, A., J. Mahrt-Smith and H. Servaes, 2002, “Corporate Liquidity,” mimeo, Indiana University and London Business School.
Erickson, T. and T. Whited, 2000, “Measurement Error and the Relationship between Investment
and Q,” Journal of Political Economy, 108, pp. 1027-57.
Faulkender, M., 2002, “Cash Holdings Among Small Business,” mimeo, Northwestern University.
Fazzari S., R. G. Hubbard and B. Petersen, 1988, “Financing Constraints and Corporate Investment,” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 141-95.
Fazzari S., R. G. Hubbard and B. Petersen, 2000, “Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Are Useful:
A Comment on Kaplan and Zingales,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, pp. 695-706.
Fazzari, S. and B. Petersen, 1993, “Working Capital and Fixed Investment: New Evidence on
Financing Constrains,” RAND Journal of Economics, 24, pp. 328-42.
Fenn, G. and N. Liang, 2001, “Corporate Payout Policy and Managerial Stock Incentives,” Journal
of Financial Economics, 60, pp. 45-72.
31

Froot, K., D. Scharfstein and J. Stein, 1993, “Risk Management: Coordinating Corporate Investment and Financing Policies,” Journal of Finance, 48, pp. 1629-58.
Froot, K., D. Scharfstein and J. Stein, 1994, “A Framework for Risk Management,” Harvard
Business Review, November-December, pp. 91-102.
Gilchrist, S. and C. Himmelberg, 1996, “Evidence on the Role of Cash Flow for Investment,”
Journal of Monetary Economics, 36, pp. 541-72.
Harford, J., 1999, “Corporate Cash Reserves and Acquisitions,” Journal of Finance, 54, pp. 196997.
Hart, O. and J. Moore, 1994, “A Theory of Debt Based on the Inalienability of Human Capital,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, pp. 841-79.
Hart, O. and J. Moore, 1995, “Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the Role of Hard Claims in
Constraining Management,” American Economic Review, 85, pp. 567-85.
Holmstrom, B. and J. Tirole, 1998, “Private and Public Supply of Liquidity,” Journal of Political
Economy, 106, pp. 1-40.
Jensen, M., 1986, “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and Takeovers,” American
Economic Review, 76, pp. 323-29.
Jensen, M., 1993, “The Modern Industrial Revolution, Exit, and the Failure of Internal Control
Systems,” Journal of Finance, 48, pp. 831-80.
Jensen, M. and W. Meckling, 1976, “Theory of the Firm Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs and
Capital Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 3, pp. 305-60.
John, T., 1993, “Accounting Measures of Corporate Liquidity, Leverage, and Costs of Financial
Distress,” Financial Management, 22, pp. 91-100.
Kaplan, S. and L. Zingales, 1997, “Do Financing Constraints Explain why Investment is Correlated
with Cash Flow?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112, pp. 169-215.
Kaplan, S. and L. Zingales, 2000, “Investment—Cash Flow Sensitivities are not Useful Measures
of Financial Constraints,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 115, pp. 707-12.
Kashyap, A., O. Lamont and J. Stein, 1994, “Credit Conditions and the Cyclical Behavior of
Inventories,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109, pp. 565-92.
Kashyap, A. and J. Stein, 2000, “What Do a Million Observations on Banks Say about the
Transmission of Monetary Policy?” American Economic Review, 90, pp. 407-28.
Keynes, J. M., 1936, The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, London: McMillan.
Kim, C., D. Mauer and A. Sherman, 1998, “The Determinants of Corporate Liquidity: Theory
and Evidence,” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 33, pp. 335-59.
Lamont, O., C. Polk and J. Saá-Requejo, 2001, Financial constraints and stock returns, Review
of Financial Studies, 14, pp. 529-54.
32

Lang, L., R. Stulz and R. Walkling, 1991, “A Test of the Free Cash Flow Hypothesis: The Case
of Bidder Returns,” Journal of Financial Economics, 29, pp. 315-35.
Lie, E., 2000, “Excess Funds and Agency Problems: An Empirical Study of Incremental Cash
Disbursements,” Review of Financial Studies, 13, pp. 219-47.
McConell, J. and H. Servaes, 1990, “Additional Evidence on Equity Ownership and Corporate
Value,” Journal of Financial Economics, 27, pp. 595-612.
Mørck, R., A. Shleifer and R. Vishny, 1988, “Management Ownership and Market Valuation: An
Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Financial Economics, 20, pp. 293-315.
Myers, S., 1977, The Determinants of Corporate Borrowing, Journal of Financial Economics, 5,
pp. 146-75.
Myers, S. and Majluf, 1984, Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions When Firms Have
Information that Investors do not Have, Journal of Financial Economics, 13, pp. 187-222.
Myers, S. and R. Rajan, 1998, “The Paradox of Liquidity,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113,
pp. 733-71.
Opler, T., L. Pinkowitz, R. Stulz and R. Williamson, 1999, “The Determinants and Implications
of Corporate Cash Holdings,” Journal of Financial Economics, 52, pp. 3-46.
Opler, T. and S. Titman, 1993, “The Determinants of Leveraged Buyout Activity: Free Cash Flow
vs. Financial Distress Costs,” Journal of Finance, 48, pp. 1985-99.
Ozkan A. and N. Ozkan, 2002, “Corporate Cash Holdings: An Empirical Investigation of UK
Companies,” Working Paper, University of York.
Pinkowitz, L. and R. Williamson, 2001, “Bank Power and Cash Holdings: Evidence from Japan,”
Review of Financial Studies, 14, pp. 1059-82.
Povel, P. and M. Raith, 2001, “Optimal Investment Under Financial Constraints: the Roles of
Internal Funds and Asymmetric Information,” Working Paper, University of Chicago.
Stein, J., 2001, “Agency, Information and Corporate Investment,” mimeo, Harvard University.
Tirole, J., 2001, “Corporate Governance,” Econometrica, 69, pp. 1-35.
Yermack, D., 1995, “Do Corporations Award Stock Options Eﬀectively?” Journal of Financial
Economics, 39, pp. 237-69.
Whited, T., 1992, “Debt, Liquidity Constraints and Corporate Investment: Evidence from Panel
Data,” Journal of Finance, 47, pp. 425-60.

33

Appendix: Comparative statics with constrained hedging
We use the same parametrization described in Eq. (4) to write the fist order condition as:
"
µ
¶−1 #
¡ H
¢
p H
∗ −1
∗ −1
L
∗
c +C
(c0 − C ) = δ p µc1 + C
+ (1 − p) c1 + (1 − µ)
.
(17)
1−p 1

There is no closed form solution for C ∗ , but we can still obtain comparative statics results. Define
L
the function F ≡ F (C, c0 , cH
1 , c1 , µ, p) as:
∗ −1

F (·) = (c0 − C )

µ
¶−1
¡ H
¢
p H
∗ −1
L
∗
c +C
− δp µc1 + C
− δ(1 − p) c1 + (1 − µ)
.
1−p 1

Notice that this equation is independent of τ , and thus similarly to the case of perfect hedging,
borrowing capacity will not aﬀect cash policies for firms which are constrained.
∂F
∂F
∂F
With some algebra, we can show that: ∂F
∂C > 0, ∂c0 < 0, ∂µ < 0, and ∂δ < 0. These derivatives
yield the following results for hedge-constrained firms:
• If time 0 cash flow increases, then the firm hoards more cash:
∂F

∂C
0
= − ∂c
>0
∂F
∂c0
∂C
• If future investment opportunities are more profitable than the current investment opportunities (δ is high), then the firm hoards more cash:
∂F
∂C
∂δ
= − ∂F
>0
∂δ
∂C

• Firms which can hedge less hoard more cash:
∂F

∂C
∂µ
= − ∂F > 0
∂µ
∂C

34

Table 1: Cross-Classification of Financial Constraint Types
This table displays firm-quarter cross-classification for the various criteria used to categorize firm-quarters as either
financially constrained or unconstrained (see text for definitions). The sampled firms include only manufacturers (SICs
2000-3999) in the COMPUSTAT annual industrial tapes. The sample period is 1981 through 2000.
Financial Constraints Criteria

Div. Payout
(A)

(B)

Firm Size
(A)

(B)

Bond Ratings
(A)

(B)

CP Ratings
(A)

(B)

KZ Index
(A)

(B)

1. Dividend Payout
Constrained Firms (A)

2,507

Unconstrained Firms (B)

4,075

2. Firm Size
Constrained Firms (A)

1,147

472

452

2,111

Constrained Firms (A)

1,252

1,029

2,351

194

Unconstrained Firms (B)

1,255

3,046

514

3,599

2,257

1,946

2,865

1,020

4,339

3,342

250

2,129

0

2,773

141

3,313

Constrained Firms (A)

453

1,218

136

1,796

378

2,321

1,245

1,454

Unconstrained Firms (B)

873

551

1,535

123

1,869

686

2,387

168

Unconstrained Firms (B)

2,865
3,793

3. Bond Ratings
4,480
6,655

4. Commercial Paper Ratings
Constrained Firms (A)
Unconstrained Firms (B)

7,681
3,454

5. Kaplan-Zingales Index
2,699
2,555

Table 2: Summary Statistics of Cash Holdings
This table displays summary statistics for cash holdings across groups of
financially constrained and unconstrained firms (see text for definitions). All
data are from the annual COMPUSTAT industrial tapes. The sampled firms
include only manufacturers (SICs 2000-3999) and the sample period is 1981
through 2000.
Cash Holdings

³

Cashi,t
Assetsi,t−1

´

Mean

Median

Std. Dev.

N. Obs

Constrained Firms (A)

0.372

0.176

0.539

2,507

Unconstrained Firms (B)

0.112

0.049

0.208

4,075

0.00

0.00

Constrained Firms (A)

0.372

0.219

0.502

2,865

Unconstrained Firms (B)

0.096

0.043

0.168

3,793

0.00

0.00

Constrained Firms (A)

0.296

0.140

0.452

4,480

Unconstrained Firms (B)

0.135

0.051

0.259

6,655

0.00

0.00

Constrained Firms (A)

0.253

0.105

0.412

7,681

Unconstrained Firms (B)

0.081

0.041

0.130

3,454

0.00

0.00

Constrained Firms (A)

0.068

0.029

0.100

2,699

Unconstrained Firms (B)

0.469

0.303

0.566

2,555

0.00

0.00

Financial Constraints Criteria
1. Dividend Payout

p-value (A−B6=0)
2. Firm Size

p-value (A−B6=0)
3. Bond Ratings

p-value (A−B6=0)
4. Commercial Paper Ratings

p-value (A−B6=0)
5. Kaplan-Zingales Index

p-value (A−B6=0)

Table 3: Baseline Regressions: The Cash Flow Sensitivity of Cash

This table displays results for OLS with firm fixed-eﬀects estimations of the baseline model. All data are from the annual
COMPUSTAT industrial tapes. The sampled firms include only manufacturers (SICs 2000-3999) and the sample period is 1981
through 2000. The estimations correct the error structure both for heterosckedasticity and for within-period error correlation
using the White-Hubber estimator. t-stats (in parentheses).
Dependent Variable
Cashi,t −Cashi,t−1
Assetsi,t−1

R2

Independent Variables
CashF low

Expenditures

Acquisitions

∆NW Capital

Q

Ln(Assets)

Constrained Firms (A)

0.3645
(2.73)*

−0.8850
(−5.88)*

−0.3280
(−2.47)*

0.1110
(1.49)

0.0210
(4.71)*

−0.0454
(−2.19)**

0.283

Unconstrained Firms (B)

0.0471
(0.86)

−0.3949
(−5.35)*

−0.1913
(−3.68)*

0.0190
(0.16)

0.0037
(0.72)

−0.0075
(−0.65)

0.122

0.01

0.03

0.27

0.55

0.04

0.67

Constrained Firms (A)

0.3118
(3.03)*

−0.7674
(−4.09)*

−0.6160
(−4.72)*

0.1666
(1.50)

0.0264
(7.38)*

−0.0396
(−2.30)**

0.264

Unconstrained Firms (B)

0.0324
(0.49)

−0.4504
(−4.26)*

−0.1408
(−3.97)*

0.0457
(0.87)

0.0026
(0.40)

−0.0454
(−3.75)*

0.234

0.05

0.19

0.00

0.30

0.00

0.72

Constrained Firms (A)

0.3157
(3.20)*

−0.8208
(−5.06)*

−0.5777
(−4.97)*

0.2087
(1.57)

0.0224
(5.54)*

−0.0571
(−3.28)*

0.317

Unconstrained Firms (B)

0.1351
(1.35)

−0.4985
(−4.19)*

−0.1678
(−7.08)*

0.0538
(1.94)

0.0117
(2.32)**

−0.0340
(−2.37)**

0.274

0.19

0.19

0.00

0.23

0.01

0.13

Financial Constraints Criteria
1. Dividend Payout

p-value (A−B6=0)
2. Firm Size

p-value (A−B6=0)
3. Bond Ratings

p-value (A−B6=0)

Table 3 - Continued

R2

Independent Variables
CashF low

Expenditures

Acquisitions

∆NW Capital

Q

Ln(Assets)

Constrained Firms (A)

0.2573
(3.24)*

−0.7080
(−7.88)*

−0.3556
(−4.88)*

0.1735
(2.06)**

0.0217
(4.59)*

−0.0489
(−3.35)*

0.307

Unconstrained Firms (B)

0.0008
(0.01)

−0.4004
(−2.91)*

−0.0971
(−4.38)*

−0.0738
(−2.37)**

0.0013
(0.23)

−0.0259
(−1.94)

0.170

0.02

0.12

0.01

0.01

0.01

0.07

Constrained Firms (A)

0.2758
(5.60)*

−0.4686
(−6.19)*

−0.1293
(−3.45)*

−0.0685
(−1.49)

0.0182
(2.07)**

−0.0015
(−0.37)

0.463

Unconstrained Firms (B)

0.1225
(0.74)

−1.2513
(−4.32)*

−0.6669
(−3.38)*

0.2009
(1.66)

0.0120
(2.42)**

−0.0673
(−2.26)**

0.379

0.01

0.54

0.00

0.01

0.84

0.00

4. Commercial Paper Ratings

p-value (A−B6=0)

5. Kaplan-Zingales Index

p-value (A−B6=0)

Note: *,** indicate statistical significance at the 1-percent and 5-percent (two-tail) test levels, respectively.

Table 4: Robustness: Alternative Specifications of the Baseline Regression
Model

This table displays results for OLS with firm fixed-eﬀects estimations of alternative versions of the baseline liquidity model.
The reported estimates are the coeﬃcients returned to CashF low under the diﬀerent model specifications described in the
table (see text for more details). All data are from the annual COMPUSTAT industrial tapes. The sampled firms include only
manufacturers (SICs 2000-3999) and the sample period is 1981 through 2000. The estimations correct the error structure both
for heterosckedasticity and for within-period error correlation using the White-Hubber estimator. t-stats (in parentheses).
Financial Constraints Criteria
Div. Payout

Firm Size

Bond Ratings

CP Ratings

KZ Index

Constrained Firms (A)

0.3339
(2.61)*

0.2390
(2.31)**

0.2337
(2.36)**

0.2130
(3.05)*

0.1008
(3.93)*

Unconstrained Firms (B)

—0.0183
(—0.41)

0.0439
(0.72)

0.1299
(1.64)

—0.0100
(—0.15)

0.0344
(0.23)

0.01

0.09

0.42

0.02

0.22

Constrained Firms (A)

0.3478
(2.66)*

0.2861
(2.84)*

0.2970
(3.08)*

0.2399
(3.07)*

0.1596
(5.24)*

Unconstrained Firms (B)

0.0318
(0.58)

0.0336
(0.51)

0.1275
(1.27)

0.0093
(0.11)

0.0895
(0.54)

0.01

0.07

0.18

0.02

0.67

Constrained Firms (A)

0.3580
(2.62)*

0.3107
(3.01)*

0.3319
(3.10)*

0.2749
(3.38)*

0.1788
(6.26)*

Unconstrained Firms (B)

0.0298
(0.59)

0.0790
(1.30)

0.1567
(1.63)

0.0253
(0.31)

0.0685
(0.44)

0.02

0.07

0.22

0.01

0.34

1. CashF low and Q (only) in the r.h.s. of model

p-value (A−B6=0)
2. Changes in short-term debt added to the
r.h.s. of baseline model

p-value (A−B6=0)
3. Dep. var. is Cash/Assets; lagged Cash/Assets
added to the r.h.s. of baseline model

p-value (A−B6=0)

Note: *,** indicate statistical significance at the 1-percent and 5-percent (two-tail) test levels, respectively.

Table 5: Macroeconomic Dynamics: Two-Stage Estimator of the Impact of
Aggregate Activity on the Cash Flow Sensitivity of Cash

The dependent variable is the estimated sensitivity of cash holdings to cash flow for firms classified as financially constrained vs. unconstrained. In each estimation, the dependent variable is regressed on two lags of the log of real GDP
and a time trend. In the multivariate regressions, current inflation (log CPI) and interest rates (Fed funds rate) are also
added. The sampled firms include only manufacturers (SICs 2000-3999) and the sample period is 1981 through 2000.
The sum of the coeﬃcients for the two lags of the economic activity measure is shown along with the t-statistic of this
sum (in paranthesis). Heteroskedasticity- and autocorrelation-consistent errors are computed with a Newey-West (1987)
lag window of size two. The standard errors for the diﬀerence of the sum of the two lags of GDP are computed with a
SUR system that estimates constraint categories regressions jointly.
Financial Constraints Criteria
Div. Payout

Firm Size

Bond Ratings

CP Ratings

KZ Index

Univariate
Sum of Lag Coeﬃcients
Summation Test (t-stat)

−16.566
(−3.92)*

−14.101
(−3.08)*

−10.791
(−4.83)*

−7.125
(−2.13)**

−2.428
(−2.42)**

Multivariate
Sum of Lag Coeﬃcients
Summation Test (t-stat)

−18.834
(−5.21)*

−16.188
(−5.62)*

−11.139
(−5.31)*

−8.770
(−3.53)*

−2.409
(−2.32)**

Univariate
Sum of Lag Coeﬃcients
Summation Test (t-stat)

11.332
(2.02)**

−1.475
(−0.53)

−4.003
(−0.82)

7.749
(1.30)

−14.984
(−3.56)*

Multivariate
Sum of Lag Coeﬃcients
Summation Test (t-stat)

11.502
(2.54)**

−0.960
(−0.47)

−5.130
(−1.51)

7.365
(1.39)

−16.024
(−6.45)*

Univariate
Diﬀ. Coeﬃcient
Diﬀ. p-value

−27.898
0.01

−12.626
0.09

−6.788
0.47

−14.874
0.12

12.556
0.06

Multivariate
Diﬀ. Coeﬃcient
Diﬀ. p-value

−30.336
0.00

−15.228
0.04

−6.009
0.51

−16.135
0.09

13.616
0.05

1. Constrained Firms

2. Unconstrained Firms

3. Diff. Constrained−Unconstrained

Note: *,** indicate statistical significance at the 1-percent and 5-percent (two-tail) test levels, respectively.

Table 6: The Cash Flow Sensitivity of Cash the Agency Problem

This table displays results for fixed-eﬀects OLS estimations of the cash flow sensitivity of cash with proxies for agency problems.
The baseline regression model is augmented with the inclusion of CEO Ownership (based on stocks + options) as a proxy for
CEO incentives, and its interaction with cash flow. Financial contraints are defined based on firm dividend policies throughout
the 1981-2000 period. In Panel A, High (Low) free cash flow firms are those in the top (bottom) quintile of the industry-yearnormalized distribution of the “excess operating cash flow” measure. This measure is based on the diﬀerece between a firm’s cash
flow and capital expeditures (both scaled by assets) and that of the median firm in the same 2-digit SIC industry in the same year.
In Panel B, High (Low) free cash flow firms are those with above (below) industry-year median “excess operating cash flow” and
below (above) industry-year median Q. The estimation period is 1993-2000. The estimations correct the error structure both for
heterosckedasticity and for within-period error correlation using the White-Hubber estimator. t-stats (in parentheses).
Panel A: Free Cash Flow Proxyed by (Relative to Industry-Year) ‘‘Excess Operating Cash Flow’’ Rankings
Financially Constrained
Indep. Variables

Financially Unconstrained
High Free Cash Flow

Low Free Cash Flow

p-value

(A)

(B)

(A−B6=0)

0.2676
(2.67)*

0.1041
(0.38)

0.1329
(0.52)

0.85

Expenditures

−1.1997
(−3.04)*

−0.2301
(−0.34)

−0.9996
(−1.65)

0.58

Acquisitions

−0.5053
(−5.00)*

0.3661
(0.41)

−0.2284
(−1.70)

0.19

∆NW Capital

0.0827
(0.48)

0.1764
(1.56)

0.1079
(0.84)

0.78

Q

0.0179
(2.45)*

0.0186
(3.06)*

0.0155
(1.19)

0.82

Ln(Assets)

0.0428
(0.87)

−0.0026
(−0.09)

−0.0201
(−1.31)

0.42

CEO Ownership

0.1116
(0.33)

−0.5051
(−0.93)

0.9870
(2.27)**

0.04

−0.3900
(−0.20)

4.2166
(1.27)

−7.0219
(−2.58)*

0.00

965
0.194

206
0.521

187
0.580

CashF low

CEO Ownership
× CashF low
Observations
R2

Note: *,** indicate statistical significance at the 1-percent and 5-percent (two-tail) test levels, respectively.

Table 6 - Continued

Panel B: Free Cash Flow Proxyed by the Joint Distribution of ‘‘Excess Operating Cash Flow’’ and Tobin’s Q
Financially Constrained
Indep. Variables

Financially Unconstrained
High Free Cash Flow

Low Free Cash Flow

p-value

(A)

(B)

(A−B6=0)

0.2676
(2.67)*

0.3287
(0.82)

−0.1689
(−0.57)

0.18

Expenditures

−1.1997
(−3.04)*

−0.7024
(−0.83)

−0.0338
(−0.17)

0.41

Acquisitions

−0.5053
(−5.00)*

−0.0368
(−0.41)

−0.2326
(−3.38)*

0.03

∆NW Capital

0.0827
(0.48)

−0.1706
(−0.97)

0.1589
(0.97)

0.44

Q

0.0179
(2.45)*

−0.0219
(−0.97)

0.0240
(3.25)*

0.01

Ln(Assets)

0.0428
(0.87)

0.0245
(1.79)

0.0122
(0.33)

0.54

CEO Ownership

0.1116
(0.33)

−1.3643
(−1.04)

−0.3906
(−1.14)

0.27

−0.3900
(−0.20)

5.0026
(0.69)

−2.5261
(−1.87)**

0.01

965
0.194

202
0.553

191
0.242

CashF low

CEO Ownership
× CashF low
Observations
R2

Note: *,** indicate statistical significance at the 1-percent and 5-percent (two-tail) test levels, respectively.

