NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

REDISTRIBUTION AND INSURANCE:
MANDATORY ANNUITIZATION WITH
MORTALITY HETEROGENEITY
Jeffrey R. Brown
Working Paper 9256
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9256
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002

The author is grateful to the Center for Retirement Research at Boston College for financial support and to
two anonymous referees for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Jeffrey R. Brown. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Redistribution and Insurance: Mandatory Annuitization with Mortality Heterogeneity
Jeffrey R. Brown
NBER Working Paper No. 9256
October 2002
JEL No. D91, H55, J14
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the distributional implications of mandatory longevity insurance when
there is mortality heterogeneity in the population. Previous research has demonstrated the
significant financial redistribution that occurs under alternative annuity programs in the presence
of differential mortality across groups. This paper embeds that analysis into a life cycle framework
that allows for an examination of distributional effects on a utility-adjusted basis. It finds that the
degree of redistribution that occurs from the introduction of a mandatory annuity program is
substantially lower on a utility-adjusted basis than when evaluated on a purely financial basis. In a
simple life-cycle model with no bequests, complete annuitization is welfare enhancing even for
those individuals with much higher-than-average expected mortality rates, so long as administrative
costs are sufficiently low.

These findings have implications for policy toward annuitization,

particularly as part of a reformed Social Security system.
Jeffrey R. Brown
Department of Finance
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign
340 Wohlers Hall, MC-706
1206 S. Sixth Street
Champaign, IL 61822
and NBER
brown@nber.org

Most public pension systems combine elements of redistribution and insurance. For
example, the U.S. Old Age Survivors Insurance program (OASI) uses a non-linear benefit
formula that provides a higher replacement rate for lower income workers in an effort to make the
system progressively redistributive. At the same time, OASI insures individuals against longevity
risk through the provision of benefits in the form of life annuities.
For some types of risk, providing insurance and engaging in progressive redistribution
are complementary activities. This is true, for example, with Disability Insurance. In the U.S.,
workers covered by the DI program are provided with insurance against income loss in the event
of becoming disabled. Because individuals who are disabled have, by definition, diminished
earnings capacity, this same program serves a progressively redistributive role. Even on an ex
ante basis, if lower wage individuals have a higher probability of becoming disabled, then a
disability insurance program would even redistribute from higher to lower income individuals in
expectation.
For other types of risk, however, the provision of insurance can have regressive
distributional effects. Longevity risk is one such case. In a life-cycle setting, individuals who do
not know how long they will live are, in general, made better off by annuitizing their wealth.
However, because high-income individuals have longer life expectancies, they will have a higher
expected present value of annuity payments than will low income individuals, if everyone is
required to annuitize at a uniform price as in most public pension plans.
There is a large literature focusing on measuring the insurance value of annuitization for
representative life-cycle consumers (e.g., Mitchell, et al 1999, Brown 2001). These papers
generally quantify the utility gains from access to actuarially fair annuity markets by finding how
much incremental, non-annuitized wealth would be equivalent to providing access to an
actuarially fair annuity market (sometimes called the “annuity equivalent wealth”). A standard
result from this approach is that a 65-year old male with log utility, whose mortality expectations
mirror that of the population average, would find annuities equivalent in utility terms to a 50%

1

increase in wealth. With few exceptions, however, these utility-based calculations have been
conducted only for “average” consumers who have access to annuities that are actuarially fair,
i.e., that are priced using the individual specific mortality rates. Little has been done to examine
the utility implications of annuitizing in an environment of heterogeneous mortality.1
The contribution of this paper is to examine the distributional impact of alternative
annuity designs in a framework that incorporates the utility value of the longevity insurance. In
particular, it examines how the annuity equivalent wealth varies across socioeconomic groups
when annuities are priced uniformly. Staying with the no bequest assumption, this approach
provides answers to three types of questions. First, under what conditions are individuals,
particularly those in high-mortality risk groups, made better off by annuitizing at a uniform price?
Second, how much redistribution is there on a utility-adjusted basis? Third, how are the answers
to the first two questions affected by alternative annuity designs? For example, would individuals
with shorter life expectancies prefer constant real annuities or some other path of payments?
This approach yields several interesting findings. First, in the absence of administrative
costs, uniform priced annuities can make all life-cycle consumers better off, even those with
mortality rates that are substantially higher than those used to price the annuity. Second, the
amount of redistribution that arises from mandatory annuitization is much smaller on a utility
adjusted basis than on a financial basis. Third, even high mortality risk individuals generally
prefer real annuities to nominal ones, despite the fact that nominal annuities “front-load” annuity
payments and thus provide, in expectation, higher lifetime payments to these short-lived
individuals.

1

There is a related literature examining the distributional effects of the current U.S. Social Security system
(e.g., Gustman & Steinmeier 2001, Liebman 2000, Coronado, Fullerton & Glass 2000), and a smaller but
growing literature examining redistribution within an individual accounts system (e.g., Brown 2000,
Feldstein & Liebman 2000). However, these analyses have focused on purely financial measures of
redistribution, as opposed to the utility-based measure used in this paper.

2

These findings are relevant to the debate about how to reform the U.S. Social Security
system. Mortality differentials can have a significant effect on the progressivity of mandatory
annuitization schemes, including most public pension systems. Several recent papers have
suggested that the progressivity of the OASI benefit formula, which provides a higher
replacement rate for lower wage individuals, is at least partially offset by the fact that higher
income individuals tend to live longer than lower income individuals (Gustman & Steinmeier
2001, Liebman 2000, Coronado, Fullerton, & Glass 2000, Cohen, Steuerle & Carasso 2001).
While these studies differ in the degree of overall progressivity in the system, all of them find that
mortality differentials contribute to a lessening of income-based redistribution.
Many commentators have expressed concern that supplementing or partially replacing the
current Social Security system with a program of personal accounts would have regressive
distributional implications. In particular, if there is no redistribution elsewhere in the program
(such as in contribution rates or benefit offsets), then there will be no offset of any distributional
effects that arise from mortality heterogeneity in the payout phase. For example, if all individuals
were required to annuitize their retirement accounts at a uniform price upon reaching age 67, the
expected present value of future annuity payments would be substantially smaller for individuals
with higher mortality probabilities, even if the account balances were identical in size. This paper
demonstrates that these redistributive effects are substantially mitigated when evaluated on a
utility-adjusted basis, and that the gains from annuitization are significant even for groups with
high mortality rates.
This paper proceeds as follows. Section 1 provides a review of the literature on why
annuities are valuable to representative retirees. Section 2 presents evidence on the interaction
between mortality and socioeconomic status using data from the National Longitudinal Mortality
Study, and discusses the impact of this on financial measures of distribution. Section 3 uses a
simplified, two-period model to provide intuition for how the utility value of an annuity is
affected by differential mortality. Section 4 discusses the dynamic programming methodology

3

for solving for annuity valuation in a multi-period problem with liquidity constraints. Section 5
reports dynamic programming simulation results of the annuity equivalent wealth for multiperiod life cycle individuals with more realistic constraints on annuity payments. Section 6
concludes.

1. The Insurance Value of Annuitization
In a widely cited article, Yaari (1965) demonstrated that a risk averse, life-cycle
consumer facing an uncertain date of death would find actuarially fair annuities of substantial
value. In fact, under certain conditions, including the absence of bequests and the absence of
other sources of uncertainty, life cycle consumers find it optimal to invest 100% of wealth into
actuarial notes. More recent theoretical work indicates that annuities are often welfare enhancing
in a broader set of cases than those allowed by Yaari, including in the presence of aggregate risk,
adverse selection, and intertemporal non-additivity of the utility function (Davidoff et al 2001).
Other extensions, such as allowing for precautionary savings and bequest motives, tend to reduce
the value of annuitization.
Annuities derive their value from the elimination of longevity risk. In the absence of
annuities, individuals facing an unknown date of death must allocate their wealth across an
uncertain number of periods. Unless the individual lives to the maximum lifespan, following the
optimal consumption path will result in the individual dying with positive financial wealth.
Assuming the individual does not value bequests, the individual would have been better off, ex
post, had she consumed more each period while alive. Ex ante, however, following a more
aggressive consumption path would have exposed her to the risk of having very low consumption
levels in the event that she lived longer than expected. This problem arises in the absence of
annuities because the individual is unable to allocate wealth in a state contingent manner.
Instead, she must, for any given future period, set aside an equal amount of wealth for the state in

4

which she is alive, and thus values consumption, and the state in which she is dead and does not
value consumption.
Annuities partially complete the market by allowing an individual to make future
resources survival-state contingent. In particular, annuities allow the individual to increase the
income available in future periods conditional on being alive, in return for accepting zero
resources in the event that she dies. If an individual has no bequest motive and therefore cares
only about future states in which she is alive, this enables her to consume more each period while
alive and completely eliminate the risk of living “too long” with resources insufficient to support
desired consumption levels.
Previous work indicates that for a 65-year old man with average U.S. population
mortality and log utility, gaining access to an actuarially fair real annuity market is equivalent to a
50% increase in wealth (Brown, Mitchell & Poterba, 2001). However, all of these studies have
assumed that individuals have access to annuity markets that are actuarially fair, i.e., that the
annuity is priced according to each individual’s own mortality rates. In most realistic policy
settings, such as public or private pension systems, individuals with heterogeneous mortality are
pooled into a common annuity market. As such, very few individuals have access to annuities
that are priced in a manner that is actuarially fair at the individual level, even if the system is
actuarially fair on average. As such, the utility gains from annuitization in such a setting will
vary across individuals.
2. Mortality Heterogeneity and Annuity Prices
There is substantial heterogeneity in expected lifetimes in the U.S. population. In
addition to differences by age and gender, it has been substantially documented that mortality
rates are correlated with race (Preston et al 1996, Sorlie et al 1992), ethnicity (Sorlie et al 1993),
income (Deaton & Paxson 2001), wealth (Attanasio & Hoynes 2000), marital status (Brown &
Poterba 2001), and educational attainment (Kitawaga & Hauser 1972, Deaton & Paxson 2001,
Lantz et al 1998). In general, these correlations work in the direction that individuals of higher

5

socioeconomic status live longer than those in lower socioeconomic groups. For example, whites
live longer than blacks, higher income and higher wealth individuals live longer than individuals
with less wealth, married people live longer than singles, and more highly educated individuals
live longer than less educated individuals. There is also controversial evidence suggesting that
Hispanics live longer than whites in the U.S., though this appears to be more true for foreign born
than U.S. born Hispanics, and may be due to data contamination.
To evaluate the effect of mortality differentials on annuity valuation, it is necessary to
construct a set of mortality tables that are differentiated based on demographic characteristics.
This paper will use mortality estimates that are differentiated by age, gender, educational
attainment, race and ethnicity. Age and gender are obvious characteristics to condition on, given
the near universal pattern of adult mortality rates rising with age and the fact that females have
lower mortality rates than males.
The level of lifetime financial resources available to an individual is clearly of policy
interest in evaluating the distributional implications of annuity policy. Unfortunately, solid
measures lifetime resources are not always available to researchers. One widely used measure is
the current income of an individual or family. Current income, however, is a poor measure of
lifetime resources. The most important criticism of this measure is the problem of simultaneous
causation between income and health. Low-income individuals are more likely to suffer from
health problems and thus experience higher mortality rates. But it is also true that individuals in
poor health may be unable to earn a high income, in which case the causality is reversed.
Another frequently used measure is wealth. Attanasio & Hoynes (2000), Menchik (1993)
and Palmer (1989) all provide compelling evidence that wealth and mortality are inversely
correlated. The use of wealth partially addresses the simultaneity problem that arises when using
current income. However, as noted by Attanasio & Hoynes, it cannot be considered exogenous
either because wealth accumulation behavior of individuals with different life expectancies is
likely different.

6

A third measure, and the one used in this study, is educational attainment. A significant
negative correlation between education and mortality has been well documented (Deaton &
Paxson 2001, Lantz et al 1998, Kitawaga & Hauser 1973). Education is a reasonable proxy for
lifetime resources because more highly educated individuals have, on average, higher incomes.
In addition, education is a pre-determined variable for most retired individuals. These benefits,
combined with the fact that in the data used here the income data is of poor quality and the wealth
data is not available, is the primary motivation for using educational status as a measure of
economic status.
The primary motivation for examining results by race and ethnicity is that these measures
are directly relevant to the politics of the Social Security debate in the U.S. For example, the
Interim Report of the President’s Commission to Strengthen Social Security specifically
highlighted the impact of Social Security on African-Americans and Hispanics. While no racial
or ethnic group is monolithic, there is tremendous political interest in how racial and ethnic subgroups will fare under various proposals, as this could, in part, determine the viability of any
reform effort. Thus, the ability to examine the effect of annuity policy on racial and ethnic
groups is relevant to public policy. In addition, race and ethnicity serve as additional, albeit
imperfect, proxies for economic status when combined with other measures such as educational
attainment. However, it is important to remember that the differences in mortality rates across
racial and ethnic groups presented in this paper are not necessarily caused by racial and ethnic
differences. Rather, these differences likely reflect a combination of factors, including
unobserved differences in economic status that are not conditioned out by the educational
measures. However, to the extent that one is interested in how racial and ethnic groups fare, on
average, under various reform options, the measures presented below are quite useful.
The group specific mortality differentials are estimated using data from the National
Longitudinal Mortality Study (NLMS). The NLMS is a survey of individuals who were
originally included in the Current Population Survey and/or Census in the late 1970s and early

7

1980s. Throughout the 1980s, death certificate information from the National Death Index was
merged back into the survey data, allowing researchers to compare the death rates of individuals
on the basis of demographic characteristics at the time of the interview.
Age specific mortality rates are constructed from the NLMS for black, white and
Hispanics males and females, a total of six groups. The white and black groups are then further
differentiated based on education, less than high school, high school plus up to three years of
college, and college graduates. Due to small sample sizes, it is not possible to differentiate
Hispanics along educational lines.
Several steps are required to turn these NLMS estimates into cohort mortality tables for
specific groups. First, the NLMS sample is split into groups based on the gender, race, ethnic,
and educational categories. For each group g, the age-specific, non-parametric (np) mortality
rate, qnpx,g, is calculated as the fraction of those individuals age x who die before attaining age
x+1. This procedure provides a simple, non-parametric estimate of the age specific mortality rate
for individuals with the characteristics of group g.
In order to correct for non-monotonicity that occasionally arises due to small cell sizes in
some populations, the non-parametric estimates, qnpx,g, are treated as the independent variable in a
non-linear least squares regression on age x. The non-linear regression is used to estimate three
parameters of a Gompertz/Makeham survival function, as explained in Jordan (1991). The
Gompertz/Makeham formula used is:

l x = ks x g c
where k =

x

(1)

l0
l −l
and q x = x +1 x
g
lx

x is age, and g, c, and s are the parameters to be estimated. Note that if l0 is set equal to one, then
lx is simply the cumulative survival probability to age x. Using the NLLS estimates of g, c, and s,
one then has a “Makeham formula” that gives mortality qx as a function of x. Let us denote these

8

fitted values of mortality for group g at age x as qfitx,g. An important feature of this approach is
that fitted mortality rates are a monotonically increasing function of age x. It also allows one to
create out-of-sample estimates of mortality. Therefore, while only data from age 25 to 84 is used
to fit the curve, the formula can provide estimates of mortality for ages outside of this range. This
model has been found to describe human mortality patterns quite accurately up to the age of 96
(Riggs and Millecchia 1992). It has, however, had difficulty accounting for mortality patterns
among the very oldest individuals (Witten 1988, Riggs & Millecchia 1992). Fortunately, the
results in this paper are very insensitive to the mortality rates at these extreme old ages because
the contribution of consumption to lifetime utility at these ages is being heavily discounted both
by interest rates and mortality rates.
Once these predicted mortality rates are in hand, the next step is to convert them into
cohort life tables for each group. This requires two related assumptions. The first is that the
ratios of a group’s age-specific mortality to that of the population as a whole (qx,g/qx) in the
NLMS sample is an accurate portrayal of these ratios in the full population in 1980. The second
assumption is that these ratios are constant over time. By invoking these two assumptions, it is
possible to then construct a group specific cohort life tables for any year.
Specifically, let qfitx,g be the fitted value of the mortality rate for an individual age x
belonging to group g, and let qfitx be the mortality rate for an individual age x for the population
as a whole, both from the fitted NLMS data. Let qSSAx be the age-specific mortality rate from the
1978 birth cohort table from the Social Security Administration, which represents individuals
turning age 22 in the year 2000 (the group of study in this paper). Then the cohort, group specific
mortality rates are constructed as follows:
SSA
qxSSA
, g = qx

qxfit, g
qxfit

(2)

The one exception to this methodology is that in the case of college educated black males
and females, the mortality ratio between college and high school is assumed to be the same for

9

blacks as for whites. This ratio is applied to the fitted q’s for blacks with a high school education
in order to construct the estimate for a college educated black. This was done because the sample
sizes at many ages were too small for college-educated blacks to reliably construct an
independent estimate.
Table 1 reports how the life expectancy of a 22-year-old in the year 2000 varies by the
gender, race, ethnicity, and education as calculated using the above methods. The average 22
year old male can expect to live to age 77.4, while the average 22 year old woman can expect to
live to age 83.4. However, these estimates vary widely by race. White, black, and Hispanic 22year old males have life expectancies of 78.3, 71.8 and 77.7 years respectively, while white, black
and Hispanic females have life expectancies of 84.0, 80.0, and 85.2 years respectively. Life
expectancy at age 22 also varies substantially by education level. White men with less than a
high school education have a life expectancy at age 22 of 75.3 years, a full 5.2 years less than that
of a white male with a college degree. Low educated black males have by far the lowest age 22
life expectancy of any group examined, at 68.1 years. The highest life expectancy is college
educated white women, who can expect to live to age 85.1.
Table 1 also reports the life expectancy as of age 67 for this same cohort. As can be seen,
there is still a substantial range in the estimates, although the differential in years is not as large as
at age 22. This is because much of the life expectancy difference that arises for 22 year olds is
due to higher mortality probabilities in the pre-retirement period. Conditional on reaching age 67,
these differences are diminished. The numbers suggest that a 67-year-old white can expect to live
approximately 16 months longer than a 67-year-old black. When further differentiating by
educational attainment, the difference is naturally larger, with a 3.4-year difference between
college educated white men and less than high school educated black men.
The general racial and ethnic patterns in this data set are consistent with other sources of
mortality patterns. For example, the U.S. Census Bureau reports life expectancies at birth that are
higher for Hispanics than for non-Hispanic whites, which in turn are higher than those for blacks.

10

It should be noted, however, that there is controversy about the nature of the mortality differences
for Hispanics. The limited research available suggests that U.S. Hispanics have lower mortality
rates than non-Hispanic whites, despite a greater proportion living in poverty, lacking health
insurance, and having more limited access to health care (Sorlie et al 1993). Hispanics tend to
have lower rates of heart disease, cancer and pulmonary disease, although these differences do
not seem to be explained by the major known risk factors for these diseases. There are reasons to
be cautious in interpreting the Hispanic results. First, if sampling techniques tend to undersample less healthy Hispanics (e.g. migrant workers), this would bias mortality rates down. In
addition, studies like the National Longitudinal Mortality Study obtain death statistics by linking
to the National Death Index. This means that deaths outside of the U.S. are not recorded, and
thus some individuals’ deaths will be missed. This is particularly likely to occur among
immigrants to this country, some of whom may return to their country of origin at the end of their
lives. A final reason that the Hispanic results should be interpreted cautiously is that there is very
substantial heterogeneity in this population. Of particular importance is the fact that foreign-born
persons tend to have lower mortality risk than native-born persons (Sorlie et al 1993). This
“health migrant effect” would also help explain lower mortality rates among Hispanics.
One can use these mortality estimates to construct a “money’s worth” of an annuity that
is priced based on the average mortality in the population. A money’s worth measure is simply
the expected present value of annuity payments per dollar spent to purchase the annuity, and has
been used in many past studies of annuity prices (Friedman & Warshawsky 1988 and 1990,
Warshawsky 1988, Mitchell et al 1999). Table 2 reports the money’s worth ratio for the cohort
entering the workforce in the year 2000. This purely financial measure indicates that the money’s
worth of an inflation indexed life annuity for a 67 year old black male with less than a high
school education would be only 0.800, while a white woman with a college education would have
a money’s worth of 1.106. Viewed solely from this financial perspective, mandating
annuitization at a uniform price is tantamount to a system of taxes and transfers that takes

11

resources from poorly educated black men and gives it to highly educated white woman. This is
due to the fact that an annuity, by design, serves to transfer resources from shorter-lived to
longer-lived individuals, combined with the fact that there is heterogeneous mortality in the
population.
Brown (2000) explores the money’s worth of a richer set of annuity options, and finds
that the dispersion in money’s worth across groups can be substantially reduced by considering
annuities that “front-load” annuity payments or offer bequest options. As reported in Table 2, an
annuity that declines in real value by 3% per year increases the money’s worth for low educated
black men to 0.83. Even more striking, offering an annuity with a 20-year period certain
guarantee2 increases the money’s worth to black men with less than a high school education to
0.955, as indicated in column 3.
The money’s worth, however, is purely a financial measure, and as such it ignores the
insurance value that individuals derive from the elimination of longevity risk. To assess the
welfare effect of differential mortality, it is necessary to embed the heterogeneous mortality into a
utility-based model.
3. Annuity Valuation with Heterogeneous Populations
Previous studies have used an “annuity equivalent wealth” measure to quantify the gains
from actuarially fair annuitization. Intuitively, the annuity equivalent wealth is a dollar measure
of how much value an individual places on access to an annuity market. It is closely related to
the measure of “equivalent variation” used in standard welfare analysis. It proceeds by asking the
question “what increment to and individual’s wealth would make that person as well off as if she
had access to an actuarially fair annuity market?” For a given lifetime utility function, this is
calculated first by finding the utility level associated with full annuitization of the individual’s
wealth. One can then calculate how much additional wealth would be required to attain this same

12

level of utility in the absence of annuitization. This annuity equivalent wealth measure uses the
full annuitization utility level as its baseline. Alternatively, one could use the non-annuitized
level of utility as a baseline, and then calculate how much wealth one could take away if access to
annuities were provided and still leave the person at the same utility level. This latter approach,
sometimes called “wealth equivalence” (Mitchell et al 1999) is similar to the compensating
variation measure in welfare analysis. Both approaches lead to quite similar conclusions about
the welfare gains of annuitization. The annuity equivalent wealth measure has been used more
often in previous studies due to a slight computational advantage, and is used here to make results
more comparable to these other studies.3
To understand this approach analytically, it is useful to examine a much-simplified
problem. Consider a two-period model for a single consumer, with additively separable log
utility of consumption, and the interest rate and time preference rate both equal to zero. Let P be
the probability that the individual will survive to period 2, and let φ be the period 1 price of
consumption in period 2. Then the consumer’s problem is:

Max ln C1 + P ln C2

(3)

C1 + φC 2 = W

(4)

{C1 ,C2 }

subject to:

Taking first order conditions, we find that

C2 =

P

φ

C1

(5)

Note that if no annuities are available, φ=1, and the optimal consumption path is declining
proportionally with the probability of survival. If annuities are actuarially fair, then φ=P, and the

2

A life annuity with a 20-year period certain guarantee means that the annuity will make a minimum of 20
years worth of payments to either the insured or the named beneficiary. If the annuitant is still alive at this
point, payments continue for life, otherwise, the payments end.
3
Readers interested in a more detailed discussion of these differences will find it in Brown, Mitchell,
Poterba and Warshawsky (2001).
13

individual wishes to perfectly smooth consumption over the life cycle. If annuities are available,
but are more expensive than actuarially fair, then 1>φ>P, and consumption will decline at an
intermediate rate.
Solving (2) and (3) and plugging into (1), we find that the indirect utility function
V(P,φ,W) is:

P
 W 
V (P, φ , W ) = (1 + P ) ln
 + P ln 
1+ P 
φ 

(6)

Denote the Annuity Equivalent Wealth as α, which is implicitly defined as:

V (P,1, αW ) = V (P, φ , W )

(7)

The left hand side of equation 7 is the utility level achieved when the individual does not have
access to annuities, so that the price of second period consumption is equal to one, but has
additional wealth. The right hand side of equation 7 is the utility level achieved when an
individual has access to an annuity with a price of φ. The Annuity Equivalent Wealth, α, is a
measure of the additional wealth that must be given to the individual in the absence of annuities
to be as well off as if the individual could annuitize at a price of φ.
Solving equation 7, we find that α = φ

 P 
−

 1− P 

. Naturally, when no annuities are available,

φ=1, and therefore α=1. When the annuity is actuarially fair, φ=P, and α = P

 P 
−

 1− P 

. For

example, if φ=P=.5, then α=1.26, indicating that an individual would be indifferent between
$1.26 of non-annuitized wealth, and $1.00 of annuitized wealth. Therefore, access to actuarially
fair annuity markets can be said to be worth a 26% increase in wealth.
This highly simplified framework allows one to immediately see several stylized results.4

4

Readers interested in a more general and more rigorous theoretical treatment of annuities will find it in
Davidoff, et al, 2002.
14

Result 1: α>0 for all 0<P<1 and 0<φ<1. So long as there are no additional administrative costs of
annuitization, all consumers are made better off by annuitization. Importantly, even if individuals
with very short life expectancies are required to annuitize in a market where pricing is based on
high survival probabilities (i.e., low P and high φ), the annuity equivalent wealth exceeds 1.0.
Thus, the oft-used assumption that annuities be priced actuarially fair is overly restrictive. The
intuition for this is straightforward – with no loading costs, the availability of annuities that are
not actuarially fair for an individual still have the effect of reducing the price of future
consumption for that individual, and thus making the consumer better off.
Result 2: For fixed P (0<P<1),

∂α
< 0 . Any individual with an uncertain lifespan values
∂φ

annuities more highly when they are priced using lower survival probabilities. This is quite
intuitive, since it simply states that all individuals are better off when the price of future
consumption falls.
Result 3: For fixed φ,

∂α
> 0 . For a fixed price, increasing an individual’s survival probability
∂P

makes the annuity more valuable because they are more likely to survive to consume the annuity.
Result 4: When P=φ,

∂α
∂α
> 0 up to some P , and then
< 0 . When annuities are actuarially
∂P
∂P

fair for each individual, increasing P from 0 to 1 has a positive and then negative effect on
annuity valuation. This is because a change in P now has two effects. First, individuals with
longer life expectancies (higher P) are more likely to survive to the second period and thus
consume the annuity, which makes annuities more valuable. Second, high P individuals must pay
more for second period consumption, which makes annuitization less valuable. These effects
work in opposite directions, and thus a plot of α against P is hump shaped. In this simple
example given here, the value of annuitization peaks at P=.278, a relatively low survival
probability. If we were to compare a cross-section of individuals, all of whom had a P>.278, we

15

would find that individuals with shorter life expectancies value individually priced annuities more
highly than those with longer life expectancies! This is in contrast to the intuition of result 2,
which is the standard intuition about annuity valuation. The reason for this result is that
individuals with lower survival rates are rewarded with a lower price of consumption for the
second period.
In this two-period problem, P is a sufficient statistic for both the life expectancy (e.g., the
mean) and the degree of longevity risk (e.g., higher moments). When one moves to a multiperiod problem, life expectancy is no longer a sufficient statistic for how much mortality risk one
faces, and therefore, for how much one values an annuity. Life expectancy is an average, and the
simple economics of risk suggests that the degree of uncertainty around the mean also matters. In
fact, it is possible for a person with a longer life expectancy to value an identical annuity less than
someone with a shorter life expectancy. For a trivial (and very hypothetical) example, consider a
65 year-old man who knows he will live exactly 20 more years and die on his 85th birthday. This
person has no risk to insure against, and the annuity is worth no more to him than the simple
discounted value of the 20 years of payments. If a second man has an identical 20-year life
expectancy, but substantial risk around this mean, he will value the annuity more highly. As
such, there exists some ε>0 such that we can reduce this second person’s life expectancy to 20-ε,
and still have a higher annuity equivalent wealth than the person who will live to 20 for sure, due
to the uncertainty around this mean. As such, it is not accurate to claim that an individual with a
longer life expectancy will always value annuities more highly. A multi-period model will be
discussed in the next section.
So far, we have been assuming that there are no mark-ups of price over marginal cost. If
there are mark-ups, such as in the form of administrative costs, the budget constraint in (4) can be
rewritten as:

C1 + θ ⋅ φ ⋅ C2 = W

(8)

16

where θ>1 for a positive mark-up. This leads us to another straightforward result:
Result 5: If (θ⋅φ)>1, then α<1. If administrative costs are high enough to completely offset the
price reduction that arises from the mortality rates used to price the annuity, then this has the
effect of making second period consumption more expensive, and annuities become less valuable.
This two-period model is useful insofar as it builds some simple intuition for how the
value of annuitization is related to the price of annuities, survival probabilities and administrative
costs. These results generally apply to multi-period models in which the individual has the ability
to choose survival contingent consumption in each period separately, i.e., Arrow-Debreu markets
are complete. For example, if an individual finds that his own survival probabilities in some
periods are higher than those used in the pricing of annuities, he would choose to consume more
in those states. In most “real world” annuity markets, however, the structure of annuity payments
typically constrains one’s ability to do this. For example, in the U.S. Social Security system,
individuals are forced to annuitize in a constant real annuity, and are constrained against
borrowing from future annuity payments. They must therefore purchase units of consumption
across periods in fixed proportions, and this means they are unable to precisely match the annuity
to their preferred consumption profile. When these constraints bind, this will have the effect of
reducing annuity value. Importantly, these constraints will have differential effects on groups
with different mortality expectations. Therefore, the differential utility impact of multi-period
annuity contracts needs to be examined in a multi-period setting to determine if the basic results
of the two-period model go through.
4. Multi-Period Annuity Valuation
Calculating the Annuity Equivalent Wealth (α) for more realistic, multi-period settings
with constraints on the annuity payments can in some cases be solved in closed form. Generally,
however, the presence of liquidity constraints imposed by the annuity structure makes closed

17

form solutions difficult to obtain. In such cases, one way to solve for the α is to use dynamic
programming techniques.
To generalize the problem, let U(Ct) represent the one-period utility function defined over
real consumption, ρ the utility discount rate, and T the maximum possible life-span of an
individual. Then the consumer’s problem, assuming additive separability over time, is:

T − age +1 P ⋅U ( Ct ) 
Max{Ct }  ∑ t
t 
 t =1 (1 + ρ ) 

(9)

where Pt is the probability of surviving to period t, subject to the following constraints:

( i ) W0 given
( ii ) Wt ≥ 0, ∀t
( iii ) Wt +1 = (Wt − Ct + At )(1 + r )

(10)

In these constraints, Wt is non-annuitized wealth in period t, Ct is consumption, and At is
the annuity payment that can be purchased when annuity markets are available. Assume that the
individual, prior to any annuitization, has financial wealth W*. Then for the case in which no
annuities are available, W0= W*, and At=0, ∀t. In the case in which the individual fully
annuitizes all financial assets, then W0 = 0, and At is determined by the pricing in the annuity
market. For the special case in which the annuity is actuarially fair for the individual, At is
determined by the equation:

W* =

T − age +1

∑
t =1

At ⋅ Pt

(1 + r ) (1 + π )
t

t

(11)

In equation (8), the real interest rate is represented by r, and the inflation rate by π. Note
that this formula determines the nominal value of a fixed nominal annuity. The real value of this
annuity declines by the factor 1/(1+π) each period. By setting π=0, equation (3) can be used to
determine the starting value of a real annuity as well. In the simulations that follow, it will be
assumed that r=ρ=.03. By replacing the individual’s Pj with the average Pj for the annuitizing

18

population, we can construct the annuity payments available in a uniform price system. It is also
straightforward to incorporate administrative loading costs into the calculation by multiplying the
right-hand side of equation 11 by one minus the load factor.
In order to use dynamic programming techniques to solve for the optimal consumption
path, it is useful to introduce a value function Vt(Wt), which is defined as:

T − age +1 PU ( Ct ) 
Vt (Wt ) = Max{Ct }  ∑ t
t 
 t =1 (1 + ρ ) 

(12)

subject to the constraints in equation (10).
The value function at time t is the present discounted value of expected utility evaluated
along the optimal path. This value function satisfies the following recursive Bellman equation:

Max{Ct }Vt (Wt ) = Max{Ct }U (C t ) +

(1 − qt +1 )
V (W )
(1 + ρ ) t +1 t +1

(13)

where qt+1 is the one period mortality probability, i.e., the probability of dying in period
t+1 conditional on surviving through period t. The relationship between q and P is:
t

Pt = ∏ (1 − q j )

(14)

j =1

The Bellman equation reduces the full maximization problem to a series of 2-period
problems that can be solved numerically by solving back from the final period. This
maximization is subject to the constraints in equation (10). I use standard methods of discretizing
the wealth space to closely approximate the solution.
To calculate α, the Annuity Equivalent Wealth, one must first find the maximum utility
V* for the case in which the individual has the ability to fully annuitize W*. Because this
individual fully annuitizes, he starts off with zero non-annuitized wealth, W0 = 0. One then solves
for the case in which annuities are not available. That is, At is constrained to be zero for all t. It
is then possible to solve for the amount of additional wealth, ∆W, which must be given to the
individual in the absence of annuities such that the utility without annuities is equal to V*.
19

That is, ∆W is defined such that:
V(W*+∆W | At = 0, ∀t) = V*

(15)

Annuity equivalent wealth is then defined as:

W * + ∆W
α=
W*

(16)

5. Results
The Annuity Equivalent Wealth is calculated for individuals retiring at age 67, which is
the Normal Retirement Age that the existing U.S. OASI system is transitioning towards. The
cohort chosen for this study is that which enters the workforce at age 22 in the year 2000.5
Results are quite similar for other cohorts. Within this cohort, we consider the mortality
differentials across the gender, racial, ethnic and education groups described in section 2. While
it is true that individuals in these demographic groups may enter retirement with substantially
different levels of wealth, the CRRA utility function used in the simulations is invariant to the
scale of wealth and therefore the annuity equivalent wealth measure, which is stated as a
percentage of initial wealth, is unaffected by the differences in wealth levels across groups.
The value of annuitization is, however, related to the degree of risk aversion. In
particular, more risk averse individuals will value annuities more highly than less risk averse
individuals. While there is some evidence that risk aversion differs across segments of the
population (Eisenhower & Halek forthcoming, Barsky, et al 1997), it is difficult to pin down these
differences in a precise manner. Therefore, annuity equivalent wealth values are reported for all
demographic groups for CRRA coefficients one through five. A risk aversion of one corresponds
to log utility, a value that is often found to be the average risk aversion in many studies of
consumption (Laibson, Repetto, & Tobacman 1998). Higher levels of risk aversion have been

5

This is a cohort that has been used in several other studies of Social Security reform (Feldstein &
Ranguelova 2000, Brown 2000).
20

found in other studies, particularly those examining the equity premium puzzle, and thus annuity
equivalent wealth results are reported for higher levels as well.
Table 3 reports the annuity equivalent wealth for the case of a constant real annuity that is
uniformly priced for all individuals. There are several aspects of these numbers that are worth
noting. First, as has been found in previous studies focusing on representative individuals, the
utility gains from annuitization are quite high. Focusing on average men, the annuity equivalent
wealth ranges from 1.35 at log utility to 1.546 for a risk aversion coefficient of 5. Second, even
poorly educated black men, those with the worst mortality prospects of all the groups represented,
have an annuity equivalent wealth of 1.296 when evaluated using log utility. Thus, even though
the money’s worth calculation indicates that poorly educated black men receive negative transfers
on the order of –20% from being required to annuitize at a uniform price, the utility gains are still
substantial. Third, as expected, annuity valuation is rising with risk aversion for all individuals.
Fourth, there is a surprising lack of significant dispersion in the annuity equivalent wealth
figures across demographic groups. The largest effects are between men and women. With log
utility, the difference between the utility gain to average women and that to average men is 11.5%
of wealth. This should be contrasted with the 15.6% difference when evaluated on purely a
financial basis in Table 2. This difference shrinks to only 4.2% of wealth at risk aversion of 5.
Within genders, there is very little difference. For example, the difference in annuity equivalent
wealth of college educated white men and less than high school educated black men is only 6.5%
of wealth when risk aversion is 1, and only 1.2% of wealth when risk aversion is 5. Again, this
stands in stark contrast to the results when reported on purely a financial basis, where the
difference in money’s worth between these two groups was 16.7% of wealth.
These results may seem somewhat surprising given that the financial transfers are so
large. It is important to realize, however, that much of the utility value of annuitization comes
from the fact that it eliminates the risk of running resources down to a very low level in the event
that one lives longer than expected. Even high mortality risk groups have a non-zero probability

21

of living to advanced ages, and the utility gains from avoiding states of low consumption are
quite large. In the absence of annuitization, the optimal consumption path requires a highmortality risk individual to set aside money for the low probability event that he will lived to be
age 100. In most cases, this money will be “wasted,” since the individual is likely to die much
earlier and, in this model, does not value bequests.
As an interesting comparison, annuity equivalent wealth results are next computed for the
case in which annuities are priced for each demographic group on an actuarially fair basis. In
other words, the annuity is “risk-class” priced, so groups with lower mortality rates receive lower
annuity payments. From a financial perspective, the money’s worth for every group is equal to
one. Table 4 reports the difference in annuity payouts that arise under this pricing assumption.
Note that the monthly payment ranges from a low of $553.08 for college educated white women,
to a high of $776.92 for black men with less than a high school education.
Table 5 indicates that high mortality risk individuals value actuarially fair annuities far
more highly than low mortality risk individuals. For example, with a risk aversion coefficient of
one, a black male with less than a high school education has an Annuity Equivalent Wealth of
1.632, meaning that gaining access to actuarially fair annuity markets is equivalent to a 63.2%
increase in non-annuitized wealth. This represents a doubling of the 32.1% increase in wealth for
a college educated white female, despite the fact that the payments are only 40% higher. Once
again, at higher levels of risk aversion, the annuity equivalent wealth rises for all demographic
groups. At a risk aversion coefficient of 5, for example, the annuity equivalent wealth ranges
from a low of 1.435 to a high of 1.929.
Results thus far suggest several interesting conclusions. First, even in an environment in
which annuities are uniformly priced, if administrative costs are zero, all consumers are made
better off by availability of the annuity. Second, while the degree of redistribution appears large
when measured on a financial basis, the degree of redistribution when measured on a utilityadjusted basis is substantially smaller. Third, if annuities are not uniformly priced, but rather are

22

priced based on the mortality experience of each risk class, the high mortality risk groups benefit
the most from annuitization.
High mortality risk groups experience a low money’s worth due to the fact that they are
less likely to be alive in future periods to consume the annuity payments. As such, as was shown
in table 2, they are better off from a financial perspective if the annuity is declining in real terms.
This is because a declining real annuity front-loads payments into early periods, when the
individual is more likely to be alive. As was also demonstrated in section 2, if an individual’s
mortality rate is higher than that used in the pricing of annuities, he will prefer a consumption
path that with a downward tilt. Fixing annuities in nominal terms and letting inflation erode its
real value over time is an example of a product that would provide such a downward slope. Table
6 reports annuity equivalent wealth results for the case of an annuity that declines at a real rate of
3% per annum. This rate is roughly consistent with the average historical rate of inflation in the
U.S. Comparing the results from table 6 with those of table 3 (constant real annuities), it is clear
that most individuals are made worse off by having the annuity decline in real terms. In fact, for
risk aversion of 2 or greater, every group is better off with constant real annuities. Only in the
case of log utility is any group made better off by declining annuities, and one might expect, these
are high mortality risk groups. Specifically, whites with less than a high school education, and
black men of all education levels, are the only groups to do better under a declining real annuity
with log utility. While the dispersion in annuity equivalent wealth does decrease, thus decreasing
the amount of redistribution, it does so mainly by depressing the value of annuities for most
groups, rather than raising it for many. It should also be noted that these are results for a
declining real annuity. A true nominal annuity that is subject to inflation risk would lower
annuity values for everyone. Thus, from a utility standpoint, it seems that front-loading payments
through imperfect inflation indexing is not a satisfactory way to handle distributional concerns.
Another option for lessening the degree of financial redistribution is the period certain
guarantee. For example, an annuity contract that is for “life plus 20 years certain” pays off the

23

longer of 20 years or the insured’s life. Period certain guarantees, usually 10 or 20 years, are
commonly attached to life annuity products. In the context of the present utility-based valuation
model, in which the insured individual is assumed not to value bequests, a period certain product
would not be optimally chosen. Nonetheless, given their popularity, I report results for a 20 year
period certain product in table 7. As one would expect, the overall valuation of the annuity is
lower for all households for the simple reason that a life plus 20-year period certain product has
lower payouts than a straight life annuity. If one does not value a bequest motive, then the use of
a period certain payout operates like a load factor,6 reducing the payouts with no corresponding
utility benefit. As such, the annuity is equivalent to only an increase in non-annuitized wealth of
between 8 and 18 percent, depending on the degree of risk aversion. Consistent with earlier
estimates, however, the degree of dispersion across groups is remarkably small.
All of the above results assume that annuities do not have any additional costs, i.e., that
they are actuarially fair for the average annuitant. However, it is unlikely that annuities can be
provided with no administrative costs. For example, private annuity markets in the U.S. are
estimated to have administrative costs of approximately 8% (Mitchell, et al 1999). Table 8 shows
annuity equivalent wealth results for the case of a uniform price, constant real annuity with 8%
administrative costs. Not surprisingly, all the annuity valuations fell relative to table 3 by
approximately 8%, and the basic finding that there is limited redistribution on a utility-adjusted
basis still holds.
7. Conclusions
Annuities provide valuable longevity insurance to individual with uncertain lifetimes.
However, mandating that all individuals annuitize at a uniform price also has distributional
implications. When measured on a financial basis, these transfers can be quite large and often
away from economically disadvantaged groups and towards groups that are better off financially.
6

Under the assumption of a 3 percent real interest rate and a 3 percent inflation rate, and using the unisex
mortality tables, the switch from a straight life annuity to a life + 20 year certain annuity reduces the annual

24

This paper indicates, however, that the insurance value of annuitization is sufficiently large that,
relative to a world with no annuities, all groups can be made better off through a mandatory
annuitization system, so long as administrative costs are kept low. In particular, even groups with
mortality rates far higher than those used to price the annuities are made better off than in the
absence of annuities. Furthermore, there appears to be far less redistribution when evaluated on a
utility adjusted basis.
These results are based on a counterfactual world in which no annuities are available.
This is not as extreme a counterfactual as it may at first appear, given that outside of Social
Security and some defined benefit plans, annuity markets in the U.S. are quite thin (Brown et al
2001). It is important to note, however, that the distributional consequences of mandating
annuitization in an individual accounts system, for example, will differ depending on the
counterfactual. If, for example, individuals are already fully annuitized in a system that prices
annuities uniformly, then moving to a system of individual accounts that does the same thing will
not have any new distributional effects arising from annuitization (though differences may still
arise from other features of the system). If individuals are already annuitized in a system that
prices annuities separately for each demographic group, then the move to a uniform priced
annuity system would clearly represent a shift in resources away from high risk individuals to low
risk individuals. The story becomes even more complex if, in the counterfactual world, annuities
are available on a voluntary basis only, and at high cost (a fair representation of the individual
annuity market in the U.S.) Mandating annuitization can raise the average payout rate by forcing
individuals into the market, improving the welfare of those who had been annuitizing previously.
It would also improve the welfare of those that would have liked to annuitize but did not due to
the cost structure.
It should also be noted that a full social welfare comparison of alternative annuity
systems would require the specification of an explicit social welfare function. Recent work by
payout by approximately 18 percent.
25

Sheshinski (1999) demonstrates conditions under which uniform annuity pricing can in fact be
social welfare maximizing, and conditions under which it is not.
This paper has focused exclusively on longevity insurance. One potentially fruitful area
for future research would be an investigation of the utility value of other insurance aspects of
public pension systems, such as disability, survivor and dependent benefits. To the extent that
these programs have substantial insurance value, previous studies of the distributional effects of
Social Security that have ignored this value may not tell the complete story about the
distributional effects of social insurance programs.
Future research could also extend the annuity valuation framework to include bequest
motives. While the economics profession is far from a consensus about the importance of
bequests or how to model them, additional work would be useful for understanding the value of
annuities with bequest options.

26

REFERENCES
Attanaso, Orazio P. and Hilary W. Hoynes. 2000. “Differential Mortality and Wealth
Accumulation.” Journal of Human Resources 35(1): 1-29.
Barsky, R.B., Miles S. Kimball, F. Thomas Juster, and Matthew D. Shapiro. 1997. “Preference
Parameters and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and
Retirement Study.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112(2): 537-79.
Brown, Jeffrey R. 2001. “Private Pensions, Mortality Risk, and the Decision to Annuitize.”
Journal of Public Economics 82:29-62.
Brown, Jeffrey R. 2000. “Differential Mortality and the Value of Individual Account Retirement
Annuities.” NBER Working Paper 7560. Forthcoming in Martin Feldstein & Jeffrey Liebman,
eds., Distributional Aspects of Social Security and Social Security Reform. University of
Chicago Press for NBER.
Brown, Jeffrey R. and James M. Poterba. 2000. “Joint Life Annuities and Annuity Demand by
Married Couples.” The Journal of Risk and Insurance. 67(2):527-553.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Olivia S. Mitchell, and James M. Poterba. 2001. “The Role of Real Annuities
and Indexed Bonds in and Individual Accounts Retirement Program.” In John Y. Campbell and
Martin Feldstein, eds. Risk Aspects of Investment-Based Social Security Reform. University of
Chicago Press for NBER. 321-360.
Brown, Jeffrey R., Olivia S. Mitchell, James M. Poterba, and Mark J. Warshawsky. 2001. The
Role of Annuity Markets in Financing Retirement. MIT Press.
Cohen, Lee, Gene Steurele and Adam Carasso. 2001. “Social Security Redistribution by
Education, Race, and Income: How Much and Why?” Prepared for the Third Annual Joint
Conference for the Retirement Research Consortium “Making Hard Choices About Retirement”
May 17-18, 2001, Washington, DC.
Coronado, Julia Lynn, Don Fullerton and Thomas Glass. 2000. “The Progressivity of Social
Security.” NBER Working Paper No. 7520.
Davidoff, Tom, Jeffrey R. Brown, and Peter A. Diamond. 2001. “Annuities and Welfare.”
Mimeo.
Deaton, Angus and Christina Paxson. 2001. “Mortality, Education, Income and Inequality
Among American Cohorts.” In D. Wise, ed., Themes in the Economics of Aging. University of
Chicago Press.
Eisenhower, J.G. and Martin Halek. Forthcoming. “The Demography of Risk Aversion.”
Journal of Risk and Insurance.
Feldstein, Martin and Jeffrey Liebman. 2000. “The Distributional Effects of an InvestmentBased Social Security System.” NBER Working Paper No. 7492. Forthcoming in Martin
Feldstein & Jeffrey Liebman, eds. Distributional Aspects of Social Security and Social Security
Reform. University of Chicago Press.
Feldstein, Martin and Elena Ranguelova. 2000. “The Economics of Bequests in Pensions and
Social Security.” NBER Working Paper No. 7065. Forthcoming in Martin Feldstein & Jeffrey
Liebman, eds. Distributional Aspects of Social Security and Social Security Reform. University
of Chicago Press.
Friedman, Benjamin and Mark J. Warshawsky. 1990. “The Cost of Annuities: Implications for
Saving Behavior and Bequests.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 105(1): 135-54.
27

Friedman, Benjamin and Mark J. Warshawsky. 1988. “Annuity Prices and Savings Behavior in
the United States.” In Zvie Bodie, John Shoven, and David Wise, eds. Pensions in the U.S.
Economy. University of Chicago Press.
Gale, William G. and Joel B. Slemrod. 2000. “Rethinking the Estate and Gift Tax: Overview.”
Working Paper.
Gustman, Alan L. and Thomas L. Steinmeier. 2001. “How Effective is Redistribution Under the
Social Security Benefit Formula?” Journal of Public Economics. 82(1):1-28.
Jordan, C.W. 1991. Life Contingencies. 2nd Edition. Chicago: The Society of Actuaries.
Kitawaga. E.M. and P.M. Hauser. 1972. Differential Mortality in the United States: A Study in
Socioeconomic Epidemiology. Harvard University Press.
Laibson, David, Andrea Repetto and Jeremy Tobacman. 1998. “Self Control and Saving for
Retirement.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity. 91-172.
Lantz, P.M., J.S. House, J.M. Lepkowski, D.R. Williams, R.P. Mero, and J. Chen. 1998.
“Socioeconomic Factors, Health Behaviors, and Mortality.” Journal of the American Medical
Association. 279(21).
Liebman, Jeffrey. 2000. “Redistribution in the Current U.S. Social Security System.”
Forthcoming in Martin Feldstein & Jeffrey Liebman, eds. Distributional Aspects of Social
Security and Social Security Reform. University of Chicago Press.
Menchik, P.L. “Economic Status as a Determinant of Mortality Among Black and White Older
Men: Does Poverty Kill?” Population Studies 47(3): 427-36.
Mitchell, Olivia S., James M. Poterba, Mark J. Warshawsky, and Jeffrey R. Brown. 1999. “New
Evidence on the Money’s Worth of Individual Annuities.” American Economic Review 89(5):
1299-1318.
Palmer, B.L. 1989. “Implications of Changing Male Mortality.” MIT Ph.D. Dissertation.
Preston, Samuel H., I.T. Elo, I. Rosenwaike, and M. Hill. 1996. “African-American Mortality at
Older Ages: Results of a Matching Study.” Demography 33(2):193-209.
Riggs, J.E. and R.J. Millecchia 1992. “Mortality Among the Elderly in the U.S., 1956-1987:
Demonstration of the Upper Boundary to Gompertzian Mortality.” Mechanisms of Ageing and
Development. 62: 191-199.
Sheshinksi, Eytan. 1999. “A Note on the Optimum Pricing of Annuities.” Hebrew University
mimeo.
Sorlie, P., E. Backlund, N. Johnson, and E. Rogot. 1993. “Mortality by Hispanics in the United
States.” Journal of the American Medical Association 270(20): 2464-68.
Sorlie, P., E. Rogot, R. Anderson, N.J. Johnson, and E. Backlund. 1992. “Black-White Mortality
Differences by Family Income.” The Lancet 340: 346-50.
Warshawsky, Mark J. 1988. “Private Annuity Markets in the United States.” Journal of Risk
and Insurance 55(3): 518-28.
Witten, M. 1988. “A Return to Time, Cells, Systems and Aging: Further Thoughts on
Gompertzian Survival Dynamics – the Geriatric Years.” Mechanisms of Ageing and
Development. 46: 175-200.
Yaari, Menahem E. 1965. “Uncertain Lifetimes, Life Insurance, and the Theory of the
Consumer.” Review of Economic Studies 32: 137-150.

28

TABLE 1
Conditional Life Expectancy by Gender, Race, Hispanic Status, and Education

Conditional Life Expectancy
at age 22
Men
Women

Conditional Life Expectancy
at age 67
Men
Women

All

77.4

83.4

83.5

87.2

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

78.3
71.8
77.7

84.0
80.0
85.2

83.6
82.3
84.8

87.4
86.1
88.3

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

80.5
77.8
75.3

85.1
83.9
82.1

84.4
83.4
82.3

87.8
87.3
86.5

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

75.7
71.6
68.1

81.9
80.0
77.5

83.4
82.2
81.0

86.8
86.1
85.1

Notes: “Conditional Life Expectancy” is used to describe the age to which an individual can expect to live,
conditional on attaining age 22 or 67.
Source: Author’s calculations as described in text.

29

TABLE 2
Money’s Worth of Annuities

Real Annuity
r = .03

Nominal Annuity
r = π = .03

Real Annuity with 20year Period Certain

0.920

0.938

0.972

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

0.927
0.862
0.988

0.944
0.886
0.998

0.973
0.964
0.980

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

0.967
0.916
0.865

0.980
0.934
0.889

0.978
0.973
0.964

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

0.916
0.857
0.800

0.935
0.881
0.830

0.970
0.964
0.955

1.076

1.059

1.026

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

1.084
1.022
1.123

1.067
1.011
1.097

1.027
1.018
1.042

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

1.106
1.080
1.044

1.086
1.063
1.031

1.030
1.027
1.022

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

1.055
1.022
0.976

1.041
1.011
0.970

1.023
1.018
1.011

MEN
All

WOMEN
All

Source: Author’s calculations as described in text

30

TABLE 3
Annuity Equivalent Wealth Under Uniform Pricing

CRRA=1

CRRA=2

CRRA=3

CRRA=4

CRRA=5

1.350

1.449

1.497

1.527

1.546

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

1.352
1.328
1.362

1.450
1.437
1.449

1.498
1.488
1.495

1.528
1.522
1.523

1.546
1.542
1.543

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

1.361
1.351
1.325

1.452
1.451
1.434

1.498
1.499
1.486

1.527
1.529
1.520

1.546
1.548
1.540

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

1.343
1.328
1.296

1.443
1.437
1.415

1.492
1.488
1.472

1.523
1.523
1.511

1.542
1.543
1.534

1.465

1.531

1.560

1.577

1.588

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

1.465
1.459
1.487

1.531
1.529
1.545

1.560
1.560
1.570

1.577
1.577
1.585

1.588
1.588
1.597

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

1.466
1.465
1.463

1.530
1.531
1.531

1.559
1.561
1.562

1.576
1.577
1.578

1.588
1.588
1.589

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

1.462
1.459
1.453

1.530
1.529
1.526

1.560
1.561
1.560

1.577
1.577
1.577

1.588
1.588
1.587

MEN
All

WOMEN
All

Source: Author’s calculations as described in text
BC1.g

31

TABLE 4
Monthly Income from $100,000 Policy if Priced Based on Group Specific Mortality

Monthly Income
Men

Women

All

$675.36

$577.36

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

670.42
720.83
629.12

572.90
608.15
553.08

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

642.73
678.25
718.40

561.83
575.13
595.19

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

678.22
725.13
776.92

589.01
608.01
636.84

Source: Author’s calculations as described in text

32

TABLE 5
Annuity Equivalent Wealth with Actuarially Fair Risk Class Pricing

CRRA=1

CRRA=2

CRRA=3

CRRA=4

CRRA=5

1.471

1.578

1.633

1.665

1.688

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

1.462
1.548
1.381

1.568
1.675
1.469

1.622
1.737
1.515

1.653
1.774
1.544

1.675
1.799
1.563

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

1.409
1.479
1.539

1.504
1.587
1.666

1.553
1.643
1.728

1.582
1.674
1.766

1.601
1.697
1.791

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

1.470
1.557
1.632

1.578
1.686
1.783

1.635
1.748
1.859

1.668
1.786
1.900

1.691
1.810
1.929

1.359

1.421

1.499

1.465

1.476

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

1.349
1.427
1.318

1.410
1.496
1.372

1.437
1.527
1.396

1.454
1.543
1.410

1.464
1.553
1.419

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

1.321
1.354
1.399

1.380
1.416
1.466

1.408
1.443
1.495

1.424
1.460
1.512

1.435
1.470
1.521

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

1.384
1.426
1.489

1.449
1.496
1.565

1.478
1.526
1.599

1.495
1.543
1.615

1.505
1.553
1.629

MEN
All

WOMEN
All

Source: Author’s calculations as described in text
BC2.g

33

TABLE 6
Annuity Equivalent Wealth Under Uniform Pricing
Nominal (Declining Real) Annuity

CRRA=1

CRRA=2

CRRA=3

CRRA=4

CRRA=5

1.350

1.419

1.441

1.446

1.447

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

1.351
1.339
1.353

1.419
1.419
1.411

1.440
1.441
1.434

1.446
1.447
1.444

1.447
1.446
1.449

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

1.354
1.351
1.338

1.416
1.421
1.418

1.438
1.442
1.441

1.445
1.447
1.447

1.449
1.447
1.446

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

1.346
1.340
1.321

1.416
1.420
1.414

1.439
1.442
1.439

1.446
1.447
1.449

1.447
1.446
1.445

1.408

1.441

1.447

1.448

1.450

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

1.408
1.409
1.417

1.441
1.444
1.443

1.447
1.477
1.448

1.448
1.448
1.448

1.450
1.451
1.450

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

1.406
1.408
1.410

1.439
1.441
1.443

1.477
1.447
1.447

1.449
1.448
1.448

1.449
1.450
1.451

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

1.408
1.409
1.409

1.442
1.444
1.445

1.447
1.447
1.446

1.448
1.448
1.448

1.451
1.451
1.451

MEN
All

WOMEN
All

Source: Author’s calculations as described in text
BC3.g

34

TABLE 7
Annuity Equivalent Wealth Under Uniform Pricing
Life Annuity with 20-Year Period Certain Guarantee

CRRA=1

CRRA=2

CRRA=3

CRRA=4

CRRA=5

1.105

1.159

1.175

1.181

1.179

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

1.106
1.096
1.105

1.159
1.160
1.152

1.175
1.175
1.170

1.180
1.182
1.177

1.179
1.180
1.178

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

1.107
1.106
1.094

1.156
1.161
1.159

1.173
1.176
1.174

1.179
1.181
1.182

1.178
1.179
1.180

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

1.101
1.096
1.082

1.157
1.161
1.155

1.173
1.175
1.174

1.181
1.182
1.183

1.179
1.181
1.183

1.150

1.176

1.179

1.179

1.181

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

1.150
1.151
1.157

1.175
1.177
1.177

1.179
1.180
1.179

1.179
1.179
1.179

1.181
1.180
1.181

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

1.149
1.151
1.151

1.174
1.176
1.177

1.179
1.179
1.180

1.179
1.179
1.179

1.180
1.181
1.181

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

1.150
1.151
1.150

1.1776
1.177
1.178

1.180
1.181
1.182

1.179
1.179
1.180

1.181
1.180
1.180

MEN
All

WOMEN
All

Source: Author’s calculations as described in text
BC8.g

35

TABLE 8
Annuity Equivalent Wealth Under Uniform Pricing with 8% Load Factor

CRRA=1

CRRA=2

CRRA=3

CRRA=4

CRRA=5

1.243

1.332

1.380

1.407

1.426

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

1.245
1.223
1.254

1.333
1.320
1.333

1.381
1.373
1.377

1.408
1.402
1.405

1.427
1.421
1.424

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

1.252
1.244
1.221

1.335
1.334
1.318

1.381
1.382
1.371

1.408
1.409
1.400

1.428
1.428
1.419

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

1.237
1.223
1.194

1.326
1.321
1.303

1.375
1.374
1.359

1.403
1.403
1.392

1.423
1.421
1.411

1.349

1.410

1.438

1.455

1.465

All Whites
All Blacks
All Hispanics

1.349
1.343
1.368

1.410
1.410
1.423

1.438
1.438
1.448

1.455
1.455
1.462

1.465
1.466
1.470

Whites: College +
Whites: HS +
Whites: < HS

1.349
1.349
1.347

1.409
1.411
1.412

1.437
1.438
1.439

1.453
1.455
1.456

1.464
1.466
1.467

Blacks: College +
Blacks: HS +
Blacks: < HS

1.346
1.343
1.337

1.410
1.410
1.408

1.438
1.438
1.437

1.455
1.455
1.455

1.466
1.466
1.465

MEN
All

WOMEN
All

Source: Author’s calculations as described in text
BC4.g

36

