                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             TRANSPARENCY AND INTERNATIONAL INVESTOR BEHAVIOR


                                             R. Gaston Gelos
                                              Shang-Jin Wei


                                           Working Paper 9260
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9260


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




The authors wish to thank Philippe Bacchetta, Andrew Berg, Patrick Bolton, Tito Cordella, Douglas Gale,
Philippe Martin, Paolo Mauro, Alessandro Prati, David Robinson, Nouriel Roubini, Antonio Spilimbergo,
Jiang Wang, and seminar participants at the IMF for helpful discussions, Torbjörn Becker, Przemek
Gajdeczka, Hunter Monroe, and Anthony Richards for detailed comments on earlier drafts, and Peter Allum
for sharing data. Nese Erbil and Chi Nguyen provided excellent research assistance. The views in the paper
are the authors’ own and may not reflect those of the IMF or any other organization that they are or have been
associated with.

© 2002 by R. Gaston Gelos and Shang-Jin Wei. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Transparency and International Investor Behavior
R. Gaston Gelos and Shang-Jin Wei
NBER Working Paper No. 9260
October 2002
JEL No. F30, D80, G10, G30

                                           ABSTRACT

       Does country transparency affect international portfolio investment? We examine this and
related questions using some new measures of transparency and a unique micro dataset on
international portfolio holdings. We distinguish between government and corporate transparency.
There is clear evidence that international funds invest systematically less in less transparent
countries. On the other hand, herding among funds tends to be more prevalent in less transparent
countries. There is also some evidence that during crises, funds flee non-transparent countries by
a greater amount.


R. Gaston Gelos                                       Shang-Jin Wei
International Monetary Fund                           International Monetary Fund
Room 9-718                                            Room 10-700m
700 19th Street, N.W.                                 700 19th Street N.W.
Washington, DC 20431                                  Washington, DC 20431
ggelos@imf.org                                        and NBER
                                                      swei@imf.org
                                              -2-




1. INTRODUCTION


       In policy circles, lack of transparency has frequently been blamed for the recent financial
crises in emerging markets. For example, the IMF (2001) notes that a “lack of transparency was
a feature of the buildup to the Mexican crisis of 1994–95 and of the emerging market crises of
1997–98,” stating that “inadequate economic data, hidden weaknesses in financial systems, and a
lack of clarity about government policies and policy formulation contributed to a loss of
confidence that ultimately threatened to undermine global stability.” Consequently, the
international financial institutions have actively promoted more transparency among their
member countries as well as made strides to become more transparent in their own operations.
       The strive for more transparency presupposes that destabilizing behavior by individual
investors can be avoided or attenuated by improved provision of information. For example,
international investment funds may be more likely to engage in herding in less transparent
countries (where herding is defined as funds taking investment decisions which they would not
take if they did not observe other funds taking them). As a result, investors may rush in and out
of countries even in the absence of substantial news about fundamentals.
       In theory, however, it is controversial whether lower country transparency yields higher
herding or volatility. On the one hand, one set of theoretical explanations of herding behavior
relies on asymmetric information (e.g., Bikhchandani et al., 1992; Banerjee, 1992; Devenow and
Welch, 1996; Bikhchandani and Sharma, 2000). We would note that there is a natural linkage
between low transparency and asymmetry of information. Low transparency typically does not
mean that no one knows anything. Rather, lower transparency means that less information is
made publicly available, which in turn implies that the gap between those who know and those
who do not becomes larger. Such higher informational asymmetry should therefore result in
more herding.
       On the other hand, herding by institutional investors can be rationalized without an
appeal to informational asymmetry at all, but instead by the incentives faced by fund managers
that result from the need to have their performances compared periodically with a common
benchmark (Scharfstein and Stein, 1990; and Chevalier and Ellison, 1999). In this case, an
                                                -3-




improvement in a country’s transparency would not imply a reduction in international investors’
herding behavior.
       Related to this discussion, the theoretical link between availability of information and
market volatility is ambiguous, as pointed out, among others, by Furman and Stiglitz (1998).
While their argument is not specifically about herding behavior, it is about investors’ trading
behavior in different information environments. In particular, they suggest that if more
transparency means a higher frequency of information release (holding the true value of the
fundamental constant), price volatility could increase rather than decline. The notion that
transparency may not necessarily reduce volatility is reflected in the recent literature on
corporate transparency. In particular, Bushee and Noe (2000) report a positive association
between corporate transparency and the volatility of the firm’s stock price. Firms with higher
levels of disclosure tend to attract certain types of institutional investors which use aggressive,
short-term trading strategies which in turn can raise the volatility of the firm’s stock price. It is
not clear whether this investor self-selection story can be generalized to international context.
Ultimately, the effect of transparency on the behavior of international investors is an empirical
question.
       International evidence on this question, however, is still lacking. To be sure, there are
several empirical studies that measure the degree of herding among funds, including Lakonishok,
Shleifer and Vishny (1992), Grinblatt, Titman and Wermers (1995), and Wermers (1999) for the
U.S., Choe, Kho and Stulz (1999) and Kim and Wei (2002) for Korea, and Borensztein and
Gelos (forthcoming) for emerging markets worldwide. However, as far as we know, there is no
paper that studies the connection between a country’s level of transparency and the degree of
herding by international investors.
       Transparency may also affect the level of international portfolio investment in addition to
its effect on herding. On this, there is less disagreement in the existing literature. In the corporate
finance context, Diamond and Verrechia (1991), among others, have argued that a reduction in
informational asymmetry can increase the investment from large investors and hence reduce the
cost of capital for the firm (see Healy and Palepu, 2001, and Core, 2001, for reviews of the
empirical literature on corporate disclosure). So far, there is no theoretical paper that has
modeled explicitly the effect of a country’s transparency on the level of international portfolio
                                              -4-




investment2. However, it seems reasonable to extrapolate from the corporate finance literature
that an improvement in a country’s transparency can be expected to lead to an increase in the
level of investment by international mutual funds.
       We aim to accomplish two main objectives in this paper. First, we investigate the effect
of transparency in developing countries on the level of investment by international institutional
investors. Second, we examine the effect of transparency on the degree of herding among funds
(as well as related issues). Apart from the novelty of the questions examined, two important
features of the paper are the construction of transparency measures and the use of a unique micro
investment data set containing the country allocation of over 300 emerging market funds at a
monthly frequency over 1996-2000. The investment information at the individual fund level
allows us to measure herding behavior, which is not possible with aggregate data.
       We distinguish between government and corporate transparency. Within the category of
government transparency, we further differentiate between macroeconomic data availability
(timeliness and frequency) and transparency in the conduct of macroeconomic policies.
Corporate transparency refers to availability of financial and other business information about
firms in a country on average. It turns out that each measure contains information not captured
by the other ones3. For example, the correlation between corporate transparency and government
data transparency is 0.02, and the correlation between corporate and government macropolicy
transparency is 0.54.




2
  There are several somewhat related papers which we cannot survey completely here. Portes and
Rey (1999) examine the role of information in explaining cross-border volume of equity flows,
though they do not look at any measure of transparency at the country level. Wei (2000) studies
the effect of corruption on inward foreign direct investment and bank borrowing, but not the
effect of transparency on equity investment by international mutual funds. Using data on U.S.
holdings of equities, Griever, and Warnock (2000) examine how informational asymmetries
affect the home bias.
3
 Note that we do not focus on corruption, the rule of law, or specific corporate governance
aspects, such as the degree of minority shareholder protection in this paper. Rather, we try to
capture as accurately as possible the notion of information quality and availability.
                                               -5-




       The main findings of the paper can be summarized here. First, there is relatively clear
evidence that low transparency – or high opacity -- tends to depress the level of international
investment. Government opacity and corporate opacity have separate, depressing effects on
investment. Second, there is a moderate amount of evidence that low transparency in a
developing country leads to an increase in the herding behavior by international investors. Thus,
if herding by international investors contributes to a higher volatility or more frequent financial
crises in emerging markets, it is not unrelated to the transparency features of the countries. Third,
funds seem to react less strongly to news about country fundamentals in less transparent
countries. Fourth, there is some evidence that during crises, funds flee non-transparent countries
and invest in more transparent ones.


2. Data


       Two sets of variables are crucial for our analysis. The first is a data set on investment
positions by individual international funds in various countries. The second set is related to
various measures of transparency. We explain the two sets of data in turn.


2.1. Data on Emerging Market Funds


       We use data from a comprehensive database purchased from eMergingPortfolio.com
(formerly Emerging Market Funds Research, Inc.). The database covers, on a monthly basis, the
country asset allocation of hundreds of equity funds, a few of which have a global investment
strategy, but most of which have a focus on emerging markets. The period covered is January
1996–December 2000. At the beginning of the sample, the database contains 382 funds with
assets totaling US$117 billion; at the end of 2000, the number of funds covered is 639, managing
US$120 billion. Approximately one quarter of the funds are closed-end funds. The funds are
domiciled mostly in advanced economies and offshore banking centers. We exclude single-
country funds.
       In February 1999, the sample consisted of 9 international funds (not focusing on
emerging markets), 53 global emerging market funds, 125 Asian regional funds, 52 regional
                                                    -6-




Latin American funds, and 39 funds focusing on other geographic areas. Approximately one
quarter of the funds are closed-end funds. The assets of these funds represent a modest, but not
negligible fraction of the total market capitalization. For example, in the case of Argentina, funds
held approximately 6.5 percent of the total stock market capitalization in August of 1998, while
the share was around 4.5 percent for Hungary and Korea.
          The data set provides asset positions in each country at a given point in time (month end).
Since we are mainly interested in the flows to individual countries, we infer their values from the
asset position data under some assumptions on changes in the stock valuation. In particular, we
assume that in any given country, the funds hold that country’s index (or, more precisely, a
portfolio of stocks that is well approximated by the IFC investable index.4 We assume that flows
occur halfway through the period. For investment flow from fund i to country c in month t we
assume that:



               Flowcit = [Assetsi,c,t – Assetsi,c,t-1 (1+ Index returnct)] /(1+ Index returnct)1/2   (1)



          This obviously represents an approximation. However, consistency checks for closed-end
funds show that our approximation is reasonable.5


2.2. Measuring (Lack of) Transparency


          In this paper, we use the term transparency to denote the availability and quality of
information, measured at the country level. In particular, we focus on two categories of opacity:
governmental and corporate. Within the category of government opacity, we construct separate
measures for opacity in macroeconomic policies and opacity in the availability of
macroeconomic information. For corporate opacity, we work with an index of availability and

4
  Where the IFC does not compute an investable index, we used the global index. For countries
not covered by the IFC, we employed MSCI US dollar index data or national indices converted
into U.S. dollars.
5
    The correlation between imputed and actual changes in total assets is 0.93.
                                                -7-




reliability of corporate accounting information. In addition, we use a new composite index of
opacity intended to combine information about opacity in accounting, regulation, the legal
system, economic policy, and bureaucratic corruption. This index potentially crosses the
distinction between government and corporate opacity.


Government Opacity
        On government transparency, we look into two separate aspects. The first concerns the
transparency and predictability of a government’s macroeconomic policies, and the second
concerns the frequency and timeliness of government information release.
        We construct a measure of macro policy opacity based on two measures developed by
Oxford Analytica for Wilshire Associates. Oxford Analytica produced detailed reports for 27
countries, based on which it assigned scores to fiscal and monetary policy. For about half of the
countries, Oxford Analytica relied heavily on the recent “Reports on Standards and Codes”
(ROSCs) produced by the IMF. Because the ratings are largely based on the degree to which a
government’s macro policies conform with the prescribed standards and codes rather than
actually realized size of inflation or fiscal deficits, they have, in principle, been filtered by the
impact of shocks to an economy. We use the sum of these scores, subtract it from ten, and label
this variable MACROPOLICY OPACITY (See Appendix I).
        We construct a measure of macro data opacity based on two indices developed by the
IMF on the frequency and timeliness of national authorities’ macroeconomic data dissemination
for all its member countries. The indices are available for 1996, 1997 and 2000 (Allum and
Agça, 2001). We subtract these values from ten, construct a simple average of the two variables
for each year and call it MACRODATA OPACITY. For the years 1998 and 1999, we use the
values from 1997.


Corporate Opacity
        The yearly Global Competitiveness Report produced by the World Economic Forum used
to include results from surveys about the level of financial disclosure and availability of
information about companies. Based on these results, we construct a summary variable called
                                                 -8-




CORPORATE OPACITY (further details are given in Appendix I). This gives us a one-time
cross-country measure of average opacity in the corporate sector.


Composite Opacity
        The accountancy and consulting company PriceWaterhouseCoopers conducted a survey
of banks, firms, equity analysts, and in-country staff in 2000 to generate measures of opacity in
five areas (PriceWaterhouseCoopers, 2001): bureaucratic practices (corruption), legal system,
government macroeconomic policies, accounting standards and practices, and regulatory regime.
We call this variable OFACTOR.


Correlation Among the Opacity Measures
        A list of countries in our sample and their associated opacity measures are in Table A1.
These different measures of opacity indeed appear to capture different aspects of country
opacity: the correlation among them is positive but far from perfect (Table 1). The overall
measures OFACTOR is strongly correlated with CORPORATE OPACITY (correlation
coefficient =0.69), and the correlations between MACROPOLICY OPACITY and
MACRODATA OPACITY is also quite high (0.63). The relationship between CORPORATE
OPACITY and OFACTOR on the one hand and the macroeconomic opacity measures on the
other hand is low. In order to highlight that the opacity measures measure something different
than just economic development, the table also shows the correlation of the opacity indices with
GDP per capita. The correlation of OFACTOR and CORPORATE OPACITY with GDP per
capita is statistically significant but far from perfect.


3. EMPIRICAL RESULTS


3.1 TRANSPARENCY AND COUNTRY ASSET ALLOCATION


        In this sub-section, we assess whether funds tend to allocate less money to less
transparent countries. To do this, we need a benchmark on how international mutual funds would
invest if all countries were equal on the transparency dimension. We take as our guidance the
                                                    -9-




International Capital Asset Pricing Model, which predicts that international mutual funds should
hold each country’s asset in proportion to its share in the world market portfolio. As an empirical
proxy for the world market portfolio, we choose the popular MSCI Emerging Markets Free
(EMF) Index produced by Morgan Stanley. The index is essentially based on market
capitalization of a country’s stocks that are available to foreign investors. It is common for asset
managers to report their positions relative this index and for investment banks to issue
recommendations relative to it (e.g., “over-weight Singapore” means “advisable to invest more
than Singapore’s weight in the MSCI EMF index”). Indeed, Disyatat and Gelos (2001) report
evidence that the country allocation of dedicated emerging market funds can, to a large extent, be
explained by the MSCI EMF index.
       The empirical strategy in this paper is to examine whether a country’s measure of opacity
helps to explain mutual funds’ investment position after we take into account the country’s share
in the MSCI EMF index. (We will also add other control variables later on.) To be more precise,
we regress the actual country weights on benchmark index weights and measures of
transparency. The EMF index includes only investment opportunities available to the
international investor. The regressions are of the form:


                           wi , j ,t = α j + β ⋅ wibenchmark
                                                   ,t        + γ ⋅ OpacityIndext + ε it            (2)


where wi,j,t denotes the weight of country i in fund j’s portfolio at the end of period t and αj is a
fund fixed effect. The right-hand side variables do not vary with the fund dimension j. For this
reason, we allow for clustering of the errors around the country j dimension to avoid artificially
inflated t-statistics.6 The coefficient on OpacityIndex would be negative if emerging markets
funds systematically invested less in less transparent countries.


6
  See Rogers (1993). A less efficient alternative is to simply form averages by fund and allowing
for serial correlation by country, and we obtain very similar results when proceeding this way. A
related problem concerns the estimation of the effect of aggregate variables on micro data, since
it requires awareness that errors are likely to be correlated within the groups formed by the
aggregate variables (see Moulton, 1986). Aggregating by funds obviously solves this problem.
Alternatively, we allow for clustering of the errors for each country-month group, and the effect
of the transparency variables remains statistically significant.
                                                - 10 -




         There are two things worth noting at the outset. First, the total market capitalization in
any country must be held in the aggregate by some investors. In other words, not all investors
can be “underweight” in less transparent countries. Therefore, our empirical investigation
concerns whether and how the level of foreign investment relative to domestic investment is
affected by opacity. Second, here we ignore any effect of transparency on a country’s share in
the MSCI EMF index itself. It seems plausible that less transparency would inhibit the
development of a country’s financial market, an issue we do not examine in this paper. To the
extent that this is true, our estimates may underestimate the true negative effect of opacity on the
level of international investment. Note, however, as long as the opacity measure is uncorrelated
with the error term in the regressions, its coefficient estimate are still consistent albeit less
precise if opacity is correlated with the share in the EMF index.
         The regression results are reported in Table 2. Without exception, lack of transparency
is associated with lower exposure of emerging market funds. The overall opacity index and all
four indices of corruption are statistically significantly and negatively correlated with country
weights.7 The estimated effect of opacity on international investment is not huge but not trivial
either. For example, the estimate using OFACTOR as the opacity measure suggests that a
country like Venezuela, currently represented with an average 0.4 percent weight in the sample’s
portfolios, could achieve a 1.7 average higher percentage weight in fund portfolios if it increased
its transparency to Singapore’s level.8
        While we believe that the MSCI EMF index provides a good benchmark for our analysis,
other factors might be relevant in determining the country allocation of funds’ assets. Therefore,
we make an attempt to control for many that might be suspected of being correlated with



7
  This finding is similar to that of Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2000), who find that an
interaction variable of an index measuring rule of law and an index measuring accounting
standards contributes to explaining U.S. holdings of foreign equities.
8
 The effect of opacity may depend on market capitalization. We therefore also used percentage
deviations from the MSCI benchmark a dependent variable, leaving out the MSCI index as an
explanatory variable. This reduces our sample since some countries have zero weight in the
MSCI, but the main results are not affected.
                                              - 11 -




opacity.9 (1) Funds might prefer to be overweight in more liquid markets, and transparency
measures might be proxying for market liquidity. Therefore, we include average turnover
(average monthly value traded divided by mean market capitalization) as an additional variable.
(2) Fund managers could prefer countries with strong protection of minority shareholders, and
transparency might pick up this effect. Therefore, we include the summary variable on minority
shareholder rights constructed by La Porta, López de Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) and
extended by Pistor, Raiser and Gelfer (2000) for transition economies in the regressions. (3)
Countries classified by us as less transparent may be countries with closely held stock
ownership. Pinkowitz, Stulz, and Williamson (2001) point out that only a fraction of the market
capitalization in most countries is available to international investors who are not controlling
shareholders. They compute the percentage of firms closely held for many countries, and show
that home bias by U.S. investors can largely be explained by this effect. We include their
measure of closely held shares in our regressions. (4) One may also suspect that our opacity
measures are likely to capture other factors associated with economic development, not
necessarily market opacity. For this reason—although there is no clear justification for doing
so—we also include GDP per capita as an additional explanatory variable. (5) Opacity indices
may be capturing country risks more broadly rather than those specifically associated with lack
of transparency. We therefore include monthly summary risk variables for economic, financial,
and political risk produced by International Country Risk Guide.10 Note that this in some sense
represents an “overcorrection,” since the political risk measure captures some country
characteristics that are related to transparency—in fact these variables have occasionally been
used to measure transparency.11 We also include a three-year moving average of mean returns to



9
The MSCI index weights themselves may be a function of opacity: when a market becomes
more transparent, it may grow and increase its weight in the index. If this were the case, it would
make it harder to find any significant effects of opacity.
10
   For details, see Appendix B. Note that the ICRG variables have been used in the finance
literature to derive expected returns. See Erb, Harvey, and Viskanta (1996).
11
     See Furman and Stiglitz (1998).
                                               - 12 -




capture the possibility that fund managers are return chasing. We allow for the effect of opacity
to vary between tranquil and crises times.12
          When including these control variables, all opacity variables continue to have negative
and statistically significant coefficients, with their magnitude broadly unchanged (Table 3).
Interestingly, during crises, the effect of opacity becomes less important. This possibly reflects
panic selling across all emerging markets during a crisis when the distinction among countries in
terms of opacity becomes less important. In any case, the negative effect of opacity on
international investment (reported in Table 2) is not driven by crisis episodes in the sample. The
coefficients on the other control variables mostly have the expected signs and are often
statistically significant. An exception is that funds tend to prefer politically risky countries.
          Lastly, exchange rate regimes might potentially be correlated with opacity and fund
managers may have a preference for certain types of exchange rate arrangements. While the
ICRG variables contain a component related to exchange rate variability, in another
specification, we therefore explicitly include monthly dummies for five different types of
exchange rate regimes based on recent work by Reinhart and Rogoff (2002). Table 4 adds these
variables describing the features of a country’s exchange rate regime to the list of control
variables. We see that each of the opacity variable continues to be negative and statistically
significant. Concerning exchange rate regimes, funds appear to have a “fear of floating.”13
          A potential problem is that some of our opacity measures were constructed toward the
end or even after the sample period. We therefore also use an earlier measure of corporate
opacity, namely the accounting standard variable proposed by La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
Shleifer, and Vishny (1998).14 The measure was published in 1991, and for Indonesia and
Pakistan we use values published in 1993 following Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2002). We find
that the degree of accounting opacity has a significant negative effect on holdings, with

12
  We interacted the opacity variable with a crisis dummy, which was set equal to one for the
period of the Asian, Russian, and Brazilian crises (97:07-98:01, 98:07-98:09, 99:01).
13
     Calvo and Reinhart (2002) show that governments suffer from a “fear of floating.”
14
  To be consistent with our other measures, we subtract the original variable from 100, so that
higher levels denote higher accounting opacity.
                                               - 13 -




coefficients ranging from -0.025 (t-statistic: -4.06) in the simple regression to -0.034 (t-statistic: -
3.68) in a regression including control variables.
        These results are not the artifact of individual outliers. We compare the means of the
differences between actual and MSCI index portfolio weights for samples in which the opacity
variable was below or above its median (Table 5). The differences in portfolio weights for the
two subsamples are in line with the regression results and the hypothesis of equality in means
can always be rejected.


A Horse Race Among Different Transparency Dimensions
        What is the relative importance of these dimensions of transparency? To assess this
question, we run a simple “horserace” between our measures, including them jointly in
regressions (Table 6). We do not include OFACTOR since it is a summary variable
encompassing both corporate and macroeconomic transparency. When we do not include control
variables except for the benchmark index weights (as in Table 2), the coefficients on each of the
three opacity measures retain their approximate size and significance, while the government
transparency variables become statistically insignificant. By contrast, when including control
variables (as in Table 3), the coefficients become much larger in (absolute) size, with the
coefficient on MACRODATA OPACITY turning positive. We therefore tentatively conclude
that at least corporate opacity and macropolicy opacity separately contribute to a reduction in
international investment.


3.2. The Effect of Transparency on Investors’ Herding Behavior


        Is herding more or less prevalent in less transparent countries? To measure the extent of
herding behavior, we compute a statistic of trading co-movement originally introduced by
Lakonishok, Shleifer, and Vishny (1992).15 The measure allows us to assess whether funds move



15
  Borensztein and Gelos (forthcoming) compute and discuss herding among the funds examined
here. They find moderate, but statistically significant evidence for herding. The mean of HM
across countries and over time is 7.7 percent, about twice as large as the number found for
                                                                                    (continued…)
                                                   - 14 -




in the same direction more often than one would expect if they traded independently and
randomly. The indicator, denoted HM (for herding measure), is given by:


                                   HMit = |pit-E[pit]| - E|pit-E[pit]|,                           (3)


where pit is the proportion of all funds active in country i in month t that are buyers:


                                               # ofBuyers(i, t )
                                pit =                                         ,                   (4)
                                        # ofBuyers(i, t )+ # ofSellers(i, t )


and E[pit] is its expected value. By taking the absolute value, the first term in equation (3)
captures imbalances in both directions, buying or selling.


       The expected fraction of buyers E[pit] may vary over time—for example, there might be
periods of large inflows into emerging market funds, during which we would observe most funds
buying contemporaneously. We approximate E[pit] by the total number of net buyers across all
countries divided by the total number of active funds in that month:


                                                    N

                                                    ∑ # Buyers(i, t )
                              E [ pit ] =   N
                                                    i =1
                                                                                                  (5)
                                            ∑ # Buyers(i, t )+# Sellers(i, t )
                                            i =1




       Since the distribution of the absolute value of the first expression is not centered around
zero, the expected value E|pit-E[pit]| needs to be subtracted. Under the null hypothesis of no
herding, this expected value is calculated assuming that the number of buyers follows a binomial
distribution. It should be pointed out that evidence for correlated trading patterns is a necessary,


domestic U.S. institutional investors. See Kim and Wei (2002a) and Choe, Kho, and Stulz (1999)
for evidence of herding among international investors in Korea.
                                               - 15 -




but not sufficient condition for the existence of herding in a strict sense—the specific class of
investors we are examining may react in the same way to news about fundamentals.
       We compute averages of HMit for each country over the 60 periods. To include only
meaningful notions of “herds,” we include only observations with at least five active funds.
Moreover, in order to limit the impact of approximation errors, we classify a fund as buyer or
seller only if the absolute value of the calculated (out-) flow into (or from) a country is larger
than three percent of the fund’s assets in that country. We then examine correlations between
herding and country transparency. To our knowledge, this is among the first attempts to relate
the degree of herding to country characteristics rather than investors.
       While herding is somewhat higher in less transparent countries, the relationship is weak.
Mean herding values are higher for more opaque countries, although the difference is only
significant at the 5 percent level for OFACTOR and at the 10 percent confidence level in the
case of MACROPOLICY OPACITY and CORPORATE OPACITY (Table 7). Figure 2 shows
the simple, unconditional relation between HM and OFACTOR. There is an apparent positive
association between a country’s opacity and the tendency for international investors to herd
when investing in this country’s assets.
       The results are similar when including control variables. We regress these herding
averages on our country transparency indices, average turnover and average market
capitalization (Table 9).16 Mean turnover (defined as the country average of monthly value
traded divided by market capitalization) should proxy for market liquidity. Herding strategies are
likely to be easier to implement in more liquid markets, where the price impact of any trade is
lower. Concerning market size, Borensztein and Gelos (forthcoming) report that herding is more
pronounced in larger markets, and we therefore include size as a control variable in these simple
regressions. The coefficients on two transparency measures, namely OFACTOR, and
CORPORATE OPACITY are significant at the five percent level. In some cases, the included
variables explain a substantial fraction of the variation of herding across countries (the R2’s
range from 0.01 to 0.3). When including GDP per capita as an additional regressor, only

16
 Wherever we have time variation in the transparency levels, such as in the case of
MACRODATA OPACITY, we use simple averages of the variables.
                                               - 16 -




OFACTOR remains significant at the five percent level (CORPORATE OPACITY is still
significant at the 10 percent level).
        We again carried out a horserace between transparency measures (not shown): since the
number of observations shrinks to 23 while the number of explanatory variables increases, the
estimates loose precision and none of the transparency indices remains significant at the 5
percent level.
        Similarly to our finding on investment levels, the relationship between the degree of
herding and opacity appears to be weaker during crises. We computed the herding measure for
only the crisis months mentioned earlier. In the regressions, none of the opacity variables was
significant at the five percent level (not reported to save space).


3.3 The Reaction to News


        An issue closely related to herding is the reaction of investors to news. Timely and
comprehensive data dissemination by national authorities are intended to avoid situations in
which any piece of bad news––whether accurate or not—is potentially seen by market
participants as the tip of a hidden iceberg, with ensuing panicky reactions which be quickly
magnified by herding behavior.
        Furman and Stiglitz (1998) argue that the mean of investors’ expectations is unlikely to
be affected by a lack of transparency. However, the variance of expectations across investors is
likely to be higher and their prior beliefs flatter. Any information received might therefore have a
larger effect on investors’ beliefs.
        On the other hand, news about more transparent countries will on average convey more
useful information than news about opaque countries, so that markets may react more strongly to
news in transparent markets. Put differently, if one thinks of signals (news) as composed of a
“fundamental” plus an error term (whose variance is a function of transparency), the reaction to
news should be lower the higher the variance of the error term. Core (2001) and Shu (2000)
make this point in the context of corporate disclosure. This view is consistent with the notion that
in transparent markets, investment decisions are largely driven by the reaction to news about
fundamentals rather than by herding behavior.
                                                 - 17 -




        In order to assess whether funds react differently to news depending on the degree of
country opacity, we relate changes in country portfolio weights to revisions in Consensus GDP
forecasts (CONSNEWS).17 First, we regress changes in portfolio weights on CONSNEWS and
an interaction variable of CONSNEWS multiplied with the various transparency variables to
assess the differential effect of opacity.18 Then, again we include control variables to assess the
robustness of our results. The regressions are of the form:


                 ∆wi , j ,t = α ⋅ CONSNEWS i ,t + β ⋅ OpacityIndex ⋅ CONSNEWS i ,t +
                                                                                                     (6)
                 γ ⋅ ControlVar ⋅ CONSNEWS i ,t + η j + ν i + ε i , j ,t


where ∆wi,j,t denotes the change of weight of country i in fund j’s portfolio at the end of period t,
ηj and νi are fund and country fixed effects, and εijt is an error term.
        After controlling for other country variables, including risk factors, the results show that
the reaction to news is more muted in more opaque countries (Table 9). The only exception is the
effect of CORPORATE OPACITY. The results also indicate that funds react more strongly
about news in larger and more liquid markets, since the interaction terms with market
capitalization and turnover are significantly positive. The results are robust to the inclusion of
country random effects.
        These result suggest that the signal-to-noise ratio regarding macroeconomic
fundamentals is indeed lower in more opaque countries. Accordingly, after the release of positive
macroeconomic news, fund managers may want to wait for further confirmation before engaging
in a costly reallocation of assets across countries.




17
   The surveys are published at the end of month in which they are conducted. We use a
weighted average of current-year and year-ahead forecasts: in February, the current-year forecast
is given a weight of 5/6, and next year’s forecast a weight of 1/6, and so forth. We call the
bimonthly difference between these forecasts CONSNEWS.
18
  Note that we do not include the opacity variable as a separate regressor, since opacity levels
should not have an effect on changes in country weights.
                                                     - 18 -




3.4 Flows during crises


       While the overall relationship between herding and opacity is of interest, a more specific
question concerns the extent to which difference in opacity helps to explains which countries are
more likely to be hit by outflows during crises. Are more opaque countries more prone to
contagion effects? Do transparency measures, beyond and above macroeconomic indicators,
explain the degree of confidence loss across countries during turbulent times?
       Johnson and others (2000) have examined whether measures of corporate governance, in
particular the effectiveness of minority shareholder protection, help explain the extent of
currency depreciation and stock market decline across countries during the Asian crisis. They
find that corporate governance variables can account for a larger fraction of the variation in
performance than standard macroeconomic variables. The fact that their regressions contain only
25 observations, however, limits inference. For example, when including GDP per capita, the
coefficients on corporate governance variables become insignificant. It is therefore not clear
whether other country characteristics correlated with economic development, such as
transparency as defined here, is driving the results.
       We relate the size of monthly fund flows during the Asian and Russian crises to our
measures of country transparency. Specifically, we look at flows relative to preceding month’s
holdings of individual funds across countries during the period of the Asian and Russian crises,
namely May 1997-September 1998. [We have also examined the Asian and Russian crises
separately, and found that the main conclusions are not sensitive to the choice of horizons.] The
regression equation therefore had the form:
                      f ijt
                               = α ⋅ OpacityIndex + β ⋅ ControlVar + η j + ν i + ε i , j ,t            (7)
                     Aijt −1


       Where fijt is the flow of fund j into country i at time t, Aijt-1 are the assets of fund j in
country i at time t-1, ηj is a fund fixed effect and νi a country random effect. A negative value of
α indicates that capital outflows are greater in less transparent countries.
       The basic results are reported in Table 11. The coefficients on all measures of opacity
consistently have a negative sign. This suggests that more opaque countries indeed experience
                                              - 19 -




larger outflows during the crises (though the coefficient is not significant for the composite
Ofactor measure). In Table 12, we observe that the link between outflow and opacity is still
visible when controlling for other variables. In particular, the coefficients on MACROPOLICY
OPACITY and MACRODATA OPACITY are significant at the five percent level. In a
horserace between the three opacity indices, MACROPOLICY, MACRODATA, and
CORPORATE OPACITY, reported in Table 13, only MACRODATA OPACITY enters
significantly at the five percent level.
        Note that the estimation technique used here is relatively conservative, since in addition
to fund fixed effects, we include country random effects, which can be expected to absorb a
significant fraction of the variation in country characteristics. Instead of the ICRG risk measures,
we also used crisis probabilities as predicted by the early warning model of Berg and Pattillo
(1999) and Kaminsky, Lizondo, and Reinhart (1998) as controls, without changing the main
results (not shown to conserve space).
        As a robustness check, we also employ a measure of accounting standard quality
proposed by La Porta, López-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998) (LLSV). The measure was
published in 1991 and hence pre-determined relative to the investment positions of the funds in
our sample. It turns out that the results using this variable are very similar to the ones obtained
with CORPORATE OPACITY.


4. CONCLUSION


        This paper represents a first assessment of the impact of country transparency on the
behavior of international investment funds. There are a few noteworthy findings. First, we find
relatively clear evidence that international funds prefer to hold more assets in more transparent
markets. Second, on the other hand, herding among funds is more prevalent in less transparent
countries. Third, there is some modest evidence that during a crisis, international investors tend
to flee more opaque markets.
        We conjecture that the effects of opacity documented here are likely to represent a lower
bound for the overall effects on the universe of international investors that go beyond specialized
emerging market funds. In future research, it would be useful to contrast these findings with the
                                             - 20 -




behavior of other players in international capital markets, and with that of domestic investors in
these countries.
                                            - 21 -                                APPENDIX II


                                   Transparency Variables

Measures of Government Transparency

Transparency of Macroeconomic Policies

        Here, we rely on two measures developed by Oxford Analytica for Wilshire Associates.
Wilshire Associates (2002) had in turn commissioned this work as part of an investment analysis
on “permissible equity markets” produced for the California Public Employees’ Retirement
System. Oxford Analytica delivered detailed reports for 27 countries, on which basis it assigned
a score from 1 (least transparent) to 5 (most transparent) to fiscal and monetary policy. The
reports were to a significant extent based on the IMF’s recent Reports on Standards and Codes
(ROSCs) – the IMF, however, did not assign scores to individual countries. We use the sum of
Oxford Analytica’s scores, which ranges from three to eight, and subtract it from ten and label
the variable MACROPOLICY OPACITY.

Frequency and Timeliness of Macroeconomic Data Dissemination

       The IMF has computed indices of the frequency and timeliness of national authorities’
macroeconomic data dissemination for all its member countries. The indices are available for
1996, 1997 and 2000 (see Allum and Agça, 2001). We use the average of these three values and
subtract them from ten. Then, we construct a simple average of the two variables and call it
MACRODATA OPACITY. For 1998 and 1999 we use the 1997 values.

Corporate Transparency

         The Global Competitiveness Report includes results from surveys about the level of
financial disclosure. The respondents have to assess the validity of the statement “The level of
financial disclosure required is extensive and detailed” with a score from 1 (=strongly disagree)
to 7 (strongly agree). We use the numbers appearing in the 2000 and 1999 issues (the questions
were not covered in other issues), which are based surveys carried out one year earlier. We form
a variable FINDIS by subtracting the original variable from eight. Similarly, the Global
Competitiveness Report surveys the degree of “availability of information” about business.
Again, we use the numbers appearing in the 2000 and 1999 issues, and form a variable AVAIL
by subtracting the original variable ranges from eight. We construct a new summary variable,
which is equal to the simple average of AVAIL and FINDIS, called CORPORATE OPACITY.

Composite Index

        The accountancy and consulting company PricewaterhouseCoopers has recently
conducted a survey of banks, firms, equity analysts, and in-country staff during the third and
fourth quarters of the year 2000 to generate measures of opacity in five areas
(PricewaterhosueCoopers, 2001): bureaucratic practices (corruption), legal system, government
macroeconomic policies, accounting standards and practices, and regulatory regime. This
variable is called OFACTOR.
                                            - 22 -


Data from International Country Risk Guide (ICRG)

        The International Country Risk Guide (ICRG) provides monthly values for
22 components grouped into three major categories of risk: political, financial, and economic,
with political risk comprising 12 components, financial risk 5 components, and economic risk 5
components. Each component is assigned a maximum numerical value (risk points), with the
highest number of points indicating the lowest potential risk for that component and the lowest
number (0) indicating the highest potential risk. The maximum points able to be awarded to any
particular risk component is pre-set within the system and depends on the importance
(weighting) of that component to the overall risk of a country.

        The ICRG staff collects political, economic and financial information, and converts these
into risk points for each individual risk component. The political risk assessments are made on
the basis of subjective analysis of the available information, while the financial and economic
risk assessments are made solely on the basis of objective data.

        The components, which are added to construct a risk rating for each subcategory, are
listed below. For further details, see
http://www.prsgroup.com/commonhtml/methods.html#_International_Country_Risk.


Political Risk Components       Financial Risk Components Economic Risk
                                                             Components
Government Stability            Foreign Debt as a Percentage
Socioeconomic Conditions        of GDP                       GDP per Head of Population
Investment Profile              Foreign Debt Service as a    Real Annual GDP Growth
Internal Conflict               Percentage of XGS            Annual Inflation Rate
External Conflict               Current Account as a         Budget Balance as a
Corruption                      Percentage of XGS            Percentage of GDP
Military in Politics            Net Liquidity as Months of   Current Account Balance as
Religious Tensions              Import Cover                 a Percentage of GDP
Law and Order                   Exchange Rate Stability
Ethnic Tensions
Democratic Accountability
Bureaucracy Quality
                                            - 23 -


                                         REFERENCES

Ahearne, Alan G, William L. Griever, and Francis R. Warnock, 2000, “Information Costs and
      Home Bias: An Analysis of U.S. Holdings of Foreign Equities,” International Finance
      Discussion Paper 691, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

Allum, Peter, and Mehmet Agça, 2001, “Economic Data Dissemination: What Influences
       Country Performance On Frequency and Timeliness?,” IMF Working Paper 01/173
       (Washington: International Monetary Fund).

Banerjee, A., 1992, “A Simple Model of Herd Behavior,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107,
       797-817.

Berg, Andrew and Catherine Pattillo, 1999, “Are Currency Crises Predictable? A Test,” IMF
       Staff Papers, Vol. 46 (June), pp. 107–38.

Bikhchandani, S., Hirshleifer, D., Welch, I., 1992, “A Theory of Fads, Fashion, Custom, and
      Cultural Change as Information Cascades,” Journal of Political Economy 100, 992-1020.

Bikhchandani, Sushil and Sunil Sharma, 2000, “Herd Behavior in Financial Markets,” IMF Staff
      Papers Vol. 47 (September), pp. 279–310.

Borensztein, Eduardo and R. Gaston Gelos, forthcoming, “A Panic-Prone Pack? The Behavior of
      Emerging Market Mutual Funds,” IMF Staff Papers

Bushee, Brian J., and Christopher F. Noe, 2001, “Corporate Disclosure Practices, Institutional
      Investors, and Stock Return Volatility,” Journal of Accounting Research, Vol. 38
      Supplement 2000.

Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart, 2002, “Fear of Floating,” Quarterly Journal of
       Economics, Vol. 117 (May), pp. 379–408.

Chevalier, Judith; Ellison, Glenn, 1999, “Career Concerns of Mutual Fund Managers,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics Vol.114 (May), pp.389-432

Choe, Hyuk, Bong-Chan Kho, and René Stulz, 1999, “Do Foreign Investors Destabilize Stock
       Markets?” Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 54 (October), pp. 227–64.

Chui, Andy C.W., Sheridan Titman, and K.C. John Wei, 2000, “Momentum, Legal Systems and
       Ownership Structure: An Analysis of Asian Stock Markets” (unpublished manuscript).

Core, John E., 2001, “A Review of the Empirical Disclosure Literature: Discussion,” Journal of
       Accounting and Economics, Vol. 31, pp. 441–456.

De Long, J.B., Shleifer, A., Summers, L.H., Waldmann, R.J, 1990, “Noise Trader Risk in
      Financial Markets,” Journal of Political Economy 98 (August), pp. 703–738.
                                         - 24 -



Demirgürç-Kunt, Asli and Enrica Detragiache, 1998, “The Determinants of Banking Crises in
      Developing and Developed Countries,” IMF Staff Papers 45 (March), pp. 81–109.

Diamond, Douglas W. and Robert E. Verrecchia, 1991, “Disclosure, Liquidity, and the Cost of
      Capital, “ Journal of Finance Vol. XLVI (September), pp. 1325–59.

Disyatat, Piti and R. Gaston Gelos, 2001, “The Asset Allocation of Emerging Market Mutual
       Funds,” IMF Working Paper 01/111 (Washington: International Monetary Fund)

Doidge, Craid, G. Andrew Karolyi, and René Stulz, 2002, “Why are Foreign Firms Listed in the
       U.S. Worth More?,” mimeo
Erb, Claude .B., Campbell R. Harvey, and Tadas E. Viskanta, 1996, “Expected Returns and
       Volatility in 135 Countries,” Journal of Portfolio Management, Vol. 22 (Spring), pp. 46–
       58.

Fisman, Raymond, 2000, “Estimating the Value of Political Connections,” American
      Economic Review, Vol. 91 (September), pp. 1095–1102.

Furman, Jason, and Joseph Stiglitz, 1998, “Economic Crises: Evidence and Insights from
      East Asia,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No. 2, pp. 1–135.

Ghosh, Swati R. and Atish R Ghosh (2002), “Structural Volatility and Currency Crises,” IMF
       Working Paper 02/9 (Washington: International Monetary Fund)

Grinblatt, Mark, Sheridan Titman, and Russ Wermers, 1995, “Momentum Investment Strategies,
       Portfolio Performance, and Herding: A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior,“ American
       Economic Review 85 (December), pp. 1088–1105.

G-22, 1998, Report of the Working Group on Transparency and Accountability

Healy, Paul M. and Krishna G. Palepu, 2001, “A Review of the Empirical Disclosure Literature,”
       Journal of Accounting and Economics, Vol. 31 (September), pp. 441–45.

Institute of International Finance, 1999, Report of the Working Group on Transparency in
        Emerging Markets Finance,” Washington, D.C.

International Country Risk Guide, various years

International Monetary Fund, 2001, IMF Survey Supplement, Vol. 30, September, Washington,
        D.C., pp. 7–8.

Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach, and Eric Friedman, 2000, “Corporate
      Governance in the Asian Financial Crisis,” Journal of Financial Economics, No. 58 (Oct-
      Nov), pp. 141–186.
                                          - 25 -


Kaminsky, Graciela, Saúl Lizondo, and Carmen M. Reinhart, 1998, “Leading Indicators of
      Currency Crises,“ IMF Staff Papers, 45 (March), pp. 1–48.

Kaminsky, Graciela, Richard Lyons, and Sergio Schmukler (2000), “Managers, Investors, and
      Crises: Mutual Fund Strategies in Emerging Markets,” World Bank Working Paper 2399
      (Washington: World Bank)

Kim, Woochan and Shang-Jin Wei, 2002a, “Foreign Portfolio Investors Before and During a
      Crisis” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 56 (January), pp. 77–96

Kim, Woochan and Shang-Jin Wei, 2002b, “Offshore Investment Funds: Monsters in Emerging
      Markets?,” Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 68 (June), pp. 205-224.

Lakonishok, Josef, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert W. Vishny, 1992, “The Impact of Institutional
      Trading on Stock Prices,” Journal of Financial Economics 32, pp. 23–44

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio López-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, “Law
       and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106 (December), pp.1113–55.

Mehrez, Gil and Daniel Kaufmann, 2000, “Transparency, Liberalization, and Banking Crises,”
      World Bank Working Paper 2286 (Washington: World Bank)

Morck, Randall, Bernard Yeung, and Wayne Yu, 2000, “The Information Content of Stock
      Markets: Why Do Emerging Markets Have Synchronours Stock Price Movements?,”
      Journal of Financial Economics, 58 (Oct-Nov), pp. 215–260.

Moulton, Brent R., 1990, “An Illustration of A Pitfall in Estimating the Effects of Aggregate
      Variables of Micro Units,” Review of Economics and Statistics pp. 334–338

Pinkowitz, Lee, René Stulz, and Rohan Williamson, 2001, “Corporate Governance and The
      Home Bias,” mimeo

Pistor, Katharina, Martin Raiser and Stanislaw Gelfer, 2000, “Law and Finance in Transition
        Economies,” Economics of Transition, Vol. 8 (20), pp. 325–68

Portes, Richard and Helène Rey, 1999, “The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows,”
        NBER Working Paper 7336

PricewaterhouseCoopers, 2001, The Opacity Index, www.opacityindex.com.

Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth S. Rogoff, 2002, “The Modern History of Exchange Rate
       Arrangements: A Reinterpretation,” NBER Working Paper No. 8963

Rogers, William, 1993, “Regression Standard Errors in Clustered Samples,” Stata Technical
       Bulletin 13 (May), pp. 19-23.
                                         - 26 -


Scharfstein, D.S. and J.C. Stein, 1990, “Herd Behavior and Investment,” American Economic
       Review 80, pp.465-79.

Shu, Susan, 2000, “Firms’ Discretionary Choices in the Face of an Earnings Disappointment,”
       unpublished manuscript, Boston College.
Vishwanath, Tara and Daniel Kaufmann, 2001, “Toward Transparency: New Approaches and
       Their Application to Financial Markets,” The World Bank Research Observer, Vol. 16
       (Spring), pp. 41–57.

Wei, Shang-Jin, 2000, “Local Corruption and Global Capital Flows,” Brookings Papers on
       Economic Activity, No: 2, pp. 303–54.

Wei, Shang-Jin, 2001, “Domestic Crony Capitalism and International Fickle Capital: Is There a
       Connection?,” International Finance, Vol. 4 (Spring), pp. 15–45.

Wilshire Associates, 2002, “Permissible Equity Markets Investment Analysis and
       Recommendations,” prepared for The California Public Employees’ Retirement System

World Economic Forum, various years, The Global Competitiveness Report, Geneva.
                                                - 27 -


                            Table 1. Correlation Between Opacity Measures

                                                 MACROPOLICY              MACRODATA               CORPORATE
                                 OFACTOR
                                                   OPACITY                 OPACITY                 OPACITY

Overall           OFACTOR             1
               MACROPOLICY
Government       OPACITY
                                    0.44                    1
Opacity        MACRODATA
                 OPACITY
                                    0.06                 0.63                    1
Corporate       CORPORATE
Opacity          OPACITY
                                    0.69                 0.54                   0.02                  1
Correlation
with income     GDP per capita      -0.54                -0.40                  -0.03               -0.56
levels




          Table 2. The Effect of Opacity on Investment by Global Funds

                                   O-Factor    MACROPOLICY        MACRODATA          CORPORATE
                                 (Composite)     OPACITY           OPACITY            OPACITY
                                    0.839            0.933             0.829             0.806
               MSCI Index
                                   (36.90)          (47.13)           (37.11)           (35.46)
                                   -0.086            -0.449            -0.371           -0.976
               Opacity index
                                   (-7.13)          (-9.28)           (-2.38)           (-9.74)
               Number of obs.      29,621           24,944            31,180            31,180
               Fund fixed
                                    Yes               yes               yes              yes
               effects
               Clustering by
                                    Yes               yes               yes              yes
               country-month
               Adj. R2              0.66             0.66              0.63              0.62


              Dependent variable: wijt. T-statistics in parentheses (based on robust standard
              errors, allowing for clustering by country-month). Regressions include fund fixed
              effects. Total number of countries: 19–21.
                                                    - 28 -


             Table 3. Opacity and Investment by Global Funds: Adding Control Variables

                                              MACROPOLICY                  MACRODATA                  CORPORATE
                              OFACTOR
                                                OPACITY                     OPACITY                    OPACITY
                                 0.861              0.794                        0.840                    0.818
MSCI Index
                                (43.79)            (24.27)                     (31.08)                   (30.79)
                                -0.156             -0.733                       -0.508                   -1.428
Opacity Index
                                (-8.62)            (-8.35)                      (-4.74)                  (-5.42)
Opacity Index·Crisis             0.009              0.087                        0.215                    0.082
dummy                            (6.60)             (4.17)                      (2.86)                    (4.43)
                                 0.099              0.074                        0.205                    0.079
GDP per capita
                                 (7.18)             (2.47)                     (12.85)                    (2.98)
                                -5.177              1.168                       -1.756                   -7.145
Mean Turnover
                                (-6.09)             (1.12)                      (-2.54)                   (4.65)
                                -0.027              0.006                       -0.065                   -0.039
Share of firms closely held
                                (-5.51)             (0.66)                      (9.78)                   (-5.99)
Minority Shareholders’          -0.208             -0.379                       -0.092                   -0.359
Rights                          (-4.12)            (-6.95)                      (-1.88)                  (-4.80)
                                -0.042             -0.033                       -0.042                   -0.061
ICRG Economic Risk
                                (-2.73)            (-2.15)                      (-2.89)                  (-3.57)
                                -0.013              0.014                       -0.051                    0.007
ICRG Financial Risk
                                (-0.88)             (1.00)                      (-3.02)                   (0.48)
                                -0.119             -0.068                       -0.106                   -0.084
ICRG Political Risk
                               (-14.79)            (-7.63)                     (-12.83)                  (-8.79)
                                20.857             22.873                       16.419                    8.925
Historical returns
                                 (6.49)             (5.18)                      (4.48)                    (2.48)
Number of obs.                 25,255               21,672                     25,379                    25,844

Fund fixed effects               Yes                 Yes                         Yes                       Yes

Adj. R2                         0.66                 0.66                       0.63                       0.60


Dependent variable: wijt. T-statistics in parentheses (based on robust standard errors, allowing for error clustering by
countries). Regressions include fund fixed effects. Total number of countries: 16.
                                                    - 29 -


          Table 4. Opacity and Investment by Global Funds: Adding Exchange Rate Regimes

                                              MACROPOLICY                  MACRODATA                  CORPORATE
                              OFACTOR
                                                OPACITY                     OPACITY                    OPACITY
                                 1.041              0.861                       0.888                     0.861
MSCI Index
                                (47.56)            (23.62)                     (33.23)                   (35.28)
Opacity                         -0.034             -0.602                       -0.494                   -2.197
index                           (-1.44)            (-4.87)                     (-4.59)                   (-8.93)
Opacity                          0.011              0.151                       0.295                     0.111
Index·Crisis dummy               (6.03)             (6.92)                      (3.85)                    (6.11)
                                 0.194              0.184                       0.198                     0.029
GDP per capita
                                (12.55)             (3.86)                     (12.29)                    (1.10)
                                -7.829              0.973                       -5.615                   -9.046
Mean Turnover
                               (-10.39)             (1.27)                     (-7.67)                   (-5.86)
Minority Shareholders’           0.041             -0.174                       0.119                    -0.306
Rights                           (0.68)            (-2.20)                      (2.39)                   (-4.07)
                                -0.018              0.006                       -0.049                   -0.019
Share of firms closely held
                                (-4.25)             (0.67)                     (-7.85)                   (-3.15)
Exchange rate                   -0.181              0.433                       0.557                     0.592
Dummy: peg                      (-0.29)             (0.68)                      (0.82)                    (0.89)
Exchange rate
                               -0.403               0.905                       0.258                     0.355
Dummy:
                               (-0.73)              (1.52)                      (0.41)                    (0.58)
Limited Flexibility
Exchange rate
                               -0.021               1.805                       0.837                     0.603
Dummy:
                               (-0.03)              (2.41)                      (1.15)                    (0.85)
Managed Floating
Exchange rate
                                -3.22               -1.011                     -1.809                    -2.675
Dummy:
                               (-4.77)              (-1.39)                    (-2.75)                   (-4.05)
Freely Floating
Exchange rate                   -0.123               0.647                       0.094                    -0.597
Dummy: Freely Falling           (-0.20)              (0.93)                     (0.14)                    (-0.96)
                                -0.014              -0.040                      -0.072                    -0.105
ICRG Economic Risk
                                (-0.95)             (-2.76)                     (-4.85)                   (-6.05)
                                 0.019               0.028                      -0.022                     0.033
ICRG Financial Risk
                                 (1.55)              (1.53)                     (-1.36)                    (2.43)
                                -0.166              -0.091                      -0.132                    -0.103
ICRG Political Risk
                               (-16.89)             (-8.73)                    (-15.05)                  (-11.60)
                                 0.453              16.189                       15.36                    -3.437
Historical returns
                                 (0.12)              (3.12)                     (3.18)                    (-0.85)
Fund fixed effects               yes                 Yes                         yes                       Yes

Number of obs.                 23,696               20,113                     25,379                    25,844

Adj. R2                         0.69                 0.69                       0.64                       0.62


Dependent variable: wijt. T-statistics in parentheses (based on robust standard errors, allowing for error clustering by
countries). Regressions include fund fixed effects. Total number of countries: 16.
                                                  - 30 -


                             Table 5. Tests of Differences in Means of Holdings

                                     Mean of difference       Mean of difference         Test that
                                     between actual and       between actual and            H0:
                                      MSCI weight for          MSCI weight for        MDLOW=MIDIHI
                                      Opacity Measure        Opacity Measure above      Against Ha:
                                       below median             median (MDHI)         MDLOW>MIDIHI
                                        (MDLOW)                                          (p-value)
    OFACTOR                                0.33                     -0.16                    0.000
    MACROPOLICY OPACITY                    0.37                     -0.07                    0.000
    MACRODATA OPACITY                      0.48                     -0.25                    0.000
    CORPORATE OPACITY                      0.64                     -0.39                    0.000


               Table 6. Investment Levels: Horserace Between Transparency Measures
                              (additional control variables not reported)

                                      Regression incl. only benchmark
                                                                            Regression incl. control variables
          Opacity variable              weights as control variable
                                                                                     (as in Table 3)
                                               (as in Table 2)
                                                   -0.211                                -1.121
MACROPOLICY OPACITY
                                                   (-2.37)                               (-5.67)
                                                   -0.345                                 1.964
MACRODATA OPACITY
                                                   (-2.18)                                (7.25)
                                                   -0.986                                -1.243
CORPORATE OPACITY
                                                   (-5.31)                               (-6.43)
Number of obs.                                     21,826                                16,995

Adj. R2                                             0.66                                  0.77


                              Table 7. Tests of Differences in Herding Means

                                       Mean Herding           Mean Herding (in %)        Test H0:
                                     (in %) for Opacity       for Opacity Measure      MHLOW=MHHI
                                       Measure Below         Above Median (MHHI)        Against Ha:
                                     Median (MHLOW)                                    MHLOW<MHHI
                                                                                         (p-value)
    OFACTOR                                 6.6                      9.0                     0.03
    MACROPOLICY OPACITY                     6.7                      8.7                     0.08
    MACRODATA OPACITY                       7.4                      8.6                     0.29
    CORPORATE OPACITY                       7.1                      8.6                     0.11
                                                        - 31 -


                                                  Table 8. Herding Regressions

                                                MACROPOLICY                     MACRODATA                    CORPORATE
                            OFACTOR
                                                  OPACITY                        OPACITY                      OPACITY
                                0.002               0.003                          0.016                        0.019
Opacity Index
                                (2.48)             (1.04)                          (1.51)                       (2.22)
                               -0.061              -0.026                         -0.074                        0.023
Mean turnover
                               (-0.95)             (-0.34)                        (-0.72)                       (0.44)
Mean market                      0.06               0.149                         -0.007                        0.090
capitalization                  (1.89)             (2.90)                         (-0.17)                       (2.49)
Number of obs.                   30                     26                             37                          31

R2                              0.16                   0.33                           0.13                        0.31


Note: T-statistics (based on heteroskedasticity-robust estimates) are given in parentheses. Regressions also include a
constant (not shown). Coefficients that are significant at the 5 percent level are marked bold.


Table 9. Reaction to News

                                                 MACROPOLICY                 MACRODATA                     CORPORATE
                               OFACTOR
                                                   OPACITY                    OPACITY                       OPACITY
  GDP forecast                    0.460                0.375                      0.321                        -0.499
  Revision                        (1.98)               (4.70)                     (4.42)                       (-2.40)
  GDP forecast
                                 -0.007               -0.039                       -0.47                       0.090
  revision
                                 (-2.17)              (-2.87)                     (-7.84)                      (2.32)
  ·OpacityIndex
  GDP forecast                     3.73                1.414                       3.46                        3.389
  revision ·Mean turnover        (11.85)               (4.78)                    (11.42)                      (11.38)
  GDP forecast                     0.58                3.886                       1.64                        0.775
  Revision ·Mkt cap.              (2.62)              (12.04)                     (6.88)                       (3.36)
  GDP forecast
                                  -0.03               -0.019                       -0.02                       -0.025
  revision
                                 (-8.41)              (-3.12)                     (-7.88)                      (-8.18)
  ·GDP per capita
  GDP forecast
                                 -0.003                -0.019                      -0.01                       -0.003
  revision
                                 (-2.31)              (-12.00)                    (-7.56)                      (-2.06)
  ·ICRG Pol. Risk
  GDP forecast
                                 -0.016                -0.14                      -0.01                        -0.013
  revision
                                 (-4.59)              (-4.31)                     (2.34)                       (-4.05)
  ·ICRG Econ. Risk
  GDP forecast
                                   0.02                0.039                       0.03                        0.026
  revision
                                  (6.91)              (13.32)                     (10.9)                       (9.47)
  ·ICRG Fin. Risk
  Fund fixed effects               Yes                  Yes                        Yes                          Yes

  Country fixed effects            Yes                  Yes                        Yes                          Yes

  No. of obs.                    53,763               45,897                      56,469                       59,231

  R2                               0.01                 0.02                       0.01                         0.01


The dependent variable is the change in country i’s weight in fund j's portfolio at time t, minus the weight at time t-
2: wi , j ,t − wi , j ,t − 2 . Regressions include fund- and country fixed effects. T-statistics are given in parentheses (based
on robust standard errors, allowing for error clustering within funds).
                                                        - 32 -



                    Table 10. Reaction to News: Horserace Among Opacity Variables

                                         GDP forecast                         -1.614
                                         Revision                             (-6.64)
                                         GDP forecast
                                                                              -0.144
                                         revision
                                                                              (-8.08)
                                         ·MACROPOLICY OPACITY
                                         GDP forecast
                                                                              0.013
                                         revision
                                                                              (0.20)
                                         ·MACRODATA OPACITY
                                         GDP forecast
                                                                              0.494
                                         revision
                                                                              (9.03)
                                         ·CORPORATE OPACITY
                                         GDP forecast                          0.094
                                         revision ·Mean turnover               (0.20)
                                         GDP forecast                          4.994
                                         Revision ·Mkt cap.                   (11.70)
                                         GDP forecast                         -0.024
                                         revision                             (-3.75)
                                         ·GDP per capita
                                         GDP forecast                         -0.010
                                         revision                             (-5.19)
                                         ·ICRG Pol. Risk
                                         GDP forecast
                                                                              -0.014
                                         revision
                                                                              (-4.29)
                                         ·ICRG Econ. Risk
                                         GDP forecast
                                                                               0.041
                                         revision
                                                                              (13.65)
                                         ·ICRG Fin. Risk
                                         Fund fixed effects                    Yes

                                         Country fixed effects                 Yes

                                         No. of obs.                          47,454

                                         R2                                    0.03


The dependent variable is the change in country i’s weight in fund j's portfolio at time t, minus the weight at time t-
2: wi , j ,t − wi , j ,t − 2 . Regressions include fund- and country fixed effects. T-statistics are given in parentheses (based
on robust standard errors, allowing for error clustering within funds).
                                                   - 33 -


Table 11. Asian and Russian Crises: Fund flows and Opacity
                                                                                                      Corp. Opacity:
                                            MACROPOLICY          MACRODATA          CORPORATE             LLSV
                            OFACTOR
                                              OPACITY             OPACITY            OPACITY           Accounting
                                                                                                        Standards
                              -0.004             -0.005               -0.01             -0.007           -0.008
 Opacity variable
                              (-1.85)            (-4.40)             (-4.00)            (-3.42)          (-6.94)
 R2                             0.04               0.05               0.04               0.04             0.05

 Country random effects         Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes

 Fund fixed effects             Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes

 No. of countries               27                 26                  34                 30               22

 No. of obs                   12,353             11,866              13,717             13,815           12,141

Note: Dependent variable: Fund-level outflows by country over the period 97:05–98:09 divided by lagged assets in
the respective country. Regressions include fund-fixed effects and country random effects. Z statistics are given in
parentheses. *Significant at the 10 percent level. LLSVaccounting standards=100-original accounting standard
variable reported in LLSV.

Table 12. Asian and Russian Crises: Fund flows and Opacity, including Control Variables
                                                                                                      Corp. Opacity:
                                            MACROPOLICY          MACRODATA          CORPORATE             LLSV
                            OFACTOR
                                              OPACITY             OPACITY            OPACITY           Accounting
                                                                                                        Standards
                               0.001             -0.004              -0.028             -0.001           -0.001
 Opacity variable
                               (3.18)            (-2.67)             (-6.78)            (-0.15)          (-4.48)
                              -0.009             -0.002               0.137              0.054            0.059
 Turnover
                              (-0.36)            (-0.09)              (4.03)             (2.15)           (2.43)
                               0.000              0.003               0.001              0.001             0.00
 GDP per capita
                               (0.27)            (3.79)               (2.81)             (1.66)           (0.00)
 ICRG Economic Risk           -0.006             -0.003              -0.002             -0.002           0.0001
 (lagged one month)           (-1.16)            (-5.45)             (-3.30)            (-3.43)           (0.28)
 ICRG Financial Risk           0.008              0.002               0.002              0.001            0.006
 (lagged one month)            (2.22)            (5.27)               (5.20)             (1.64)           (1.51)
 ICRG Political Risk           0.001              0.001               0.000              0.001            0.000
 (lagged one month)            (6.05)            (2.73)               (1.24)             (3.97)           (0.07)
 R2                             0.05               0.06               0.05               0.05             0.06

 Country random effects         Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes

 Fund fixed effects             Yes                Yes                 Yes               Yes               Yes

 No. of countries               27                 25                  32                 29               22

 No. of obs                   10,758             10,153              11,735             12,008           10,572

Note: Dependent variable: Fund-level outflows by country over the period 97:05–98:09 divided by lagged assets in
the respective country. Regressions include fund-fixed effects and country random effects. Z statistics are given in
parentheses. *Significant at the 10 percent level. LLSVaccounting standards=100-original accounting standard
variable reported in LLSV.
                                                    - 34 -


               Table 13. Asian and Russian Crises: Horserace Among Opacity indices
                                       MACRODATA                   -0.035
                                       OPACITY                     (-3.54)
                                       MACROPOLICY                  0.004
                                       OPACITY                      (1.32)
                                       CORPORATE                   -0.012
                                       OPACITY                     (-1.72)
                                                                    0.204
                                       Turnover
                                                                    (3.28)
                                                                    0.002
                                       GDP per capita
                                                                    (1.94)
                                       ICRG Economic Risk          -0.002
                                       (lagged one month)          (-3.45)
                                       ICRG Financial Risk          0.003
                                       (lagged one month)           (5.27)
                                       ICRG Political Risk          0.000
                                       (lagged one month)           (0.73)
                                       R2                            0.07

                                       Country random effects        Yes

                                       Fund fixed effects            Yes

                                       No. of countries              22

                                       No. of obs                   9,037

Note: Dependent variable: Fund-level outflows by country over the period 97:05–98:09 divided by lagged assets in
the respective country. Regressions include fund-fixed effects and country random effects. Z statistics are given in
parentheses. *Significant at the 10 percent level. LLSVaccounting standards=100-original accounting standard
variable reported in LLSV.
                                     - 35 -


Table A1. Opacity Measures

                                  MACRO       MACRO
                    O-FACTOR       DATA                 CORPOPRATE   LLSV Accounting
COUNTRY                                       POLICY
                    (composite)   OPACITY                 OPACITY       OPACITY
                                              OPACITY

Argentina               40          0.20         2         3.13            55
Bangladesh               .          1.79         .           .              .
Botswana                 .          3.32         .           .              .
Brazil                  34          0.11         2         3.03            46
Chile                   23          0.62         2         2.20            48
China                               1.87         7         4.23             .
Colombia                39          1.27         3         3.57            50
Czech Rep.              41          0.27         2         3.76             .
Ecuador                 42          0.55         .         5.06             .
Egypt                   39          1.81         6         3.66            76
Ghana                    .          2.20         .           .              .
Greece                  37          1.55         .         3.13            45
Hong Kong SAR           29          1.94         .         2.18            31
Hungary                 31          0.35         2         3.23             .
India                   38          1.45         4         3.22            43
Indonesia               47          0.71         4         3.83            65
Israel                  35          0.63         3         2.29            36
Jordan                   .          1.24         5         3.17             .
Kenya                   43          1.13         .           .              .
Korea                   42          1.00         3         3.25            38
Malaysia                 .          0.86         4         2.86            24
Mauritius                .          2.91         .         3.14             .
Mexico                  33          0.32         3         3.36            40
Morocco                 34          1.59         4           .              .
Pakistan                38          1.10         7           .             61
Peru                    38          0.46         3         3.39            62
Philippines             37          0.38         3         3.40            35
Poland                  44          0.51         3         3.33             .
Portugal                 .          0.56         .         2.88            64
Romania                  .          0.41         .           .              .
Russia                  55          0.34         5         4.21
South Africa            34          0.73         3         2.55            30
Singapore               22          0.84         .         2.06            22
Slovak Rep.             38          0.27         .         3.78             .
Sri Lanka                .          1.12         6           .              .
Taiwan                  37            .          4         2.59            35
Thailand                42          0.51         5         3.75            36
Turkey                  46          0.50         5         2.89            49
Venezuela               42          0.90         6         4.28            60
Zimbabwe                46          1.40         .         3.17             .
                                     - 36 -


                          Figure 1. Mean Herding and Opacity

               .15
Mean herding




                .1




               .05




                     20    30            40           50       60
                                       ofactor
