                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            EXCHANGE RATES AND CASUALTIES
                              DURING THE FIRST WORLD WAR


                                             George J. Hall


                                          Working Paper 9261
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9261


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




I thank Michael Bordo, William Brainard, Timothy Guinnane, Lingfeng Li, Thomas Sargent, and Mark
Watson for helpful conversations. I thank Richard Burdekin, Marc Weidenmier, and seminar participants at
Yale and Rutgers for constructive comments. The views expressed herein are those of the author and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by George J. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Exchange Rates and Casualties During the First World War
George J. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 9261
October 2002
JEL No. N1, E4

                                          ABSTRACT

       I estimate two factor models of Swiss exchange rates during the FirstWorldWar. I have data
for five of the primary belligerents: Britain, France, Italy, Germany, and Austria-Hungary. At the
outbreak of the war, these nations suspended convertibility of their currencies into gold with the
promise that after the war each would restore convertibility at the old par. However, once
convertibility was suspended, the value of each currency depended on the outcome of the war. I
decompose exchange rate movements into a common trend, a common factor, and country-specific
factors. Movements in the common trend are consistent with the quantity theory of money. The
common factor contains information on contemporaries’ expectations about the war’s resolution.
Innovations to this common factor are correlated with time series on soldiers killed, wounded, and
taken prisoner.

George J. Hall
Department of Economics
Yale University
P.O. Box 208268
New Haven, CT 06520-8268
and NBER
e-mail: george.hall@yale.edu
1 Introduction

Throughout World War I, Switzerland, a neutral country, traded with both sides of the conflict. Conse-
quently the Swiss franc was actively traded throughout the war in foreign exchange markets in Basle,
Paris, London, and Berlin. Price data on the currencies of five belligerent nations indicate that while these
governments tried to influence the value of their currencies during the war, they were not entirely success-
ful. As the war progressed their ability to manipulate currency markets declined, and the value of their
currencies relative to the Swiss franc fell. While this relative decrease in currency values can be attributed
to differences in money growth rates, it also appears that the value of the belligerents’ currencies fluctuated
with military news. In particular, good war news for the Allies increased the value of the Allied currencies
relative to the currencies of the Central Powers and vice versa.
    To formalize these observations, I construct and estimate two factor models. On the Allied side I
have data on the British, French, and Italian rates. Of the Central Powers, I have data on German and
Austro-Hungarian exchange rates. Since I have data on both Central and Allied countries, I can decompose
movements in currency prices into movement due to a common trend, movements due to a common factor,
and movements due to country-specific factors. Consistent with the quantity theory of money, the common
trend is highly correlated with a common trend in the money stocks of the belligerent countries. The
common factor, on the other hand, rises with good news for the Allies and falls with good news for the
Central Powers. I interpret this common factor as a measure of contemporaries’ expectations of the war’s
outcome.
    Using time series on casualties from the Western Front, I compute a “net body count” by subtracting the
number of Germans killed and wounded from the number of British killed and wounded. I also compute
a “net POWs” series by subtracting the number of Germans taken prisoner from the number of British
taken prisoner. Innovations to the common factor are positively correlated with the net body count series
and negatively correlated with the net POWs series. Since offensive campaigns usually resulted in less
favorable net body counts, these correlations suggest that being on the offensive was viewed positively
by financial markets. The negative correlation between net POWs and innovations to the common factor
suggests that the number of soldiers taken prisoner is a proxy for morale and the willingness of soldiers to
continue fighting. Taken together, these findings support the view expressed by Niall Ferguson in his 1998
book The Pity of War that the key to victory in the First World War was not directly due to ones’ ability to
kill and wound the enemy, but rather due to the willingness of the enemy to surrender.


                                                       2
    Traditionally during times of war, governments induced money- and bond-holding by promising, con-
tingent on winning the war, postwar deflation. Bordo and Kydland (1995) argue that the gold standard,
as practiced from 1880 to 1914, represented a state-contingent policy rule. During calm periods, each
government on the gold standard kept the value of its currency fixed in terms of gold. But in the event of a
well understood, exogenously produced crisis, such as a war, gold convertibility could be suspended with
the understanding that, after the crisis had safely passed, convertibility would be restored at the old par.
During the crisis, the government could issue paper money and sell debt to meet its short-term spending
needs; but in doing so, it had to commit (either explicitly or implicitly) to eventually pay off this new debt
in gold. Implicit in this policy rule is that after the resolution of the crisis, the government commits to
undertake deflationary policies sufficient to return to the gold standard at the original parity.
    This state-contingent policy was carried out by Britain in the Napoleonic Wars and to some extent by
both sides in the American Civil War. 1 During the U.S. Civil War, both sides promised to carry out this
state-contingent policy; however after the war, only the Union was able to honor its commitments. The
Union was on the gold standard prior to the outbreak of the Civil War. During the hostilities the Union
suspended specie payments and issued an unbacked currency, the greenback; this led to an increase in
the money supply and a 70 percent rise in the price level during the war. Despite substantial political
opposition, the U.S. undertook deflationary policies after the war and returned to convertibility at the pre-
war parity in 1879. The Confederacy attempted to carry out a similar policy. It issued non-interest bearing
notes (the graybacks) that specified a date that the government promised to redeem the obligations for gold.
Of course, by the conclusion of the war the Confederate government could not honor its commitments,
and these notes were worthless.
    During the First World War, governments on both sides promised, contingent on winning the war,
to restore convertibility at the old par; however, despite all of the belligerent governments surviving the
war (unlike the U.S. Confederacy), several governments could not afford to (or chose not to) implement
postwar deflation sufficient to restore the old par. While Britain, Switzerland, and several Scandinavian
countries (Denmark, Norway, and Sweden) resumed convertibility at the original par by 1925, France and
Italy chose to resume convertibility at new lower level of par. Germany, as well as the newly formed nations
of Austria and Hungary, made no attempt to return to the gold standard after the war but instead engineered
   1 See Bordo and White (1991) for a description of British debt management polices during the eighteenth and early nineteenth

centuries. Bordo and White argue that Britain’s fiscal and monetary policies were consistent with Barro’s (1979) tax smoothing
model with non-state contingent debt. I interpret changes in the price level as the mechanism Britain used to incorporate state-
contingencies into its debt. See in particular figure 8.9 of Bordo and White.



                                                               3
a hyperinflation. Through this policy of hyperinflation, the German government effectively defaulted
on its nominal obligations and convinced the Allies to reduce the required reparation payments. If all
governments were expected to return to their old pars soon after the war, currency values would simply
be a function of the expected duration of the war. However, during World War I many contemporaries
believed that much of the costs would be paid by the losers. The issue of reparations is one potential
contributing factor in leading the Allied and Central Power currencies to move in opposite directions.
    Germany at the end of the Franco-Prussian War, in 1871, had imposed a large indemnity on France
and hoped to do the same at the end of this war. Indeed throughout the war Germany made only modest
attempts to finance its wartime expenditures through taxation and thus depended almost solely on loans to
finance its military.2 While the German government hoped to avoid the inefficiencies of additional direct
distortionary taxation of its citizenry during the war, it believed it would be able to shift its costs onto
Britain and France after the war. Dr. Karl Helfferich, Minister of Finance of the German government
stated on March 10, 1915:
          The Federated Governments ... believe that they should not aggravate the already heavy
       burden of the war by new taxes or increases of taxes. ... We have a firm hope that after the
       conclusion of peace we shall present to our opponents a bill for the expenses of the war forced
       upon us. (Bogart, 1921 and Kuczynski, 1923)

On August 20, 1915 he went on to say:
            We do not wish to increase by taxation during the war the tremendous burden which our
       people bear, so long as there is no compelling necessity. ... As things are, the only method
       seems to be to leave the settlement of the war bill to the conclusion of peace, and the time
       after peace has been concluded. And on this I would say: If God grant us victory and with
       it the possibility of moulding the peace to suit our needs, we neither can nor will forget the
       question of costs. We owe that to the future of our people. The whole course of the future
       development of their lives must, if at all possible, be freed from the appalling burden caused
       by the war. Those who provoked the war, and not we, deserve to drag through the centuries to
       come the leaden weight of these milliards.(Bogart, 1921 and Kuczynski, 1923)

This view was not uniquely held by the Central Powers.
    Although the Allies used taxation to cover a larger share of their war expense than the Central Powers,
there was little doubt during the last two years of the war that the Central Powers (particularly Germany)
   2 See Kuczynski (1923) for a detailed discussion of German tax policy during the war. Interestingly, Kuczynski argues that
German fiscal policy was designed to cover expenses of the “peace budget, excluding army and navy” and the interest on war debt
through taxation and to cover the expenses of the “peace budget for army and navy” and the wartime expenditures through debt.
These intentions are consistent with the optimal tax smoothing policy implied by Barro (1979). The Germans were unsuccessful
in carrying out this policy and much of the interest on the war debt was covered by new loans.


                                                              4
were expected to pay the bill for the damage caused by the war. 3 The Allies had repeatedly stated that their
objectives in the war included “the restoration of Belgium, of Serbia, and of Montenegro, and the indem-
nities that are due them; the evacuation of the invaded territories of France, of Russia, and of Roumania
with just reparation.” (Burnett, 1965, Document 5, Reply of the Allies to Wilson, January 10, 1917.)
    Even without the possibility of reparations, once off the gold standard each currency became a contin-
gent claim that depended on the likelihood and timing of the country’s return to the gold standard at the
old par. Restrictions imposed by the government budget constraint required the value of these obligations
to depend not only on the quantity outstanding but also on the expected discounted present value of the
future stream of primary surpluses. Hence as traders learned about the war’s length and costs, forecasts of
future government surpluses for the belligerents would generally move together; it follows that the value
of all the belligerents’ currencies should move together. However with the possibility of reparations, the
expected value of future primary surpluses depended critically on winning or losing the war. Thus the gov-
ernment’s ability to resume convertibility at the old par depended not only on when but also how the war
would end. One would expect that the value of Allied currencies would at times move in opposite direc-
tions to those of the Central Powers. If this is the case, the value of these nominal government obligations
provide information about contemporaries’ expectations of the duration and resolution of the war.
    The idea that war news influences the value of a nation’s currency and other claims on the government
is an old one. In 1903 Wesley Mitchell argued that many of the rapid and violent movements in the value
of the Greenback during the U.S. Civil War could not be explained by changes in the volume of money
outstanding as the quantity theory of money would predict; instead, many of these movements were the
result of news from the battlefield. Likewise, Roll (1972) documents that during the Civil War federal
bond prices and thus interest rates were also a function of war news. More recently Willard, Guinnane,
and Rosen (1996) study daily price data for U.S. Greenbacks from the New York gold market. They
employ a purely statistical method to distinguish between events that have long-lived effects on prices
(“turning points”) and those events that simply generated “blips” in the data. Brown and Burdekin (2000)
apply Willard, Guinnane, and Rosen’s methodology to price data on Confederate bonds traded in Europe.
These studies use data from one side of the war. But war is (at least) a two-sided activity, so it is useful to
incorporate data from all sides. McCandless (1996) estimates a single-factor model for the U.S. Civil War
using data on gold prices from both the Union and Confederacy. Weidenmier (1999) uses both Confederate
   3 Kuczynski (1923) reports that the tax revenue available to Great Britain for wartime expenditures was three times as high as

in Germany.



                                                               5
and Union currency prices to test the hypotheses that the Union was fighting to win while the Confederacy
was only fighting for a draw. Frey and Kucher (1997) use Willard, Guinnane, and Rosen’s methodology to
study the prices of German, Austrian, French, Belgian, and Swiss government bonds traded in Switzerland
during World War II, though they analyze each of these countries individually.
    Most of the papers cited in the previous paragraph follow Wesley Mitchell and ask whether battlefield
news or the quantity theory of money is the primary determinant of currency prices during a war. I take
a different approach by decomposing the changes in currency values into three components. I find that
movements in the first component, a common trend, are consistent with quantity theory of money. Move-
ments in the second component, a common factor, are correlated with news from the battlefield. Thus for
the exchange rate data I study these two explanations are not mutually exclusive.


2 The Exchange Rate Data

I collected daily and monthly data on Swiss exchange rates during the war. Daily exchange rates from
January 4, 1916 to November 30, 1918 are from three separate sources. The British-Swiss exchange rates,
taken from the London Times, are the average of the high and low trading prices on the London Course
of Exchange. The French-Swiss exchange rates, taken from Le Petit Parisien, are the average of the bid
and ask prices from the Paris bourse. The German-Swiss exchange rates from January 1916 to November
1918 were provided by the Deutsche Bundesbank; they are the average exchange rate in Berlin. The
monthly exchange rate data are taken from Appendix VIII of the Swiss Bank Corporation report, Revue
Commerciale et Industrielle Suisse, 1914-1918 published in 1919. The data are monthly averages of the
offer and demand quotations for sight drafts on the British pound, French franc, Italian lira, German mark,
and Austrian-Hungarian kronen at the Basle bourse from July 1914 to November 1918.
    The theory discussed in the introduction suggests that currency holders would be more concerned with
the price of gold than with price of the Swiss franc. I am assuming the price of the Swiss franc in terms of
the belligerent currency multiplied by the price of gold in terms of the Swiss franc is equal to the price of
gold in terms of the belligerent currency. I would prefer to study data on the market price of gold in terms
of each one of these five currencies. Unfortunately, I was unable to find any reliable series on the market
price of gold. For example, the Bundesbank reported in a personal correspondence that the official price
of gold in terms of marks was unchanged at 1 Kilogram = 2790 Marks from 1914-1918.
    Prior to the war, all five belligerent countries were either explicitly on the gold standard or had a policy



                                                       6
of keeping the value of their currency near the nominal par. By August of 1914, all five of these belligerent
countries had effectively suspended convertibility of their currency into gold and placed restrictions on
the exportation of gold. All of the belligerent nations attempted to maintain stable exchange rates. The
most effective of the stabilization policies was carried out by the Allies. In April 1916 the French and
British governments agreed to stabilize the franc-sterling exchange rate through gold exports from France
to Britain and loans. During this time, the sterling-dollar exchange rate was also stabilized, so the relative
prices of US, French, and British currency were effectively fixed for the remainder of the war. In the
summer of 1918 Italy made various agreements with the United States, Great Britain, and France to enter
into the Allies fixed exchange rate agreement.
    While the Allies were eventually successful in their attempts to fix the intra-Allied exchange rates,
the Central Powers were less so. During the first week of war, Germany went off the gold standard and
almost immediately engaged in a policy of using short-term domestic credit to finance its war effort.
While Germany was able from time to time to obtain some loans from Switzerland and the Scandinavian
countries, it had substantial trouble obtaining long-term loans from foreign sources. As sources of credit
started to run out, the German and Austrian governments tried several times to stabilize its exchange
rates by setting up consortiums of banks to carry out all foreign exchange transactions at fixed rates.
Nevertheless, as the war progressed, these consortiums were unable to maintain the value of the mark and
kronen due to a lack of funds.
    Several features of the gold standard remained intact for the duration for the war. The definition of
the gold content of the standard coins remained unchanged. The central banks and treasuries continued
to honor their obligations to purchase gold at the fixed mint prices, and no restrictions were placed on
the import of gold. Nevertheless, the existence of these consortiums and controls suggests that the war
period was one of fixed prices. However, while some of these exchange rates were fixed successfully
(e.g. the dollar-sterling-French franc), others were less successful. Maintaining fixed exchange rates is
expensive. As the war progressed, the belligerents became poorer, and their ability and willingness to
maintain their exchange rates declined. All of these currencies fell in value relative to the primary neutral
nations, Switzerland, Sweden, Denmark, and Spain.
    I do not have data on the volume of trades that took place in any of the four foreign exchange markets
from which I have price data. However, there is evidence that foreign exchange was a relatively thick,
liquid market in Switzerland during the war. The Swiss Bank Corporation (1919) states that during the war
“In Switzerland, in Holland, and the Scandinavian countries, the operations in foreign exchange have taken


                                                      7
                  country                              1913       1914    1915     1916     1917      1918
                  Great Britain            imports     113         76     112      160      269        248
                                           exports      236       234      355      424      362       269
                   France                  imports      348       221      189      236      305      208
                                           exports      141       115      220      401      462      466
                   Italy                   imports      207       194      259      390      369      222
                                           exports       91        89       89      150      136       97
                   Austria-Hungary         imports      109       103      66       45        44      61
                                           exports       78        67      157      195       93      101
                   Germany                 imports      631       481      418      472      483      619
                                           exports      306       274      457      709      698      445


Table 1: Swiss imports from and exports to each of the five belligerents, 1913-1918, in millions of nominal
Swiss Francs.
Source: Swiss Bank Corporation, (1920) La Situation Economique et Financiere de la Suisse: 1919, page 36.


on an unaccustomed, and surely temporary, importance.” Both the Swiss Bank Corporation (1918) and the
Federal Reserve Bulletin (1918) report that “Owing to its central geographic position, foreign exchange
rates in Switzerland have come to be regarded as on the whole the most reliable basis for international
comparisons.”4 Brown (1940, pages 13-14) reports that after the outbreak of the war “Remittance between
the Central Powers and the Allied world continued to be made, though with difficulty, through markets
of Germany’s neutral neighbors. The Swiss foreign exchange market in particular became extremely
important in the world economy for this reason ...”
    Switzerland actively traded with both the Central and Allied countries. Table 1 shows that the Swiss
traded roughly equal amounts with both sides throughout the war. While exports and imports fell at
the outbreak of hostilities, as the war progressed trade with the belligerents increased. Multiplying each
number in table 1 by 4.25 provides a rough estimate of the magnitude in 2001 U.S. dollars of Swiss trade
with each of the belligerents.5 In 1915 Switzerland imported about $1.8 billion worth of goods (in 2001
dollars) from Germany and exported about $950 million worth of goods to France. Young (1925) also
reports that Swiss private investors bought considerable amounts of foreign securities. This level of trade
would support a sufficiently large volume of foreign exchange to ensure that the rate data I study are
meaningful. Finally, I have exchange rate data from three other neutral countries: Denmark, Sweden, and
    4 The quote is taken from the Federal Reserve Bulletin (May 1, 1918, page 390) though it appears to have been translated

directly from page 63 of the Swiss Bank Corporation (1918) Revue Economique et Financiere Suisse.
    5 During this time period, one Swiss franc was worth between 20 and 25 U.S. cents. One U.S. dollar in 1915 is equivalent to

$17.50 in 2001.


                                                              8
                                                        Standardized Monthly Exchange Rates
         2.5

             2

         1.5

             1

         0.5

             0

        −0.5

            −1

        −1.5           Britain
                       France
                       Italy
            −2         Austria−Hungary
                       Germany
        −2.5
                            15




                                                         16




                                                                                       17




                                                                                                               18




                                                                                                                                              19
             4




                                               5




                                                                        6




                                                                                                    7




                                                                                                                                  8
            91




                                              91




                                                                       91




                                                                                                   91




                                                                                                                              91
                           19




                                                        19




                                                                                      19




                                                                                                              19




                                                                                                                                             19
        l1




                                          l1




                                                                   l1




                                                                                               l1




                                                                                                                             l1
                       n




                                                    n




                                                                                  n




                                                                                                          n




                                                                                                                                         n
       Ju




                                      Ju




                                                                  Ju




                                                                                             Ju




                                                                                                                         Ju
                      Ja




                                                   Ja




                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                         Ja




                                                                                                                                       Ja
Figure 1: Monthly exchange rates normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.


                                                             Standardized Daily Exchange Rates
             1.5


                 1


             0.5


                 0


            −0.5


             −1


            −1.5


             −2             Britain
                            France
                            Germany
            −2.5
                                          6




                                                                                  7




                                                                                                                         8
                 16




                                                             17




                                                                                                    18




                                                                                                                                              19
                                      91




                                                                                 91




                                                                                                                        91
             19




                                                         19




                                                                                                   19




                                                                                                                                             19
                                     ,1




                                                                             ,1




                                                                                                                    ,1
            1,




                                                        1,




                                                                                               1,




                                                                                                                                         1,
                                 l1




                                                                            l1




                                                                                                                   l1
        n




                                                    n




                                                                                               n




                                                                                                                                         n
                                Ju




                                                                        Ju




                                                                                                               Ju
       Ja




                                                   Ja




                                                                                            Ja




                                                                                                                                      Ja




 Figure 2: Daily exchange rates normalized to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one.


                                                                             9
Spain. These exchange rates display qualitatively similar time series patterns to the Swiss rates. I focus
on the Swiss franc because my two Swiss datasets are the most complete ones I have and the above quotes
convinced me that the Swiss market was the primary exchange market during the war.
          Since each of the exchange rates are in different units, I subtracted the mean from each series and
                                                                                            1
                                                                                                            




divided each series by its standard deviation. Thus                                        T 1Y                 Y is the matrix of correlation coefficients of the
normalized exchange rates where T is number of observations per series, and Y is a T                                                                




                                                                                                                                                        5 or T   




                                                                                                                                                                     3 matrix
of the normalized series. These normalized series are plotted in figures 1 and 2. The dominant feature
of these figures is the steady decline of all the currencies against the Swiss franc. The belligerents made
repeated efforts to maintain the value of their currencies; but eventhough the Swiss price level more than
doubled during the war, they could not maintain the value of their currencies relative to the Swiss franc.
          For three reasons most of my analysis focuses on the monthly data. First, each of the monthly rates
are the price of a Swiss franc in Basle, while the daily dataset reports the prices of a Swiss franc in Berlin,
London, or Paris. Given the events of the time, it is not obvious that one could arbitrage across these three
markets. Second, the monthly dataset has prices for five currencies whereas the daily dataset only has
prices for only three. Third and most importantly, the market for Swiss francs in Berlin does not appear to
have been a free market. As can be seen in figure 2, prices for Swiss francs in Berlin remained unchanged
for long periods of time. I would prefer to have constructed a daily dataset of exchange rates from the
Basle market (or some other neutral country that traded with both sides), but I could not find a source that
reported daily rates from this market (or the other neutral markets) consistently throughout the war.


3 The Factor Model

The factor model consists of four equations. 6 Let yt denote the 5                                                               




                                                                                                                                     1 vector of time t exchange rates:
                  ytBritain ytFrance ytItaly ytGermany ytAustria . Each element of y is a linear function of a common trend, f , a
                                                      


              




yt   




                                              




common factor, z, and a country-specific factor ν i :

                                                                   yti   
                                                                                  ft   
                                                                                                γi zt   
                                                                                                                 νti                                                      (1)

for i = Britain, France, Italy, Germany, Austria . I assume the common trend is an I(2) process:
                       




                                                          ft   1         ft   
                                                                                           ft      ft           1   
                                                                                                                        εt   1                                            (2)

where εt is a sequence of i.i.d. normal random variables with a mean of zero and a variance of σ 2ε .
                   




         6I   present only the five-country monthly model. The three-country daily model only differs in the number of countries.


                                                                                           10
          Let zt denote the common factor at time t. I assume zt follows the first-order auto-regression,

                                                                                               zt   1               
                                                                                                                             ρzt         
                                                                                                                                                     ϑt       1           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (3)

where 0          ρ        1 and ϑt is a sequence of i.i.d. normal random variables, uncorrelated with ε t at all leads
                                    




and lags, with mean zero and variance one. Let νt denote the 5                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                                                                                                                                                1 vector of country-specific factors. I
assume each country-specific factor is serially correlated:

                                                                                               νt   
                                                                                                                        Dνt                  1   
                                                                                                                                                         ηt       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (4)

where
                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                        
                                                        
                                                               dBritain   0      0     0      0                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                                         
                                                                0      dFrance 0      0      0                                                                                                          

                                            D       
                                                                 0        0     dItaly 0      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                 0        0      0 dGermany   0
                                                                 0        0      0     0    dAustria

and ηt is a 5         




                          1 vector of martingale differences sequences whose elements satisfy
                                                                         




                                                                                                      ri if t s and i                                                                            j
                                                             Eηti ηsj                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                           




                                                                                       




                                                                                                      0 otherwise
                                                             Eηt ϑs                    
                                                                                                    0 tand s

                                                              Eηt εs                   
                                                                                                    0                        tand s

for i and j equal to Britain, France, Italy, Germany, Austria . Let R denote a 5
                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5 diagonal matrix with
the elements ri along the diagonal. Finally θ denotes the 1                                                                                               




                                                                                                                                                                              p vector of parameters to be estimated: θ                                         




   ρ σε γBritain γFrance γItaly γGermany γAustria dBritain dFrance dItaly dGermany dAustria
                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                 rBritain    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rFrance   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 rItaly   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              rGermany   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             rAustria .
          Parameter estimates are computed by maximizing the normal likelihood function with respect to the
vector θ using the time-varying Kalman filter. This estimation procedure is discussed in more detail in
Anderson, Hansen, McGrattan and Sargent (1996). The advantage of this estimation technique is that
conditional on the parameter estimates, the Kalman filter produces one-sided estimates of f t and zt . I
argue in the next section that I can attach economic interpretations to these two series.
          To derive the likelihood function, define ȳ                                                                  yt       1           Dyt and G¯ GA                                                   DG so equations (1)-(4) can be
rewritten as:

                                                                    xt       1             
                                                                                                            Axt              
                                                                                                                                         Cwt              1                                                                                                    (5)

                                                                             ȳt           
                                                                                                            ¯t
                                                                                                            Gx                   
                                                                                                                                         Gwt                  1       
                                                                                                                                                                               ηt           1                                                                  (6)

                                                                                                                             11
                                                                                                                                                            ϑt                           εt
                                                                                


                                                                                                                                               




where xt       
                               zt ft ft
                                                   
                                                                        1   
                                                                                        , wt                1                                                               1   
                                                                                                                                                                                                       1    
                                                                                                                                                                                                                and
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  γBritain             1        0           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            
                                                                    ρ 0                                     0                                                                                                    1 0                                                                                             γFrance              1        0           

                               A        
                                                                   0 2                                     1                       
                                                                                                                                                                                 C       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0 σε                            
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     and                      G   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  γItaly               1        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  γGermany
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                    0 1                                     0                                                                                                    0 0                                                                                                                   1        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  γAustria             1        0

Next, let Ê Y X denote the linear least squares projection of Y onto X, and let Kt and Σt denote the
                           




                                                




time t ‘Kalman gain’ and ‘state-covariance matrix,’ respectively, of the time-varying Kalman filter. So,
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           
Kt and Σt satisfy: Kt                                                                                                                                       AΣt G¯ GΣ
                                                                                                                                                                   ¯ t G¯                                                                                                                             1   and Σt
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    




                                                                        
                                                                                        CC G                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            R        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     GCC G                                             
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   AΣt          1A              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CC                   CC G         




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      
         ¯t
       ¯ GΣ                                         ¯                                                                                                                1           ¯t
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        




AΣt   1G                                    1G                  
                                                                        R           
                                                                                            GCC G                                                                                GΣ                         1A              
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GCC                                   I then apply the Kalman filter to equations (5)
and (6) to obtain the corresponding innovations representation:

                                                                                                                                                                                                      x̂t       1                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ρx̂t                 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Kt ut                                                                                                                          (7)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ȳt                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     G¯x̂t                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ut                                                                                                                            (8)

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Ωt                  ¯ t G¯                                              ¯ The
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   

                                                                                                                                                                                                                       




where ut           
                               yt           1                   Ê yt                   1   yt                                 
                                                                                                                                            y1 x̂1 , x̂t                
                                                                                                                                                                                                  
                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ê xt yt                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     y1 x̂1 and Eut ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GΣ                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     R       
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 G G.
Gaussian log-likelihood function for yt                                                                                                                                                      T                  conditioned on x̂1 is given by:
                                                                                                                                                                     




                                                                                                                                                                                             t 1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1T 1                                                       1T 1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2 t∑                                                       2 t∑
                                                                        log L θ                                                                                                                                                                             log Ωt                                                     ut Ωt 1 ut
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               




                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                                                                                     T                   1 log 2πp                                                                                                                                                                                                               (9)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         1                                                         1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                
I initialize the system by setting ẑ 1 equal to zero (its unconditional mean), f 1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   f0      
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                5   ∑i yi1 , and Σ1 equal
to a matrix of large numbers. These choices implies ν i1 is set to yi1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    f1 .


4 Model Estimation and Diagnostics

The point estimates and standard errors of the parameters for both the five-country monthly model and
the three-country daily model are reported in table 2. For both models, the coefficients on the common
factor for the Allies (γBritain γFrance and γItaly ) are of opposite sign to the Central Powers (γ Germany and γAustria ).
                                                                                                                                           




The common factor operates symmetrically on the two sides’ currencies. Since the point estimates for the
γ’s for the Allies have a positive sign, increases in zt can be interpreted as increasing perceptions that the
Allies would win the war. Each of the point estimates of γ i are more than two standard errors away from
zero. For the five-country model, the parameter estimates for Great Britain and France are quite similar.
This is not surprising since the sterling-franc exchange rate was pegged from April 1916 to the end of the
war. I re-estimated each model, individually omitting Britain and France, and found the results did not

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            12
                                                         Five-Country                 Three-Country
                                                        Monthly Model                  Daily Model
                                                       Point      Standard           Point    Standard
                           Parameter                  Estimate      Error          Estimate     Error
                                 ρ                      0.93        0.09             1.00†
                                σε                      0.21        0.04            0.0150     0.0004
                              γBritain                  0.19        0.05            0.0468     0.0023
                              γFrance                   0.21        0.05            0.0367     0.0027
                               γItaly                   0.13        0.03
                             γGermany                  -0.09        0.04            -0.0066     0.0008
                              γAustria                 -0.10        0.05
                              dBritain                  0.96        0.05             0.530      0.085
                              dFrance                   0.92        0.11             0.990      0.005
                               dItaly                   0.86        0.12
                             dGermany                   0.68        0.22             0.450      0.055
                              dAustria                 -0.26        0.36
                                rBritain               0.091       0.021             0.036      0.021
                                rFrance                0.003       0.547             0.060      0.001
                                 rItaly                0.134       0.026
                               rGermany                0.123       0.019             0.015      0.001
                                rAustria               0.072       0.023
                      number of observations                   53                          868
                          value of the                       232.7                        4948.7
                         log-likelihood


                                                 Table 2: Estimation results
† For the daily model, the value of ρ was fixed to one prior to estimation.


change in any interesting way. Thus for both the monthly and daily data, I just report the cases including
both Britain and France.
    The likelihood function was derived assuming the innovations, u t , are white noise. As a check I
regressed each innovations series, uti where i
                                          




                                                          
                                                                 Britain, France, Italy, Germany, Austria , on a constant
and one lag of the innovation. For all the series in both models the constant term was not significantly
different than zero at the 5 percent level. But for two series in the daily model (Britain and France) the
coefficients on the lag innovation are significantly different from zero at the 5 percent level.
    The decomposition of the exchange rates into three uncorrelated factors ( f t , zt , and vt ) is similar to prin-
cipal component analysis. Principal component analysis involves transforming the normalized exchange
rates into score vectors. These vectors are pairwise-uncorrelated, linear combinations of the original data;
the first series has the maximum possible variance under the constraint that the sum of squares of the co-


                                                                   13
                                 variance     variance      Column (1)/       variance     variance   Column (4) /
                series            yti ft      γi zt νti
                                                   
                                                            Column (2)          γi zt          νti    Column (2)
                                     (1)          (2)           (3)              (4)          (5)          (6)
              Britain             0.341        0.360           0.95            0.253        0.107         0.70
              France              0.165        0.310           0.53            0.310        0.000         1.00
                Italy             0.172        0.188           0.91            0.118        0.071         0.62
             Germany              0.070        0.081           0.86            0.053        0.028         0.65
          Austria-Hungary         0.048        0.070           0.69            0.064        0.006         0.92


                         Table 3: Variance decomposition for the five-country monthly model


efficients is one, the second has the maximum possible variance among those uncorrelated with the first
(again under the constraint that sum of squares of the coefficients is one), and so on. 7 Unlike the factor
model described in equations (1)-(4), principal component analysis imposes no temporal structure on the
scores. To ensure that the factors f t and zt extracted from the filtering problem are not just artifacts of
the assumptions made in these four equations, I compare the linear one-step-ahead forecasts of f t and zt
(denoted fˆt and ẑt ) to the first two principal components of the normalized exchange rates.
    In figures 3, 4, 5, and 6, I plot the one-step-ahead forecasts of f t and zt along with the first and second
principal components of the exchange rates for the monthly and daily models. For both datasets, the first
principal component is effectively two times the simple arithmetic average of the normalized series. In
the case of the five-country model, the first and second principal components move closely with fˆt and ẑt
over the sample period; the correlation between the fˆt and the first principal component is 0.98. Since ẑt
is initialized at zero while the second principal component is unconstrained, these two series differ during
the first part of the sample; nevertheless the correlation between the two series is still quite high, 0.88.
    For the three-country model, ẑt is similar to the second principal component; the correlation coefficient
for the two series is 0.96. But the paths of fˆt and the first principal component differ considerably in 1917
and 1918. Comparing figures 2 and 6 it is clear that fˆt tracks the German-Swiss exchange rate; thus
it is not surprising the point estimate of γ Germany is so small (-0.0066). In the daily model, movements in
the German exchange rate are largely explained by movements in f t . This result is robust to numerous
specifications of the daily model. Consequently in the next section much of the interpretations of fˆt and ẑt
focus on the monthly model.
    In table 3 the unconditional variance of the “detrended” one-step-ahead forecast for each exchange rate
  7 For   further discussion of principal component analysis, see chapter 11 of Anderson (1984).




                                                               14
                                                                        Common Trend, ft , and First Principal Components for Monthly Dataset
                              2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          4




                              1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              first principal components
          common trend, ft




                              0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          0




                             −1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          −2




                             −2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          −4
                                                               15




                                                                                                          16




                                                                                                                                                              17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    19
                               4




                                                                                          5




                                                                                                                                       6




                                                                                                                                                                                        7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8
                             91




                                                                               91




                                                                                                                                      91




                                                                                                                                                                                       91




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          91
                                                              19




                                                                                                         19




                                                                                                                                                             19




                                                                                                                                                                                                  19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         19
                     l1




                                                                          l1




                                                                                                                                  l1




                                                                                                                                                                            l1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l1
                                                    n




                                                                                                     n




                                                                                                                                                         n




                                                                                                                                                                                             n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n
          Ju




                                                                         Ju




                                                                                                                                 Ju




                                                                                                                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ju
                                       Ja




                                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                                                                                        Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                            Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ja
Figure 3: The one-step-ahead forecast of the common trend, fˆt , (solid line, left axis) for the five-country
model, first principal component of the monthly exchange rates (dashed line, right axis), and first principal
component of the notes in circulation (dotted line, right axis).

                                                              Common Factor, zt , and Second Principal Component for the Monthly Exchange Rates
                                  7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                             ← Bolsheviks seize power
                                      ← Battle of the Marne




                                                                           ← Italy enters war




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Armistice signed →
                              3.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              second principal component
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ← Treaty of Brest−Litovsk
                     t
          common factor, z




                                                                                                                                                                   U.S. enters war →




                                  0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                       Somme begins →
                                                                                                               Verdun begins →




                             −3.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        −1




                              −7                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −2
                                                                   15




                                                                                                             16




                                                                                                                                                              17




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        19
                                  4




                                                                                                5




                                                                                                                                       6




                                                                                                                                                                                        7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              8
                               91




                                                                                       91




                                                                                                                                      91




                                                                                                                                                                                       91




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          91
                                                               19




                                                                                                         19




                                                                                                                                                             19




                                                                                                                                                                                                      19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          19
                             l1




                                                                              l1




                                                                                                                                  l1




                                                                                                                                                                                l1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         l1
                                                              n




                                                                                                         n




                                                                                                                                                         n




                                                                                                                                                                                             n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   n
                      Ju




                                                                          Ju




                                                                                                                                 Ju




                                                                                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Ju
                                                   Ja




                                                                                                    Ja




                                                                                                                                                        Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                            Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Ja




Figure 4: The one-step-ahead forecast of the common factor, ẑ t , (solid line, left axis) and the second
principal component (dashed line, right axis) for the five-country monthly model.


                                                                                                                                                        15
                                                                             Common Trend, ft , and First Principal Components for Daily Dataset
                                 1.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      3



                                   1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2



                                 0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               first principal components
                    t
          common trend, f




                                   0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0



                             −0.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −1



                                 −1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       −2



                             −1.5                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         −3



                                 −2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       −4
                                                                          6




                                                                                                                                             7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                   16




                                                                                               17




                                                                                                                                                                             18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19
                                                                  91




                                                                                                                                         91




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 91
                                 19




                                                                                           19




                                                                                                                                                                            19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     19
                                                               ,1




                                                                                                                                        ,1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,1
                            1,




                                                                                          1,




                                                                                                                                                                       1,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1,
                                                           l1




                                                                                                                                    l1




                                                                                                                                                                                                               l1
                 n




                                                                                       n




                                                                                                                                                            n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                          Ju




                                                                                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ju
         Ja




                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ja
Figure 5: The one-step-ahead forecast of the common trend, fˆt , (solid line, left axis) for the three-country
model, first principal component of the monthly exchange rates (dashed line, right axis), and first principal
component of the notes in circulation (dotted line, right axis).

                                                          Common Factor, zt , and Second Principal Component for the Daily Exchange Rates
                                  50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ← Germany‘s "Black Day"
                                                                                                    ← Czar abdicates
                                                                 ← Somme begins




                                                                                                                                                                                                               ← German troops 56 miles from Paris
                                        ← Verdun begins




                                  25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1
                                                                                                                                                                                  ← Treaty of Brest−Litovsk




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               second principal component
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Armistice signed →
                         t
              common factor, z




                                                                                                                                                 Bolsheviks seize power →




                                   0                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                               U.S. enters war →




                                 −25                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −1




                                 −50                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      −2
                                                                          6




                                                                                                                                             7




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                   16




                                                                                               17




                                                                                                                                                                             18




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      19
                                                                  91




                                                                                                                                         91




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 91
                                 19




                                                                                           19




                                                                                                                                                                            19




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     19
                                                               ,1




                                                                                                                                        ,1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            ,1
                            1,




                                                                                          1,




                                                                                                                                                                       1,




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1,
                                                            l1




                                                                                                                                    l1




                                                                                                                                                                                                                l1
                 n




                                                                                       n




                                                                                                                                                            n




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     n
                                                          Ju




                                                                                                                                   Ju




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ju
         Ja




                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Ja




Figure 6: The one-step-ahead forecast of the common factor, ẑ t , (solid line, left axis) and the second
principal component (dashed line, right axis) for the three-country daily model.
                                                                                                                                         16
is decomposed into the fraction due to the single common factor and the fraction due to the country-specific
factor. From equation (1) we can derive
                                                                                                                             
                                                                  var yi                       γi var z γi               var νi
                                                                                                             




                                                                                   f                            
                                                                                                                                                                           (10)
                                                               
where var z           
                          ∑∞j    0       ρj       2   and var νi           
                                                                                ∑∞j  0 di j ri di j .8 In columns (1) - (3) of table 3, I compare the
variance of yti            ft (the detrended exchange rates) to the unconditional variance of γ i zt                                                   
                                                                                                                                                           νti . This is one
measure of how well the model fits the data. Ideally these two numbers should be equal (i.e. the numbers
in column (3) should be 1). The five-country model does a reasonably good job matching the second
moments of the data for Britain, Italy and Germany, but does less well for France and Austria-Hungary.
    A similar variance decomposition can be done using the score vectors derived from the principal com-
ponent analysis. I can compute the proportion of the variance of the normalized exchange rates left un-
explained by the first principal component that is explained by the second principal component. For the
monthly data, the second principal component explains 68 percent of the residual variance for Britain,
55 percent for France, 59 percent for Italy, 95 percent for Austria-Hungary, and 95 percent for Germany.
For the daily data, these numbers are 77 percent for Britain, 92 percent for France, and 100 percent for
Germany. For both sets of exchange rates, the second principal component explains a large fraction of the
residual variance.
    I also use equation (10) to decompose the variance of γ i zt                                                     
                                                                                                                         νti into the variance implied by the common
factor (the fourth data column of table 3) and the variance implied by the country-specific factor (the fifth
data column). For the five-country model, the common factor explains about 2/3 of the total variance
for Britain, Italy and Germany, and over 90 percent of the variance for France and Austria-Hungary. A
large fraction of the variance of each of the detrended exchange rates (y t                                                                ft ) can be accounted for by a
single factor. In other words, once the trend in taken into account, a large fraction of the exchange rate
movements arise solely from movements in ẑt .


5 Interpreting the fˆt and ẑt series

In this section, I ask whether an economic interpretation can be given to fˆt and ẑt . Since the fˆt series,
plotted in figures 3 and 5, are essentially picking up the long downward trend in the exchange rates, I
investigate whether a “quantity theory of money” explanation makes sense. I also analyze whether move-
                                                                                                                                                                           
ments in the ẑt series, plotted in figures 4 and 6, and its innovations (which I will refer to as Kt ut 1 ),
   8I   am unable to perform this decomposition for the daily model since I fixed ρ                                                   1.


                                                                                                17
correspond to well known historical events – in particular, events which led people to adjust their forecasts
of the outcome of the war. However, just as the Wall Street Journal can “explain” every movement in yes-
terday’s stock market, I can always find some event to explain every movement in the ẑ t series. Therefore I
                                                                  
study whether the ẑt series and its innovations Kt ut 1 are correlated with monthly data on casualties from
the Western Front, food consumption in Germany and Great Britain, and British shipping losses.
    In every European country for which I have data there were large increases in both note circulation and
other credits during the war. This led to sharp increases in prices throughout Europe. To determine how
much of the relative movements in exchange rates are due to the relative increases in government obliga-
tions, I study the quantity of notes in circulation issued by the central banks for each of the belligerents. 9
I divide each of these series by the total notes in circulation issued by the Swiss National Bank. 10 As with
the exchange rate data, I normalize each series to have a mean of zero and a standard deviation of one. I
then compute the principal components for these series.
    For the monthly dataset, the first principal component of the five normalized note series is the dotted
line plotted in figure 3. It is highly correlated with the both the first principal component of the monthly
exchange rates and the fˆt series. The correlation coefficients are 0.92 and 0.95 respectively. This suggests
that much of the decline in the value of belligerent currencies relative to the Swiss franc can be attributed
to the relative increases in the quantity of central bank notes outstanding. The remaining four principal
components from the notes series are much less correlated with the remaining four principal components
for the exchange rate series. The correlation coefficient between the second principal component of the
note series and the second principal component of the exchange rate series is 0.08; for the third, fourth,
and fifth principal components the correlation coefficients are -0.003, -0.09, 0.04 respectively. While both
the money series and the exchange rate series have similar trends, the other components are unrelated.
    In figure 5 I plot the first principal component of the three normalized note series (Britain, France,
and Germany) along with the first principal component and fˆt series for the daily dataset. All three series
appear to move together at low frequencies but do not appear to co-move at high frequencies. To compute
correlations between the series I point sampled the daily data on the mid-date (i.e. usually the 15th) of
each month. The correlation coefficients between the first principal component of the note series and the
first principal component of the exchange rate series is 0.73; the correlation with the fˆ series is only 0.55.
   9 These data are taken from Young (1925). While central bank notes in circulation is a very narrow measure of money, it is the

only consistent monthly money series I could construct across all six countries.
  10 So, for example, the British series is Bank of England notes outstanding (in pounds) divided by Swiss National Bank notes

outstanding (in francs).



                                                                  18
    For both models, the one-step-ahead forecast of the common factor, ẑ t , plotted in figures 4 and 6, makes
intuitive sense. In the monthly model, the ẑt series reaches its global maximum in November 1918, the
month of the signing of the Armistice. The second highest peak is April 1917, the month the U.S. declared
war against Germany. It hits its nadir in May 1918, during the middle of the Germans’ last attempt to
win the war. The largest negative innovation occurs in November 1917 – the month the Bolsheviks under
Lenin seized power in Russia and immediately opened peace negotiations with Germany. Four of the
largest seven negative innovations are in late 1917 and early 1918. These were months in which there were
plenty of good reasons for the Allies to be pessimistic: it had become clear the Russians were pulling out
of the war and thus the Germans would be able to concentrate more men and weapons on the Western
Front; Italy had been routed in October 1917 at the Battle of Caporetto; and Serbia and Romania had been
defeated. Like the monthly model, the ẑt for the daily model reaches its zenith in November 1918 and its
nadir in May 1918. But the timing of some of the other “peaks” differ. In particular, the second highest
peak in the daily model occurs in September 1917.
    During the first year of the war there is little movement in the monthly ẑ t series; it is essentially flat
for the first twelve months. During this period there is a modest upward trend in the second principal
component. This discrepancy between the two series is partly due to how the Kalman filter is initialized.
Recall I initialized ẑ1   
                               0. The second principal component is picking up the sharp appreciation of the
British pound that is apparent in figure 1. After the outbreak of hostilities and the belligerents’ decision
to suspend convertibility, most of the belligerents’ currencies rose slightly and traded above par as the
belligerents attempted to quickly raise resources. This appreciation was more pronounced for the pound
than for other currencies. It appears that the appreciation in the second principal component during this
second half of 1914 is due more to the intense demand for funds in London than to battlefield news.
    Italy’s entrance into the war on the Allied side in May of 1915 seems to have had a negative effect on
the monthly ẑt series. Italy may have been perceived as much of a liability as an asset. The Italian Army
was poorly equipped having not fully recovered from the Libyan War of 1912. Between their equipment
problems and the line of mountains between Italy and Austria, the Italian were of little use in forcing
Germany to send forces to the Southern Front. Furthermore, the British were already having to export
coal to France since nearly all of the coal mines in north-eastern France were behind enemy lines; now the
British were having to supply the Italians as well.
    Despite being two of the bloodiest battles of the war, neither the German attack on the French fort
at Verdun nor the British offensive at the Somme had much effect on the ẑ t series for either model. The


                                                        19
German attack on Verdun from February to June 1916 was an attempt to deal France a psychological blow
as well as to force France to incur great losses in men and equipment. While German armies did succeed
in inflicting a large number of casualties on the French (over 500,000 men), German losses were also huge
(over 400,000 men) and the fort remained in French hands. The British attack at the Somme generated
shockingly long casualty lists but little gains in terms of territory for either side. As is well known, on the
first day of the Battle of Somme, July 1, 1916, the attacking British army suffered over 60,000 casualties
(of which about 20,000 were fatalities) while German casualties were only about 8,000. Verdun and the
Somme had a large effect on the morale of all three armies. The heavy German casualties contributed to
the Kaiser’s decision to replace Falkenhayn with Hindenburg as Chief of the General Staff. Dupuy and
Hammerman (1967) state these two battles also brought home to Germany the possibility of defeat. While
some argue that German morale never fully recovered from the combined impact of theses two battles,
British and French morale also suffered forcing the French General Joffre to resign.
    While the monthly ẑt series fell in early 1916 with large negative innovation in February and March
(coinciding with the start of the Battle of Verdun), somewhat surprisingly the ẑ t series becomes positive
and continued to rise during the remainder of 1916 despite the large British losses at the Somme. In the
daily model there are no large innovations (either positive or negative) from February to December 1916.
There is no evidence of either of Verdun or the Somme in the daily data.
    In both models, the ẑt series peaks in April of 1917, the month the U.S. declared war of Germany,
and one month after the Russian revolution. On March 12, 1917 the Russian Revolution began and within
days the Czar was forced to abdicate his throne. Taylor (1980) states that the Russian Revolution was
“hailed with great rejoicing” by the West. According to Taylor, the West thought that the revolution would
only make the Russian Army stronger. In the monthly model, the fourth largest positive innovation occurs
in March of 1917. With monthly data I cannot disentangle whether this large innovation was due to the
Russian Revolution or anticipation of the American entrance into the war; but with daily data, it appears
that while the start of the Russian revolution generated a small relative increase in the value of the Allies’
currencies, the entrance of the U.S. into the war generated a large boost. This sixth largest innovation
occurs on April 5, 1917, the day before the U.S. declared war on Germany. The Unites States’ declaration
of war also had a negative impact on the “common trend” fˆt in the daily model.11 On the sixteen business
days following the declaration, there are twelve negative innovations on f t .
    In the last two years of the war, the relative value of the exchange rates move dramatically. After April
  11 Recall   that in the daily model, fˆt , basically track the German-Swiss exchange rate.


                                                                  20
1917 the ẑt series and the second principal component for the monthly model drop sharply and decline
steadily throughout 1917 as a series of bad news hit the Allies. A large mutiny in the French army from
May to August limited French military capabilities. In October and November of 1917, the Italian Army
suffered one of its largest defeats in the Battle of Caporetto. The outcome of this battle led to a substantial
depreciation of the lira. This shows up as large negative innovations for the Italian exchange rate u tItaly
from September 1917 to January 1918. Military successes and the utilization of credits from the U.S. and
Britain in the summer and fall of 1918 led to increases in the lira’s relative value.
    As mentioned above, large negative innovations occur in late 1917 in particular in the months of
October and November. In November of 1917 the Bolsheviks seized power in Petrograd and the Congress
of Soviets called for peace. Ferguson (1998, pages 333-336) reports that prices in New York for the 1915
Anglo-French 5 per cent coupon bonds fell dramatically in late 1917, hitting a nadir in December. Prices
for these bonds recovered steadily throughout 1918. Ferguson states “The surprising thing is that the New
York market remained so bullish about the Anglo-French bonds the following spring when many influential
figures in Britain and France sincerely feared Germany was on the brink of victory.” Using monthly Swiss
exchange rates, the story is a little different. While the ẑt series drops to -2.5 in December it rebounds
slightly to -1.5 in January 1918 before steadily declining to a nadir of -4.0 in May 1918. A similar pattern
can be seen in the daily data. So the movements in the Swiss foreign exchange market in early 1918 are
less surprising and more consistent with the perceived mood of “many influential figures in Britain and
France” than the New York bond market; however these declines in the ẑ t series make the rise in bond
prices all the more puzzling.
    Furthermore, all the belligerent currencies rose in value at the end of 1917 and start of 1918. This
can be seen directly in the exchange rate data in figures 1 and 2, or in the common trends in figures 3 and
5. Not only were the Bolsheviks calling for peace at this time, but President Woodrow Wilson outlined
his fourteen points in January of 1918 and called for a peace without reparations in February of 1918.
This parallel increase in currency values is consistent with the idea that these calls led currency traders
to decrease their expectations about the war’s duration. However these peace proposals were rejected by
Britain, France, and Germany. Furthermore the collapse of Russia and these calls for peace appear to
have led Germany to harden its negotiation position, thus increasing the expected length of the war. This
uniform increase in currency values was short lived.
    The collapse of Russia also permitted the transfer of German troops to the Western Front, giving the
Germans numerical superiority. The Germans planned a final effort to win in France before the United


                                                      21
States could intervene. At the end of March 1918 the Germans began a final offensive. The Germans were
able to split the French and British line and by June 3 were only fifty-six miles from Paris. Even though
the German advance was not stopped until July, in both models the ẑ t series turns in May. After the war
Ludendorff, the commanding general of the Germany Army, referred to August 8, 1918 as “the black day
of the German Army.” Ludendorff felt that a relatively minor Allied victory on this date finally shattered
the German Army’s faith in any potential victory. The two ẑt series suggests that the currency markets
foresaw this “black day” months earlier.
    While this informal review suggests military events are important in describing the movements of
exchange rates, I recognize that I can always find some event that explains every movement in each of the
five exchange rates. Therefore I restrict myself by comparing the ẑ t series to military data on the progress
of the war. The best battlefield data I could find are on casualties.
    The data I have on British and German casualties are taken from the War Office (1922). 12 I obtained
data on French casualties from Larcher (1934). 13 I was unable to get times series data on American
casualties. I focus on the Western Front for two reasons. First, I was unable to get any reliable military
data on either the Southern or Eastern Fronts. Second, most historians I have read argue that winning on
the Western Front was the key to winning the war. 14 Indeed the Germans won the Eastern Front defeating
Russia, Romania, and Serbia but lost the war.
    Reported casualty statistics are notoriously noisy and at best a rough approximation of the number
of military personnel killed, wounded and taken prisoner each month during the war. While casualty
data are a crude way to measure military effectiveness, it is not obvious a better metric exists. Offensive
capabilities were so inferior to defensive strategies and tactics that neither side could advance fast enough
to make a breakthrough. From November 1914 to March 1918 the Western Front was a continuous line
of trenches from Switzerland to the North Sea which remained virtually unchanged. Any territorial gains
made on either side were negligible and often the result of the other side falling back to positions on better
protected ground. Since neither side had much success in capturing territory, both sides implemented a
strategy of attrition hoping to wear down or use up the other sides’ stock of men. Ferguson (1998, chapter
   12 The British data are for the British Expeditionary Force (BEF) in France and include the Regular Army and Territorial

Force as well as the armies of Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Newfoundland, South Africa, and India. The German data are
originally from the Federal Archives Office at Potsdam. Neither series includes deaths from wounds or disease since these data
are not available for the German army. None of the results are sensitive to including deaths from wounds or disease for the BEF.
   13 The French data are from the French Health Service. They are aggregate casualty data, so they include killed, wounded, died

from wounds, died from disease and taken prisoner.
   14 See for example Ferguson, 1998, pages 290-292 and the citations contained within.




                                                               22
                                                                                             Killed and Wounded by Month: France, Britian, and Germany
                                                                  350
                                                                               Britain
                                                                               Germany
            military personnel killed or wounded (in thousands)                France
                                                                  300
                                                                                                                                                                            an
                                                                                                                                                                         rm     e
                                                                                                                                                                       Ge ensiv
                                                                                                                                                                      ← Off
                                                                  250

                                                                                  rne
                                                                                Ma
                                                                           ←                                          e
                                                                  200                                              gn
                                                                                                            m    pa
                                                                                                         ha                                e
                                                                                                   ←
                                                                                                        C                              mm
                                                                                                                                     So                                                           r
                                                                                                                                 ←                                                              te
                                                                  150                                                                                                                        un
                                                                                                                                                                                        d Co
                                                                                                                                                                                    i e        e
                                                                                                                                                                                All        siv
                                                                                                                                                                               ← Offen
                                                                  100



                                                                   50



                                                                    0
                                                                                 15




                                                                                                            16




                                                                                                                                           17




                                                                                                                                                                18




                                                                                                                                                                                        19
                                                                       4




                                                                                              5




                                                                                                                             6




                                                                                                                                                      7




                                                                                                                                                                           8
                                                                   91




                                                                                             91




                                                                                                                           91




                                                                                                                                                     91




                                                                                                                                                                          91
                                                                                19




                                                                                                        19




                                                                                                                                          19




                                                                                                                                                               19




                                                                                                                                                                                      19
                                                                  l1




                                                                                         l1




                                                                                                                        l1




                                                                                                                                                 l1




                                                                                                                                                                      l1
                                                                            n




                                                                                                    n




                                                                                                                                      n




                                                                                                                                                           n




                                                                                                                                                                                    n
                                   Ju




                                                                                        Ju




                                                                                                                      Ju




                                                                                                                                                Ju




                                                                                                                                                                     Ju
                                                                           Ja




                                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                                                     Ja




                                                                                                                                                          Ja




                                                                                                                                                                                 Ja
     Figure 7: British and German soldiers killed and wounded and French total casualties by month.


10) cites several military leaders expressing the view that the Allied strategy was “to kill as many Germans
as possible with the least loss to ourselves.” The German Chief of the General Staff Falkenhayn argued for
attacking the French fort at Verdun in order “to bleed France white.” So data on soldiers incapacitated do
provide a metric which contemporaries themselves used to measure combat effectiveness.
    As noted by others (i.e. Dupuy, 1977 and Ferguson, 1998), if combat effectiveness is measured by
the numbers of men killed and wounded, the Allies failed miserably. In figures 7 and 8 I plot the number
of soldiers killed, wounded, and taken prisoner. There are four features of the data I wish to emphasize.
The first is the magnitudes on the numbers of killed and wounded each month; in an average month on
the Western Front 45,000 British troops and 27,000 German troops were killed and wounded. The French
armies absorbed on average 63,000 total casualties per month. These are enormous numbers. Second is
the persistent imbalance in German and Allied casualties. Despite losing the war, the Central Powers were
far better at inflicting casualties on their enemy than were the Allies. According to the data I have, German
soldiers on average killed or wounded over three British soldiers for every two German soldier killed or
wounded. Moreover this ratio does not include French and Americans killed and wounded. 15 Only in the
   15 I think this is an overstatement of German military superiority. Dupuy (1977) reports that the German army inflicted on the

total Allied force around three casualties for every two that were inflicted on them. I cannot determine the differences between
the data I have and the data others report.


                                                                                                                                 23
                                                                                                        Missing and Prisoners of War: Britian and Germany
                                                                           80


            military personnel missing and taken prisoner (in thousands)
                                                                                     Britain
                                                                                     Germany
                                                                           70


                                                                           60


                                                                           50


                                                                           40


                                                                           30


                                                                           20


                                                                           10


                                                                            0
                                                                                         15




                                                                                                               16




                                                                                                                                        17




                                                                                                                                                             18




                                                                                                                                                                                  19
                                                                            4




                                                                                                    5




                                                                                                                           6




                                                                                                                                                   7




                                                                                                                                                                        8
                                                                           91




                                                                                                   91




                                                                                                                          91




                                                                                                                                                  91




                                                                                                                                                                       91
                                                                                        19




                                                                                                              19




                                                                                                                                     19




                                                                                                                                                            19




                                                                                                                                                                                 19
                                                    l1




                                                                                               l1




                                                                                                                      l1




                                                                                                                                              l1




                                                                                                                                                                   l1
                                                                                    n




                                                                                                           n




                                                                                                                                    n




                                                                                                                                                        n




                                                                                                                                                                             n
            Ju




                                                                                              Ju




                                                                                                                     Ju




                                                                                                                                             Ju




                                                                                                                                                                  Ju
                                                                                   Ja




                                                                                                         Ja




                                                                                                                                Ja




                                                                                                                                                       Ja




                                                                                                                                                                            Ja
                                                                                Figure 8: British and German soldiers missing and taken prisoner by month.


Spring of 1918 when the Germans launched their final offensive did they suffer higher casualties than the
Allies. Third is the seasonal pattern to the casualty data. Most major battles occurred in the spring and
summer months while the winter months were periods of relative calm. I do not see a seasonal pattern in
the exchange rate data so any attempt to link casualty data to exchange rate data will not succeed entirely.
Fourth is the large increase in the number of soldiers surrendering and being taken prisoner during the last
year of the war.
    I do not know how quickly market participants learned of events from the battlefield. Both sides
kept the press from the front lines and selectively released battlefront news. For example, Dupuy and
Hammerman (1967) report that after the French Offensive in Champagne in early October 1915, the Allies
publicized their capture of 25,000 prisoners and 150 guns, but kept their casualties – 30,000 killed and
missing, 100,000 wounded – a carefully guarded secret to avoid damaging civilian and military morale.
For the monthly model, it is not important whether market participants took hours or days to react to news
   As another illustration of the contradictory nature of casualty data, Gilbert (1994, p 299) states that the death toll at the Somme
for the months July-October 1916 was 95,675 for the British, 50,729 for the French, and 164,055 for the Germans. He reports that
on November 1, the Allies announced that in the preceding four months, they had taken 72,901 German prisoners and captured
303 artillery pieces, 215 mortars and nearly 1,000 machine guns. He does not cite his source. In contrast to the data I use, these
data suggest that more Germans were killed than Allies during the Battle of the Somme. Note that the British and French did not
(or Gilbert failed to) report the number of Allied troops taken prisoner.


                                                                                                                               24
                         French     British   German     Net Body         British         German         Net
                        total cas   K&W        K&W        Count         taken POW       taken POW       POWs
             ẑ           -0.07      0.19      -0.13       0.40            -0.23            0.32        -0.44
             Kt ut         0.13      0.11      -0.05       0.16            -0.01            0.39        -0.37
             uBritain      0.19     -0.09      -0.15       0.08            -0.12            0.15        -0.21
             uFrance       0.16     -0.05      -0.11       0.07            -0.08            0.14        -0.18
             uItaly        0.25     -0.02      -0.05       0.01            -0.03            0.07        -0.12
             uAustria     -0.09     -0.15      -0.04      -0.12            -0.05           -0.26         0.22
             uGermany     -0.06     -0.18      -0.04      -0.10            -0.08           -0.29         0.23


Table 4: Correlation Coefficients between Casualty Data and Series Imputed from the Five-Country
Monthly Model
Net body count is the number of British killed and wounded minus the number of Germans killed and wounded.
Net POWs is the number of British taken POW minus the number of Germans taken POW.


from the front, but given the work by Willard, Guinnane, and Rosen (1996) using daily price data from the
Civil War, I expect news from the battlefield traveled quickly.
    In World War I defensive capabilities were considerably better than offensive tactics and weapons. A
handful of well positioned machine guns and a line of barbed wire could hold up a much larger attacking
force until reinforcements could be brought in. Thus high casualties were often associated with offensive
campaigns. Following Ferguson (1998) I compute a “net body count” by subtracting the number of Ger-
mans killed and wounded from the number of British killed and wounded. In table 4 I report the correlation
coefficients between the casualty data and various series imputed from the five-country monthly model.
The data on soldiers killed and wounded are modestly correlated with the ẑ t series and its innovations
        
Kt ut 1 . For the five-country model, the correlation coefficient between the net body count and ẑ t is 0.40;
                                                                              
the correlation coefficient between the net body count and Kt ut 1 is 0.16. Thus an increase in Allied
casualties relative to German casualties is associated with positive innovations to ẑ t and higher values of
ẑt . So a higher net body count is associated with good news for the Allies. This positive relationship be-
tween high Allied casualties relative to German casualties and positive innovations to the common factor
suggests that being on the offensive was viewed positively by financial markets.
    While a higher net body count is associated with positive contemporaneous innovations, the reverse
holds true for prisoners of war. As the last three columns of table 4 show, the casualty series most corre-
lated with the series imputed from the factor models is German soldiers taken prisoner. For the five-country
model, the correlation coefficient between number of Germans taken prisoner and innovations is 0.39. The
correlation coefficient for net POWs (British taken prisoner minus Germans taken prisoner) the correlation


                                                           25
coefficient is -0.37. The correlation between between innovations and lagged net POWs is even greater:
-0.57. This results is largely due to the German POW data. The rate of Germans surrendering is positively
correlated with British and French innovations and negatively correlated with German and Austrian inno-
vations. These results are consistent with Ferguson’s (1998) thesis that the key to victory in the First World
War was not directly due to ones ability to kill the enemy, but rather due to the willingness of soldiers on
the other side to surrender. To quote from chapter 13 of Ferguson (1998):

           Surrendering was the key to the outcome of the First World War. Despite the huge death
       rolls, it proved impossible to achieve the ideal objective of pre-war German doctrine, ‘annihi-
       lation of the enemy’: demographics meant that there were more or less enough conscripts each
       year to plug the gaps created by attrition. For that reason the ’net body count’ in the Central
       Powers’ favour was not enough to bring them to victory. However it did prove possible to get
       the enemy to surrender in such large numbers that his ability to fight was fatally weakened.
           People at the time knew that large captures of enemy troops were a good sign. Around 10
       percent of the British film The Battle of the Somme is devoted to pictures of German POWs. ...
       The Germans too produced postcards and newsreels showing foreign prisoners of war being
       marched through German cities.

    This difference between how killed and wounded and POWs were interpreted suggests that the number
of POWs taken is highly correlated with morale and the willingness of soldiers to continue fighting. Unlike
being killed and wounded, to be taken prisoner often involved a choice. 16 A soldier could often (but not
always) decide whether or not to surrender. This was not usually the case for being killed or wounded.
Furthermore, taking an enemy prisoner was arguably better than killing or wounding him. Wounded
soldiers were often returned to the front after their injuries healed. Prisoners on the other hand were
sources of intelligence and could perform work for the captor. As figure 7 shows even during the last half
of 1918, the net body count was still in the German’s favor; but as figure 8 illustrates German soldiers
were giving up in unprecedented numbers. In terms of killing and wounding, the German army was still
more effective than the Allies. (And again note figure 7 does not include the number of American soldiers
killed and wounded.) Nevertheless – in terms of prisoners of war – there was no doubt in second half of
1918 that the Germans were losing.
    Relative to the Allies, Germany had a more difficult time growing and importing enough food to
feed its population during the war. Some have argued that given Germany’s success on the battlefield as
measured by the net body count, Germany did not lose the war militarily but was starved into defeat. 17
  16 See   chapter 13 of Ferguson, 1998, for a nice discussion of the issues surrounding surrendering.
  17 See   the first five chapters of Offer, 1989.


                                                                 26
                                 German            U.K. meat             U.K. bread &           U.K. shipping
                              calorie intake      consumption         flour consumption            losses
                 ẑ               -0.11               0.14                   0.14                    0.08
                         
                 Kt ut 1          -0.53              -0.31                   0.09                   -0.04
                 uBritain         -0.43              -0.08                   -0.09                  -0.17
                 uFrance          -0.42              -0.13                   -0.09                  -0.05
                 uItaly           -0.51              -0.17                   -0.06                  -0.01
                 uAustria          0.11               0.20                   -0.13                  -0.06
                 uGermany          0.17               0.21                   -0.23                   0.03


Table 5: Correlation Coefficients between Consumption and Shipping Data and Series Imputed from the
Five-Country Factor Model
German calorie intake is the mean daily per capita calorie intake from a set of thirty surveyed households in Leipzig, standardized
for age, sex, family size and work performed. The data are monthly from March 1917 to November 1918. Source: Offer (1989)
The First World War: An Agrarian Interpretation, page 50.
Consumption of bread and flour in the United Kingdom are monthly index numbers of retailer’s sales from June 1916 to Novem-
ber 1918. Source: Beveridge (1928) British Food Control, page 366.
Consumption of butcher’s meat in the United Kingdom are monthly index numbers of retailer’s sales from January 1916 to
November 1918. Source: Beveridge (1928) British Food Control, page 367.
War Losses of British shipping are monthly losses in gross tons from August 1914 to November 1918. Source: Fayle (1927) The
War and the Shipping Industry, page 417.


Therefore I examined the average calorie intake from a sample of households in Germany, two measures of
food consumption in Britain, and British shipping losses due to the war. In table 5, I report the correlation
coefficients between these series and the imputed innovations and ẑ t series. German calorie intake is neg-
atively correlated with the innovations implied by the two models. At first glance, it appears that calories
were as important as casualties to contemporaries forecasting the duration and outcome of the war; but
this result is hard to interpret since German calorie intake is much more correlated with Allied innova-
tions than with German innovations. Furthermore U.K. meat consumption has the same basic correlation
pattern as German calorie intake: negatively correlated with Allied innovations, positively correlated with
the Central Power’s innovations. If currency traders were using data from the home-fronts to adjust their
expectations about the war, I cannot explain why these two series would have the same correlation pattern.
In contrast, consumption of bread and flour in the U.K. is essentially uncorrelated with all of the imputed
series. Finally, U.K. shipping losses are also uncorrelated with all the imputed series. U.K. shipping losses
rose steadily during the first half of the war, peaking in early 1917; after this peak, shipping losses steadily
declined. This time series pattern does not correspond to the pattern in the innovations or the ẑ t series.




                                                               27
6 Conclusion

In this paper I decompose the exchange rate movements for five of the primary European belligerents
during World War I into three components: a common trend, f t ; a common factor, zt ; and a country-
specific component. Movements in the common trend are consistent with the quantity theory of money.
One-step-ahead forecasts of the common trend, fˆt , are highly correlated with a common trend of money
stocks. The common factor provides evidence that the value of these currencies also responded predictably
to non-monetary events, and in particular to events that help forecast future government surpluses.
    Both the casualty and foreign exchange data presented in this paper illustrate that, for the first two and
half years, the war was essentially a stalemate. The ẑt series generally oscillated around zero and relatively
few prisoners of war were taken. In late 1917 and early 1918 with the collapse of Russia in the Eastern
Front, it appeared that Germany had the upper hand. During this period the ẑ t series in both models
declined steadily, and the number of British taken prisoner relative to the Germans rose dramatically.
However as the German’s final offensive collapsed in the Summer of 1918 and as U.S. troops began make
their presence felt, one can see the tide turning in both ẑt series and the POWs series: ẑt rose sharply and
the Germans began to surrender in large numbers.
    While these results are consistent with conventional understandings of World War I military history,
they are perhaps at odds with modern views of financial markets during the war. It is often argued that
the First World War was a time of large government interventions in foreign exchange markets. While
there are numerous examples of government attempts to control the value of their currencies, the results
presented here demonstrate that these attempts were not entirely successful. During the war all five of the
currencies depreciated relative to the Swiss franc despite a doubling of the Swiss price level. Furthermore,
as in other wars, currencies of the opposing countries moved in opposite directions in response to military
events.




                                                      28
References

 [1] Anderson, Theodore (1984) An Introduction to Multivariate Statistical Analysis New York: John
     Wiley and Sons.

 [2] Anderson, Evan, Lars Hansen, Ellen McGrattan, and Thomas Sargent (1996) “Mechanics of Forming
     and Estimating Dynamic Linear Economies,” in H. Amman et al., eds. Handbook of Computational
     Economics, Vol 1, Amsterdam: Elsevier.

 [3] Barro, Robert (1979) “On the Determination of the Public Debt,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol.
     87, (October), pp. 940-971.

 [4] Beveridge, William (1928) British Food Control, London: Oxford University Press.

 [5] Bogart, Ernest (1921) War Costs and Their Financing, New York: D. Appleton and Company.

 [6] Bordo, Michael, and Eugene White (1991) “British and French Finance During the Napoleonic
     Wars,” in Bordo and Capie, eds. Monetary Regimes in Transition, Cambridge, Cambridge Univer-
     sity Press.

 [7] Bordo, Michael, and Finn Kydland (1995) “The Gold Standard As a Rule: An Essay in Exploration,”
     Journal of Economic History, Vol. 32, pages 423-464.

 [8] Brown, William (1940) The International Gold Standard Reinterpreted, 1914-1934 New York: Na-
     tional Bureau of Economic Research.

 [9] Brown, William, and Richard Burdekin (2000) “Turning Points in the U.S. Civil War: A British
     Perspective,” Journal of Economic History, Vol. 60. pages 216-231.

[10] Bulletin de la Statistique General de la France, various issues 1914-1919.

[11] Burnett, Phillip (1965) Reparations at the Paris Peace Conference from the Standpoint of the Ameri-
     can Delegation New York: Columbia University Press.

[12] Dupuy, Trevor, and Gay Hammerman (1967) Stalemate in the Trenches: November, 1914 - March,
     1918, New York: Franklin Watts, Inc.

[13] Dupuy, Trevor (1977) A Genius for War: The German Army and General Staff, 1807-1945, Engle-
     wood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall Inc.

                                                   29
[14] Fayle, C. Ernest (1927) The War and the Shipping Industry, London: Oxford University Press.

[15] Federal Reserve Bulletin, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System: Washington DC, May
     1, 1918.

[16] Federal Reserve Bulletin, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System: Washington DC, Jan-
     uary, 1920.

[17] Ferguson, Niall (1998) The Pity of War, London: Penguin Press.

[18] Frey, Bruno, and Marcel Kucher (1997) “Bond Values and World War II Events,” manuscript, Insti-
     tute of Empirical Economic Research at the University of Zurich.

[19] Gilbert, Martin (1994) The First World War: A Complete History, New York: Henry Holt and Co.

[20] Kuczynski, R. R. (1923) “German Taxation Policy in the World War,” Journal of Political Economy,
     Vol 31, pages 763-789.

[21] Larcher, Lieutenant-Colonel (1934) “Donnees Statistiques Sur Les Forces Francaises 1914-1918”
     Revue Militaire Francaise, No 156, (June), pp. 351-363.

[22] McCandless, George (1996) “Money, Expectations, and the Civil War,” American Economic Review,
     Vol. 86, (June), pp. 661-671.

[23] Mitchell, Wesley (1903) A History of the Greenbacks Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press.

[24] Offer, Avner (1989) The First World War: An Agrarian Interpretation New York: Oxford University
     Press.

[25] Roll, Richard (1972) “Interest Rates and Price Expectations During the Civil War,” Journal of Eco-
     nomic History, Vol. 32, pages 476-498.

[26] Swiss Bank Corporation (1918) Revue Economique et Financiere Suisse, 1914-1917.

[27] Swiss Bank Corporation (1919) Revue Commerciale et Industrielle Suisse, 1914-1918.

[28] Swiss Bank Corporation (1920) La Situation Economique et Financiere de la Suisse, 1919.

[29] Taylor, A.J.P. (1980) The First World War: An Illustrated History, New York: Perigee Books.


                                                  30
[30] War Office (1922) Statistics of the Military Effort of the British Empire During the Great War, Lon-
     don: H.M. Stationery Office.

[31] Weidenmier, Marc (1999) Financial Aspects of the American Civil War: War News, Price Risk, and
     the Processing of Information, unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. University of Illinois.

[32] Willard, Kristen, Timothy Guinnane, and Harvey Rosen (1996) “Turning Points in the Civil War:
     Views from the Greenback Market,” American Economic Review, Vol. 86, pp. 1001-1018.

[33] Young, John (1925) European Currency and Finance, prepared for the United States Senate Com-
     mission on Gold and Silver Inquiry, Government Printing Office, Washington DC.




                                                    31
