                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   DETERMINANTS OF REAL HOUSE PRICE DYNAMICS


                                         Dennis R. Capozza
                                        Patric H. Hendershott
                                           Charlotte Mack
                                        Christopher J. Mayer


                                         Working Paper 9262
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9262


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     October 2002




We thank Steven Van Emmerik and the participants in seminars at Columbia University, the
University of Michigan, and the ASSA meetings for helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Dennis R. Capozza, Patric H. Hendershott, Charlotte Mack, and Christopher J. Mayer. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Determinants of Real House Price Dynamics
Dennis R. Capozza, Patric H. Hendershott, Charlotte Mack, and Christopher J. Mayer
NBER Working Paper No. 9262
October 2002
JEL No. G120, R310

                                            ABSTRACT



    We explore the dynamics of real house prices by estimating serial correlation and mean reversion
coefficients from a panel data set of 62 metro areas from 1979-1995. The serial correlation and
reversion parameters are then shown to vary cross sectionally with city size, real income growth,
population growth, and real construction costs. Serial correlation is higher in metro areas with higher
real income, population growth and real construction costs. Mean reversion is greater in large metro
areas and faster-growing cities with lower construction costs. Empirically, substantial overshooting
of prices can occur in high real construction cost areas, which have high serial correlation and low
mean reversion, such as the coastal cities of Boston, New York, San Francisco, Los Angeles and San
Diego.


Dennis R. Capozza                                  Patric H. Hendershott
University of Michigan Business School             University of Aberdeen Business School
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                                Old Aberdeen AB24 3UF
capozza@umich.edu                                  Scotland, UK
                                                   and NBER
                                                   phh3939@uslink.net


Charlotte Mack                                     Christopher J. Mayer
University of Michigan                             Wharton School
Ann Arbor, MI 48109                                University of Pennsylvania
cym@umich.edu                                      Philadelphia, PA 19104-6330
                                                   mayerc@wharton.upenn.edu
Determinants of Real House Price Dynamics
        Numerous studies of a variety of asset markets have now documented the

existence of short horizon serial correlation and long horizon mean reversion in asset

prices. Among asset markets, the most heavily researched is the equity market. Two

examples include Fama and French (1988) and Poterba and Summers (1988). Using

different methodologies both studies find significant evidence of mean reversion at

long horizons. For example, Fama and French conclude that “predictable variation is

estimated to be about 40 percent of 3-5 year return variances for portfolios of small

firms.”1 Time varying equilibrium expected returns and investor overreaction have

been proposed as possible explanations.2

        The focus of our research is the U.S single-family housing market. As has

been done for other asset types, earlier studies of housing have documented both

serial correlation (Case and Shiller, 1989; Abraham and Hendershott, 1993;) and

mean reversion (Abraham and Hendershott, 1996; Capozza and Seguin, 1996;

Malpezzi, 1999). From these studies and from the observed behavior of housing

prices in regional markets, it is clear that the extent of correlation or reversion varies

with location. For example, Abraham and Hendershott (1996) document a significant

difference in time series properties between coastal and inland cities. The logical



1
 A recent study that models “fundamental” value using dividends and earnings is Chiang,
Davidson and Okunev (1997).
2
  There is a long literature in international trade that explains exchange rate movements as
reversion to purchasing power parity (fundamental value). A recent example that uses panel
data is Frankel and Rose (1996). They find “strong evidence of mean reversion that is
similar to that from long time-series.”
questions to ask are what variables other than the coast might affect time

series properties (or what variables might “coast” proxy for) and why do regions react

differently to economic shocks?3

        We use a large panel data set for 62 US metropolitan areas from 1979 to 1995.

The data set includes economic, demographic, and political variables for each of the

metro areas. We explore two kinds of hypotheses for serial correlation and mean

reversion: information or transaction based explanations and supply based theories.

Housing is highly heterogeneous so that participants have difficulty assessing the

instantaneous “true” price for any given property. In general (Quan and Quigley,

1991), an optimal “appraisal” weights current and past transactions prices of similar

properties. As a result transaction frequency can affect the rate of information

dissemination in a housing market. Transaction frequency also affects reservation

prices in search models of the housing market (Wheaton, 1990). Whenever economic

or demographic variables affect transaction frequency, some metro areas may react

either faster or with more amplitude to a given economic shock than other areas.

        Further, any given positive economic shock will be easier for an area to

absorb if the housing stock can be increased quickly and at low cost. Therefore we

hypothesize that variables proxying for the cost and difficulty of adding to the supply

of housing should affect the time series properties of housing prices. To preview the




3
  A recent study that is the first to attempt to explain differences among regions is Lamont
and Stein (1999). They find that “where homeowners are more leveraged . . . house prices
react more sensitively to city-specific shocks.”
conclusions we find evidence that both information dissemination and supply

factors influence the dynamics of housing prices.

        Our three contributions are first to provide additional evidence on serial

correlation and mean reversion in house prices using a much larger panel data set

than previously. Our results are consistent with earlier estimates but lie at the upper

end of their range. Secondly we analyze the difference equation implied by serial

correlation and mean reversion and show that the estimates for most metro areas lie in

the damped cyclical range. Third and most importantly, we model and estimate

equations relating the extent of serial correlation and mean reversion to possible

determinants. We explore the role of information dissemination, supply constraints,

and backward-looking expectation formation on market dynamics.

        In the next section we develop the difference equation and the empirical

specification. The third section describes the panel data set we use for our estimates

and the fourth section discusses the empirical results. Simulation results indicate the

wide variation in possible dynamics. The final section concludes with suggestions

for future research and policy implications.

Model
        It is assumed that in each time period, t, and in each metro area there is a

fundamental value for housing that is determined by economic conditions.

        Pt * = p( X t )                                                                (1)

where P* is the log of real fundamental value in the metro area and Xt is a vector of

exogenous explanatory variables.
        Following Abraham and Hendershott (1996), value changes are

governed by reversion to this fundamental value and by serial correlation according

to

        ∆Pt = α∆Pt −1 + β ( Pt *−1 − Pt −1 ) + γ∆Pt *                                    (2)

where Pt is the log of real house values at time t and ∆ is the difference operator. The

first term on the right in (2) is the serial correlation term. α
                                                                is the serial correlation

coefficient. The second term causes reversion to fundamental value. β (0<β<1) is

the rate of adjustment to fundamental value. The third term allows for immediate

partial adjustment to fundamentals. Partial adjustment implies that 0< γ <1.

        Equation (2) can be rewritten in difference equation form as

        Pt − (1 + α − β ) Pt −1 + αPt − 2 = γPt* + ( β − γ ) Pt*−1                       (3)

The dynamic behavior of (3) is studied by applying the “z-transform,” bn = Pn, and

then analyzing the resulting “characteristic equation” of the difference equation in (3)

given by

        b 2 − (1 + α − β )b + α = 0                                                      (4)

        Figure 1 summarizes the analysis. In the figure, the curve defined by

        (1 + α − β ) 2 = 4α                                                              (5)

divides the parameter space into a cycles region below the curve and a no cycle

region above the curve. The vertical line at α =1 divides the parameter space into an

explosive region to the right of the line and a damped region to the left. When the

autocorrelation coefficient is above unity deviations from steady state are magnified
over time and the path of values diverges from fundamentals.

         From Figure 1 it is clear that many kinds of dynamic behavior can be

accommodated within this simple model. Loosely speaking, as the serial correlation

coefficient, α, increases, the amplitude and persistence of cycles increases. As the

reversion coefficient, β, increases, the frequency and amplitude of the cycle

increases.

The Hypotheses

         We wish to explore the causes of differences in the dynamic response of

metro areas to shocks to the local economy. In the context of the model, these

differences will appear as different estimates of alpha and beta. Therefore we rewrite

(2) as

         ∆Pkt = (α + ∑ α i (Ykit − Y *i ))∆Pk ,t −1 + ( β + ∑ β i (Ykit − Y *i ))( Pk*,t −1 − Pk ,t −1 ) + γ∆Pkt*
                         i                                       i




where the Yi , which may include a subset of X, are independent variables, Y*

represents the mean value, and k indexes cities.

Information Costs
         An important issue is the choice of the Yi. First we consider the role of

information dissemination. In real estate markets information costs are high,

transactions are infrequent, and the product is highly heterogeneous. As a result

participants have difficulty assessing the current value of properties and may have to

use sales distant in time or location for setting reservation prices (Quan and Quigley

1991). Markets with a higher level of transactions have lower information costs and

thus prices should adjust more quickly to their fundamental value, i.e., mean
reversion should be greater. We include population as a measure of the

number of transactions and thus information costs.

       Another measure of the importance of information derives from models of

search in housing markets (Wheaton, 1990, and DiPasquale and Wheaton, 1996). In

these models, a positive real income shock causes existing homeowners to be under

housed and thus to move or renovate to increase their housing consumption to the

new equilibrium levels. When transactions volume increases, search costs decline

and the reservation price for both buyers and sellers increases. Once the adjustment

to new housing needs has occurred, transactions volume falls back to its long-run

level. In terms of our model, higher real income growth should proxy for higher

transactions volume and lower search costs, which should lead to faster mean

reversion.

Construction Costs
       A second set of hypotheses relate to the real cost of new housing. We identify

possible cost effects both within a given market and across markets. Across different

markets high real construction costs may serve as indicators of factors that reduce the

short-run responsiveness of supply to demand shocks. This may be the case if high

real costs are correlated with unpriced supply restrictions. Regulation is an example

of one such restriction. Stricter regulations on new development such as minimum

lot size or regulatory-induced lags have two effects; they increase the cost of new

housing (both in an absolute terms, and relative to existing housing) and they reduce

the ability of builders to respond quickly to demand shocks. Mayer and Somerville
(2000) show that construction is less responsive to price shocks in markets

with more local regulation.

       In the context of our model, we hypothesize that higher real construction costs

are correlated with slower mean reversion and more serial correlation. The latter

effect may be especially controversial. New supply serves to reduce the degree of

serial correlation because, in the absence of a futures market, it is one way that

participants can arbitrage inefficient pricing. In markets where supply can respond

quickly to price shocks, serial correlation should be lower.

Expectations
       Finally, we look for evidence of “euphoria” (Capozza and Seguin, 1996), or

backward-looking expectations as an indicator of the degree of serial correlation.

Case and Shiller (1988, 1989) and Shiller (1990) posit that serial correlation in real

estate markets is partially due to backwards-looking expectations of market

participants.4 Case and Shiller (1988) have conducted surveys of recent buyers,

showing that buyers in booming markets have greater expected house price

appreciation than buyers in a control market. Buyers in the booming market indicate

that they treat the purchase of a home more as an investment, and discuss housing

market changes more frequently. By contrast, buyers in the control market spend less

time discussing the housing market, and place more weight on the consumption value

of a home, as opposed to its investment value. To the extent that these expectations

are incorporated into observed transaction prices, strong markets should have more
serial correlation than markets with slower income growth. We include real

income growth as an indicator of the state of the economic cycle and long-run

population growth is included to measure the role of inertia or backward-looking

expectations in serial correlation.

       To summarize, higher real income and population growth and a high level of

real construction costs are expected to increase serial correlation. Higher real income

growth, larger metro area size (population) and a lower level of real construction

costs should increase mean reversion. We test these hypotheses below.

Data
       Our data are a subset of the large panel data set described in Capozza,

Kazarian, and Thomson (1997). The data for this study cover 62 metro areas for the

17 years from 1979-1995. Included among the variables are median house prices,

population, personal income, real construction costs, a land supply index, the

consumer price index, mortgage rates, property tax rates, and income tax rates. The

data are annual series with the exception of income tax rates, which derive from the

decennial census. The land supply index, a measure of the percentage of the land

around the city that is available for development, also varies across cities, but not

over time. (See Rose 1989 and Capozza and Seguin 1996 for more detail on this

variable.) Table 1 provides summary statistics on the data series.




4
 Hendershott (2000) finds evidence of backwards-looking expectations in the Sydney office
market.
House Prices
       Two variables require more discussion. The first is the median house price

series. There is considerable debate over the merits of using median house price data

versus repeat sales data. This study uses the NAR median price series because of its

long history and extensive coverage of metro areas. Repeat sales data were available

at the regional level from the FHLMC but for only a limited number of MSAs. The

median and the repeat sales price series exhibit similar overall patterns, but there are

timing differences, especially in the Northeast and the Southeast. The Pearson

product-moment correlations of the price changes are 0.59, 0.73, 0.89, 0.88 and 0.92

for the Northeast, Southeast, North Central, Southwest and West regions respectively.

The correlations of first differences suggest there will not be a large difference

between empirical estimates from the two data series. We report the results of a

robustness check using the FHLMC data below.

       Because our model estimates the long-run real house price level in the first

stage, we take advantage of the level differences within a city obtained with median

prices. Repeat sales indexes only measure relative prices within a city over time, but

not across different cities, and thus are not well suited for estimation procedures that

attempt to exploit the cross-sectional variation by using the absolute dollar value of

housing.

       Neither median nor repeat sales data are fully quality adjusted. The upward

quality drift in the median prices is about 2% per year (Hendershott and Thibodeau,

1990) and occurs both because new houses of above average quality are added and

because existing houses are renovated. In the typical metro area, much of the quality
drift arises from renovations. Repeat sales data include only existing houses

so that only the drift from renovations applies. Since typical repeat sales procedures

attempt to exclude or adjust for houses that increase in size, the quality drift is

mitigated. Many existing houses are renovated soon after purchase. For our

purposes, a constant rate of upward drift will not affect the results since we include

dummy variables for each year of the sample. A more important issue is systematic

changes in the quality of the median house over an economic cycle. If the quality of

the median house is systematically different near peaks than it is near troughs, the

median price series will over or under estimate cyclical movements. However, as

long as this bias is constant across cities, it will not impact our estimates of the

factors that affect the cyclicality of prices.

User Cost
        The user cost (UC) is a derived variable. It is an attempt to capture the after

tax cost of home ownership. Our calculation adjusts ownership costs for taxes and

appreciation rates:

 UC = (Mortgage rate+Property tax rate)(1-Income tax rate) - Inflation rate             (7)

The source and definition of all the right hand side variables appear in Appendix A.

The metropolitan areas included in the study are listed in Appendix B. Two data

issues are worth noting. First, only the tax rate variables vary cross-sectionally so

that user cost is mainly a time series variable. Mortgage rates and inflation rates are

national series. Second, since the expected appreciation of housing is being measured

by the national inflation rate (CPI) during the previous year, the variation in
expectations by location, which may be substantial, is not incorporated.

Clearly more sophisticated measures of user cost are possible but beyond the scope of

this research.

Empirical Estimates

       Our empirics are developed in three stages. First, we estimate the long run

price relationship, equation (1). Second, we estimate an adjustment relationship,

equation (2), where the serial correlation and mean reversion variables are added to

the model. Lastly, we allow the serial correlation and mean reversion coefficients to

vary over time and space by estimating equation (6).

Preliminaries: The Long Run Relationship
       We begin by fitting a long-run equilibrium equation for real house price levels

in a metro area using the annual panel data described in the previous section.

Following the urban asset pricing models of Capozza and Helsley (1989, 1990) and

Capozza and Sick (1994), equilibrium real house prices are modeled as a function of

the size of a metro area (population level and real median income), the real

construction cost of converting land from agricultural use to new residential

structures, an expected growth premium, and the user cost of owner-occupied

housing. The equation is estimated in two versions, first using OLS and second using

a panel data estimator that controls for both year and metro area fixed effects. These

fixed effects will capture any systematic differences in the average quality of housing

across cities or over time. All variables are measured in logs.

       Estimates from the above equation are given in Table 2. All variables in

model 1 of Table 2 have the expected sign, and many coefficients have the expected
magnitude. In particular, real median house prices are positively related to

total population, real median income, an index of real construction costs, and the 5-

year growth rate in population (proxying for the long-run expected growth rate of

population), and are negatively related to the user cost of housing and the land supply

index.5 The coefficients suggest reasonable elasticities. For example, the coefficient

on real construction cost is 1.1 in model 1.1 and 1.2 in model 2 when fixed effects are

included in the specification. Neither value is statistically different from the

theoretical prediction of 1.03 at the 5 percent level. (The mean index value is 0.97;

therefore a .01 unit increase in the cost index leads to a 1.03 (=1/0.97) percent

increase in prices.) The coefficients on real income suggest that a one percent rise in

a metro area’s real income leads to almost a half percent increase in real median

house prices, either because the prices of more desirable locations are bid up or

because consumers improve their existing units.6 The amount of developable land

around a city, measured by the land supply index, has a negative and significant

effect on the real price level, as would be expected.

        The real price elasticity with respect to city size (population) in model 2 is

0.15, smaller than would be obtained from a standard monocentric city urban model.

However, the existence of fringe cities should lower the expected size of the

population coefficient relative to a standard urban model. Long-run growth has a




5
  Blanchard and Katz (1992) show that the growth rate of population is persistent over time
using state-level data over several decades.
6
  This is consistent with earlier work (see Bourassa, Hendershott and Murphy, 2001).
large impact on real price levels; a one percent increase in the population

growth rate over the last five years leads to 1½ percent higher real house price.

        In both models 1 and 2, the coefficients on population level and growth are

similar. Perhaps due to limited cross-sectional variation, the user cost coefficients of

-0.04 and -0.09 are statistically different from zero, but far from the value of -1.0

predicted by theory.7 In the empirical work that follows, we use model 2. F-tests of

the significance of the time and metro area effects reject that these fixed effects equal

zero at the 0.001 confidence level.

Dynamics: the Adjustment Equation
        The second stage analysis uses the estimates of P* from the first stage

equation to “anchor” the estimates of price changes. In particular, we estimate

equation (2) where α
                    represents the degree of serial correlation, β is the extent of

mean reversion, and γ is the contemporaneous adjustment of prices to current shocks.

If house prices adjusted instantaneously to local economic shocks and real estate

markets were perfectly efficient,  γ would equal 1, and α would equal 0 (theory has

no prediction about the estimated value of β because actual house prices would never

deviate from their long-run fundamentals.) However, abundant academic research

has shown that α is positive and economically and statistically significant. For

example, Case and Shiller (1989) estimate that annual serial correlation in their




7
 In a study using similar cities but decennial data only (1970, 1980 and 1990), Capozza,
Green and Hendershott (1996) find a price elasticity of –0.8, insignificantly different from –
1.0.
sample of 4 cities ranges from 0.25 to 0.5.8 Abraham and Hendershott

(1993) obtain an estimate of 0.4 on a panel of 29 cities. When the cities are divided

roughly in half, the estimate is 0.5 for the coastal cities versus 0.2 for the inland cities

(Abraham and Hendershott, 1996). When house prices converge to their fundamental

values in the long run,  α >0 implies β >0.

        Estimates from this second stage equation are given in the Model 1 of Table

3. To control for possible omitted local factors that might cause differential

appreciation rates, we initially included fixed effects for all MSAs. The subsequent

regressions do not include these fixed effects in the second stage because an F-test of

the significance of these factors does not allow for rejection at conventional

confidence levels and the empirical work is little changed by their exclusion.

        The empirical results in Table 3 are consistent with the previous real estate

literature, and suggest slow responses for real estate relative to other assets. The

immediate adjustment coefficient, γ , for example, suggests that current house prices

adjust to 52 percent of the value of a shock to predicted (or fundamental) house price

levels in the year of the shock. In addition, house prices also exhibit strong serial

correlation, with a coefficient of 0.33. This estimate is consistent with those in

Abraham and Hendershott and Case and Shiller. Furthermore, our estimates show




8
 Case and Shiller also note that the construction of repeat sales indexes induces spurious
serial correlation in estimators derived from a single sample of houses. Such a bias does not
affect our sample because we use median sales prices. Even with repeat sales indexes,
however, spurious serial correlation would only bias the intercept in the third stage, not the
coefficients on other explanatory variables.
that house prices take a long time to converge to their long-run values.

Actual prices converge only 25 percent (= β) of this difference every year.

       Of course the degrees of serial correlation and mean reversion are not constant

across markets. Case and Shiller find the degree of serial correlation varies across

four markets and Abraham and Hendershott (1996) report that cities on the coasts

(e.g., Boston, New York, San Francisco, Los Angeles) have had far more severe real

estate cycles, owing to both higher serial correlation and lower mean reversion, than

cities in the Midwest (e.g., Chicago, Milwaukee, Cleveland, Detroit).

Endogenous Dynamic Adjustment
       In the third stage, we estimate possible determinants of the degree of serial

correlation and mean reversion by interacting variables derived from hypotheses

described earlier –population growth (information dissemination), real income

growth (search costs, behavioral models), and real construction costs (supply

elasticities) – with the serial correlation and mean reversion variables, as in equation

(6). That is, serial correlation and mean reversion are allowed to vary both over time

and over space.

       These estimates, presented in models 2 and 3 in Table 3, provide significant

evidence consistent with all three of the hypotheses. The most striking results are the

determinants of serial correlation. High real construction costs and faster growth in

both population and real income are associated with greater autocorrelation. A one-

standard deviation shock of two percent to either real income or the 5-year growth

rate of population leads to a 10 percent increase in serial correlation (a third of the

overall effect in model 1). Both of these results suggest that house prices exhibit
much more serial correlation, and thus a greater likelihood of overshooting

their fundamental values, in metro areas in the midst of a strong economic

expansions.

        Differences across MSAs in real construction costs lead to economically and

statistically significant differences in serial correlation. For example, an increase in

real construction costs of 10 percent would increase serial correlation by 15

percentage points--one-half of the average serial correlation coefficient in model 1.

To the extent that high construction costs are related to inelastic supply, the costs may

be indicative of factors that do not allow the supply of new houses to adjust quickly

to demand shocks. Regulation or geography are two examples of such factors. Many

types of land use regulation raise development costs and make it more difficult for

developers to respond to market signals. Mayer and Somerville (2000), for example,

show that higher levels of regulation lead to fewer permits and lower supply

elasticities. Reduced land availability, either because of historic development or

small farms at the periphery of a city, may make land assembly more difficult and

expensive.

        In model 3, we explore the extent to which geography (the land supply index)

is related to the construction cost result reported earlier. However, the coefficient on

the land supply interaction is the opposite of that predicted by theory and not

statistically significant.

        While the results on the impact of various factors explaining the degree of

mean reversion are consistent with the hypotheses, they are weaker in terms of
economic and statistical significance. The interaction coefficients are

statistically significant at the 5 or 10 percent levels. Metro area size is positively

related to the degree of mean reversion, an effect that would be predicted from search

models with imperfect information. Information about demand shocks is easier to

discern in thicker markets in which comparable units sell more often. Thus prices

should adjust more quickly to their fundamental levels because homeowners can

more easily determine a price for a house that incorporates latest market information.

The estimates show that prices revert to their mean 6 percentage points faster in a

metro area that is twice as large as a comparison metro area.

       Also consistent with search models, higher income growth leads to greater

mean reversion. As with population, the economic impact of differences in income

growth is moderate. A two-percentage point increase in the growth rate of income

leads to a three percent increase in mean reversion (10 percent of the total effect).

Finally, a 10 percent increase in real construction costs lowers mean reversion by four

percentage points.

Partial Adjustment, Serial Correlation, Mean Reversion and Cycles
       Evidence that real estate markets do not immediately adjust to changes in

fundamentals and exhibit serial correlation has often been cited as showing that real

estate price trends are caused by inefficiencies in real estate markets. That is,

inefficiencies in real estate markets lead to prices that do not immediately incorporate

all market information and thus exhibit smooth behavior. Others (e.g., Abraham and

Hendershott, 1996) have gone further, arguing that these inefficiencies have caused
house prices in some areas to significantly “overshoot” their fundamental

values, leading to large declines as prices return to their long-run values.

        The behavior of house prices in equation (2) is determined by three factors

(coefficients): partial adjustment to fundamentals (γ), serial correlation (α) and mean

reversion (β) For there to be significant “overshooting.” a minimum requirement is

that a combination of fast adjustment and serial correlation exist. Without the former,

serial correlation just helps prices to more rapidly rise or fall to the new equilibrium;

without the latter, there is nothing to generate overshooting. And even if this

combination exists, a series of positive shocks is necessary to get significant

overshooting, and a low degree of mean reversion is required or any overshooting

will quickly be reversed.

        To illustrate these points, we have simulated a six-year period of rapid (four

percent) growth in equilibrium real house prices, ending with the equilibrium being

26.5 percent higher. We simulate actual real price and the percentage overshooting –

the percentage difference between actual and equilibrium real price. The maximum

overshooting is given for combinations of γ (0.5 and 0.75), α (0.5, 0.667, 0.75 and

0.9) and β (0.1, 0.3 and 0.5) in Table 4. As can be seen, overshooting is less than

three percent for γ = α =0.5 irrespective of the value of β. If either γ is raised to 0.75

or α to 0.667, overshooting of 8 percent occurs if mean reversion is very low (β =

0.1). Double digit overshooting requires even higher values of γ and/or α or even

less mean reversion. To repeat, only if we have rapid adjustment to fundamentals,
high serial correlation, and low mean reversion can significant overshooting

occur.9 The serial correlation and mean reversion estimates in model 1 are too low

and high, respectively, for the existence of significant overshooting.

       On the other hand, the estimates of model 2 suggest possible large

overshooting. Rapid growth is not likely to do it because growth raises both

autocorrelation and mean reversion, the former contributing to overshooting but the

latter limiting it. However, high real construction costs both increase autocorrelation

and lower mean reversion. And real construction costs are much higher in some

areas (the large coastal cities) than in others. More specifically, real construction

costs are, on average, forty percent higher during our sample period in Boston, New

York, San Francisco, Los Angeles, Orange County and San Diego than in the rest of

the sample. For these six cities, autocorrelation is 0.9 and mean reversion is 0.1

according to our estimates. Accordingly, the simulations in Table 4 suggest the

likelihood of 27 percent overshooting in response to six years of four percent real

growth.

Robustness Tests
       In addition to the specifications reported above, a number of alternative

specifications were tried but not reported in the tables. With the available repeat

sales price data as the dependent variable in the stage 1 and 2 regression, the results

were quite economically similar to the equations in Table 2 but with smaller sample

sizes the independent variables were less statistically significant. In the second stage
regressions, the repeat sales data exhibit more serial correlation (0.55 versus

0.33) and less mean reversion (0.15 versus 0.25).

        As indicated earlier alternative panel error specifications were also tried and

tested against the models presented. Finally, because of the importance of supply in

the stage three regressions, additional variables on the regulatory structure for

housing supply were compiled and tested. These variables include data on local fees

payable by developers (use fees and total fees) as well as the average and maximum

times needed in the approval process. None of these regulatory variables was

statistically significant at the usual levels in the stage three regressions.

Conclusion

        Our results show that variation in the cyclical behavior of real house prices

across metropolitan areas is due to more than just variation in local economies.

House prices react differently to economic shocks depending on such factors as

growth rates, area size, and construction costs. The results are much stronger –

statistically and economically – in explaining serial correlation than mean reversion.

While the average city in the sample has an autocorrelation coefficient of 0.49, a city

with a zero growth rate of population and real income and relatively low real

construction costs (index=0.90) would have an autocorrelation coefficient of just

0.23. And a city with 4 percent growth in population and real income, and high real

construction costs (index=1.4) would have a coefficient of 0.75. Similar variation in




9
 Abraham and Hendershott (1996) and Bourassa et al (2001) obtained greater estimates of
overshooting because they assumed instantaneous adjustment to changed fundamentals.
city size (5 versus 10 million people) and real income growth rates (0 versus

4 percent) would lead to differences in mean reversion of 18 to 30 percent, with the

latter occurring in large, high real income growth cities.

        High real income growth boosts serial correlation and mean reversion,

although the former about three times as much as the latter. Nonetheless, the effects

on possible overshooting of real house prices in response to a cycle are not great.

High real construction costs, on the other hand, raise serial correlation and lower

mean reversion. The combination leads to real house prices continuing to rise beyond

their equilibrium values after growth has slowed, causing significant overshooting

and eventually a decline in prices. This evidence is consistent with the extreme

behavior of house prices in markets such as Los Angeles and Boston in the 1980s,

which had large increases in real incomes coupled with high real construction costs

over this period.

        From a theoretical perspective in which forward-looking prices should

immediately incorporate all available information about future changes in real house

prices, the impact of factors affecting serial correlation is difficult to explain.

Consider first the impact of growth rates of real income and population on the

momentum in real price changes (autocorrelation). An efficient market should

arbitrage (subject to high transaction costs) the expected cyclical behavior of real

prices, dampening cycles and reducing autocorrelation. In this sense, the positive

correlation between real construction cost and autocorrelation is instructive. In the

absence of complete markets, new construction is one means through which investors
can exploit inefficient pricing (i.e., home builders can supply more houses

when prices exceed their equilibrium level, forcing prices lower). Our results

indicate that markets with high construction costs have more autocorrelation.

       Like others before us, this paper does not explain why such arbitrage does not

occur more quickly. High transaction costs clearly limit the ability of investors to

buy housing when its expected future returns are high. However, individual

homebuyers and sellers could still incorporate this information in their transactions.

Future research could explore the micro evidence on the behavior of individual

homebuyers, particularly the role of liquidity, information, and psychology. Lamont

and Stein (1999) show that house prices in metro areas with high levels of leverage

are more sensitive to income shocks than house prices in metro areas with less

leverage. At an individual level, Genesove and Mayer (2001) show that leverage has

a large impact on seller reservation prices in a downturn, affecting both the

probability of sale, and the subsequent sales prices. Others have shown that liquidity

affects refinancing behavior and mobility. While Case and Shiller (1988) use surveys

to show that market conditions affect the reported expectations of recent home

buyers, few papers have explored the role of information and psychology on

expectations formations and transactions prices.

       From a policy perspective, this paper suggests ways to reduce the volatility of

real house prices. As Shiller (1993) has noted, the development of a futures market

could allow investors to buy or sell real estate with much lower transactions cost,

ensuring more efficient pricing. In the absence of complete markets, governments
could reduce barriers to new construction. In the past, many policymakers

have viewed developers as part of the problem--feeding the frenzy in a boom.

However, new construction is just the market’s response to high prices. The findings

here demonstrate that lower real construction costs have a role in dampening cycles.

Finally, developments in information technology will provide better information to

buyers and sellers, allowing them to negotiate more efficient agreements.
References

Abraham, Jesse and Patric H. Hendershott. 1993. “Patterns and Determinants of Metropolitan
House Prices, 1977-91” in Browne and Rosengreen (eds.), Real Estate and the Credit Crunch,
Proceedings of the 25th Annual Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference, 18-42.

__________. 1996. “Bubbles in Metropolitan Housing Markets.” Journal of Housing
Research, 7: 191-207.

Blanchard, Olivier and Lawrence Katz. 1992. “Regional Evolutions.” Brookings Papers on
Economic Activity, 1-61.

Bourassa, Stephen, Patric H.Hendershott and James L. Murphy. 2001. “Further Evidence on
the Existence of Housing Market Bubbles.” Journal of Property Research, 18. 1-20.

Capozza, Dennis R., Richard Green and Patric H. Hendershott. 1996. “Taxes, Home
Mortgage Borrowing and Residential Land Prices” in Aaron and Gale (eds.), Fundamental
Tax Reform, The Brookings Institution, Washington D.C., 181-204.

Capozza, Dennis R. and Robert Helsley. 1989. "The Fundamentals of Land Prices and Urban
Growth." Journal of Urban Economics, 26: 295-306.

_____. 1990. "The Stochastic City." Journal of Urban Economics, 28: 187-203.

Capozza, Dennis R., Dick Kazarian, and Tom Thomson. 1997. “Mortgage Default in Local
Markets.” Real Estate Economics, 26: 631-656.

Capozza, Dennis R. and Paul J. Seguin. 1996. "Expectations, Efficiency, and Euphoria in the
Housing Market." Regional Science and Urban Economics, 26: 369-386.

Capozza, Dennis R. and Gordon Sick. 1994. “The Risk Structure of Land Markets.” Journal
of Urban Economics, 35: 297-319.

Case, Karl E. and Robert J Shiller. 1988. “The Behavior of Home Buyers in Boom and Post-
boom Markets.” New England Economic Review, November/December, 29-46.

_____. 1989. “The Efficiency of the Market for Single Family Homes.” The American
Economic Review, 79: 125-37.

Chiang, Raymond, Ian Davidson and John Okunev. 1997. “Some Further Theoretical and
Empirical Implications regarding the Relationship between Earnings, Dividends and Stock
Prices.” Journal of Banking and Finance, 21, 17-35.

DiPasquale, Denise and William Wheaton. 1996. Urban Economics and Real Estate Markets,
Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ.

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French. 1988. “Permanent and Temporary Components of Stock
Prices.” Journal of Political Economy, 96, 246-273.
Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew Rose. 1996. “A Panel Project on Purchasing Power Parity:
Mean Reversion within and between Countries.” Journal of International Economics, 40,
209-224.

Genesove, David and Christopher Mayer, 2001. “Loss Aversion and Seller Behavior:
Evidence from the Housing Market.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116, 1233-60.

Hendershott, Patric H. 2000. “Property Asset Bubbles: Evidence from the Sydney Office
Market.” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 20: 67-81.

Hendershott, P.H., and T. Thibodeau. 1993. “The Relationship Between Median and
Constant Quality House Prices: Implications for Setting FHA Loan Limits.” Journal of the
American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association, 18: 323-334.

Lamont, Owen and Jeremy Stein. 1999. “Leverage and House Price Dynamics in U.S.
Cities.” RAND Journal of Economics, autumn.

Malpezzi, Steven, 1999. "A Simple Error Correction Model of Housing Prices." Journal of
Housing Economics, 8; 27-62.

Mayer, Christopher and Tsur Somerville 2000. “Land Use Regulation and New
Construction?" Regional Science and Urban Economics, 30: 639-662.

Poterba, James and Lawrence Summers. 1988. “Mean Reversion in Stock Prices: Evidence
and Implications.” Journal of Financial Economics, 22: 27-59.

Quan, Daniel C. and John Quigley. 1991. “Price Formation and the Appraisal Function in
Real Estate Markets.” Journal of Real Estate Finance and Economics, 4: 127-46.

Rose, Louis A. 1989. “Urban Land Supply: Natural and Contrived Restrictions.” Journal of
Urban Economics, 25: 325-45.

Shiller, Robert. 1990. “Market Volatility and Investor Behavior.” The American Economic
Review, 80: 58-62.

Shiller, Robert. 1993. Macro Markets. Clarendon Press: Oxford.

Wheaton, William C. 1990. “Vacancy, Search, and Prices in a Housing Market Matching
Model.” Journal of Political Economy, 98: 1270-92.
Appendix A: Data Sources and Definitions

Median sales price of existing homes & National Association of Realtors Real Estate
Outlook; annual data, except that latest year is arithmetic mean of quarterly prices

Metro area population & Annual mid-year estimate, Bureau of the Census; supplied
by the Bureau of Economic Analysis, May, 1995

Total employment, metro area & Bureau of Economic Analysis May 1995

Nominal personal income per capita & Bureau of Economic Analysis May 1995

Local area construction cost indexes & R.S. Means Handbook

State average property tax rates (used in calculating homeowner's % cost of capital)
& American Council on Intergovernmental Relations Significant Features of Fiscal
Federalism, 1994. The property tax series is published only occasionally

National average home mortgage interest rate (used in calculating homeowner's %
cost of capital) & Economic Report of the President for the current year, or Statistical
Abstract of the United States

The annualized Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers (used in deflating
income and house prices) & Electronic edition of the Economic Bulletin Board,
October 1995; the rate of change in the previous year is the expected inflation rate
used in the user cost calculation
Appendix B: Metropolitan Areas Included in the Study

Code name & Census name

Northern Atlantic Region
Boston & Boston-Worcester-Lawrence-Lowell-Brocktn, MA-NH (NECMA)
Hartford & Hartford, CT (NECMA)
Providence & Providence-Warwick-Pawtucket, RI (NECMA)
New York & New York-Northern New Jersey-Long Island, NY-NJ-CT-PA (CMSA)

Middle Atlantic Region
Baltimore & Baltimore, MD (PMSA)
Philadelphia & Philadelphia, PA-NJ (PMSA)
Washington DC & Washington, DC-MD-VA-WV (PMSA)

Southeastern Region
Birmingham & Birmingham (MSA)
Fort Lauderdale & Fort Lauderdale, FL (PMSA)
Knoxville & Knoxville, TN (MSA)
Louisville & Louisville, KY-IN MSA
Memphis & Memphis, TN-AR-MS MSA
Nashville & Nashville, TN (MSA)
New Orleans & New Orleans, LA (MSA)
Tampa & Tampa-St. Petersburg-Clearwater, FL (MSA)
West Palm Beach & West Palm Beach-Boca Raton, FL (MSA)

Great Lakes Region
Akron & Akron, OH (PMSA)
Albany & Albany-Schenectady-Troy, NY (MSA)
Chicago & Chicago-Gary-Kenosha, IL-IN-WI (CMSA)
Columbus & Columbus, OH (MSA)
Detroit & Detroit-Ann Arbor-Flint, MI (CMSA)
Grand Rapids & Grand Rapids-Muskegon-Holland, MI (MSA)
Indianapolis & Indianapolis, IN (MSA)
Milwaukee & Milwaukee-Waukesha, WI (PMSA)
Minneapolis-St. Paul & Minneapolis-St. Paul, MN-WI (MSA)
Rochester & Rochester, NY (MSA)
Saint Louis & Saint Louis, MO-IL (MSA)
Syracuse & Syracuse, NY (MSA)

Great Plains Region
Des Moines & Des Moines, IA (MSA)
Kansas City & Kansas City, MO-KS (MSA)
Omaha & Omaha, NE-IA (MSA)
Southwestern Region
Albuquerque & Albuquerque, NM (MSA)
El Paso & El Paso,TX (MSA)
Houston & Houston-Galveston-Brazoria, TX (CMSA)
Oklahoma City & Oklahoma City, OK (MSA)
Salt Lake & Salt Lake City-Ogden, UT (MSA)
San Antonio & San Antonio, TX (MSA)
Tulsa & Tulsa, OK (MSA)
Dallas & Dallas-Fort Worth, TX (CMSA)

Southern California Region
Los Angeles & Los Angeles-Long Beach, CA (PMSA)
Orange County & Anaheim-Santa Ana-Garden Grove (Orange County, CA)
Riverside-San Bernadino & Riverside-San Bernardino, CA (PMSA)
San Diego & San Diego, CA (MSA)

Northern Pacific Region
San Francisco & San Francisco-Oakland, CA (CMSA)
Table 1. Summary Statistics

                                          Standard
                              Mean                    Minimum   Maximum
                                          Deviation

 Real Price                   72,000      27,000      41,000    210,000

 Change in Real Price         0%          5%          -14%      29%

 Population                   2,300,000   3,100,000   370,000   20,000,000

 5 Year Change in
                              7%          7%          -6%       31%
 Population

 Real Personal Income         13,900      2,200       7,700     22,000

 Change in Real Personal
                              1%          2%          -7%       12%
 Income
 Real Construction Cost
                              0.97        0.10        0.78      1.5
 Index

 User Cost                    7%          n/m         0%        11%

 Land Supply Index            0.89        0.13        0.54      1




                                                                          31
       Table 2. Steady State Regression. Dependent variable is the log of real

price. OLS estimates of equation 1 in the text. Model 2 is estimated with fixed effects.


                                 Model 1                      Model 2
                                 OLS                          Fixed Effects

                                 Coefficient    T-Statistic   Coefficient     T-Statistic

 Log of Population               0.07           7.7           0.15            2.9

 Log of Real Median Income       0.45           9.7           0.43            5.3

 Real Construction Cost          1.10           14.8          1.20            13.9

 5-Year % Change in
                                 1.53           16.4          1.54            13.9
 Population

 Log of User Cost                -0.04          -3.1          -.09            -3.2


 Land Supply Index               -0.38          -7.6

 Fixed Effects (City, Year)      No                           Yes

 R2                              0.65                         0.43




       32
Table 3. Second Stage Price Change Regressions.

Dependent variable is the percent change in real housing price. Ordinary least squares estimates of equation 6 in the text with steady state
values estimated from model 2 of Table 1.
                                     Model 1                          Model 2                          Model 3
                                     Coefficient      T-Statistic     Coefficient      T-Statistic     Coefficient       T-Statistic
 Change in the First Stage Fitted     0.52             13.2            0.53             13.9             0.53             13.9

 Lagged Change in Real Price          0.33            12.2             0.49             1.8              0.49             1.2

 Change in Population times
                                                                       4.79             2.3              5.04             2.4
 Lagged Real Price Change
 Change in Real Income times
                                                                       5.02             4.2              5.05             4.2
 Lagged Real Price Change
 Real Construction Cost times
                                                                       1.47             6.1              1.62             6.0
 Lagged Real Price Change
 Land Supply Index timesLagged
                                                                                                         0.27             1.2
 Real Price Change
 Deviation from Steady State          0.25             13.1            0.26             1.7              0.27             1.6
 Log Population times Deviation
                                                                       0.06             2.4              0.06             2.3
 from Steady State
 Change in Real Income times
                                                                       1.40             1.7              1.43             1.8
 Deviation from Steady State
 Real Construction Cost times
                                                                       -0.40            -1.8             -0.39            -1.8
 Deviation from Steady State

 R2                                   0.42                             0.49                              0.46




       33
Table 4: Maximum Overshooting for Different Adjustment Parameters in Response to Six
Years of Four Percent Growth in the Equilibrium Price


                                   Mean Reversion Parameter (β)

 Adjustment      Autocorrelation
                                   0.1               0.3              0.5
 (γ )          (α)

 0.5             0.5               2                 3                2

 0.5             0.67              8                 6                4

 0.75            0.5               8                 5                3

 0.75            0.75              24                12               7

 0.5             0.9               27                14               8




34
Figure 1. The dynamic behavior of the difference equation.
        This graph illustrates the parameter values that generate housing cycles when
fundamentals are shocked. Values of the autocorrelation coefficient greater than 1 result in
explosive behavior. Parameter values that lie below the curve result in cycles.




                     0                                                      No Cycles
                             No Cycles


               -0.25

                                                   Cycles
                 -0.5

                                  Convergent                   Explosive
               -0.75


                    -1
                         0            0.5         1        1.5                     2
                                             Autocorrelation




        35
