                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                    HOW IMPORTANT ARE CLASSROOM PEER EFFECTS?
                      EVIDENCE FROM BOSTON’S METCO PROGRAM


                                            Joshua D. Angrist
                                               Kevin Lang


                                          Working Paper 9263
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9263


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




Special thanks go to Andrew Kolesnikov and especially Byron Lutz for outstanding research assistance, and
to Sue Picardo and the staff of the Brookline Public Schools data processing unit for help with data. We are
grateful to Jean McGuire and her staff at Metco, Inc. for helping us understand the history of Metco and the
placement process. Thanks also go to the Upjohn Institute for funding and to seminar participants at
Universitat Pomepeu Fabra, the MIT Labor Lunch, and the 2002 NBER Labor Studies meeting for helpful
comments. The views expressed in this paper are our own and not necessarily those of any of the individuals
or organizations from whose assistance we have benefitted.

© 2002 by Joshua D. Angrist and Kevin Lang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
How Important are Classroom Peer Effects? Evidence from Boston’s Metco Program
Joshua D. Angrist and Kevin Lang
NBER Working Paper No. 9263
October 2002
JEL No. I2, J7

                                           ABSTRACT

   Most integration programs transfer students between schools within districts. In this paper, we
study the impact of Metco, a long-running desegregation program that sends mostly black students
out of the Boston public school district to attend schools in more affluent suburban districts. We
focus on the impact of Metco on the students in one of the largest Metco-receiving districts. In the
2000 school year, Metco increased the proportion black in this district from about 7.5 percent to
almost 12.5 percent. Because Metco students have substantially lower test scores than local students,
this inflow generates a significant decline in scores, with an especially marked effect on the lower
quantiles. The overall decline is due to a composition effect, however, since OLS estimates show
no impact on average scores in the sample of all non-Metco students. On the other hand, OLS and
fixed effects estimates show some evidence of an effect on the scores of minority 3rd graders in
reading and language. Instrumental variables estimates for 3rd graders are imprecise but generally
in line with OLS. Further analysis shows the negative effects on 3rd graders to be clearly present
only for girls. Given the highly localized nature of these results, we conclude that any peer effects
from Metco are modest and short-lived.


Joshua D. Angrist                                         Kevin Lang
MIT                                                       Boston University
Department of Economics                                   Department of Economics
50 Memorial Drive                                         270 Bay State Road
Cambridge, MA 02142                                       Boston, MA 02215
and NBER                                                  and NBER
angrist@mit.edu                                           lang@bu.edu
        Few questions in American public life are as controversial as the social consequences of school

integration. Policy makers and researchers have debated the impact both on the individual students who are

bused to school for the purposes of racial balance, and on residential patterns in school districts affected by

busing. Even the proximate impact of desegregation efforts have not been clear cut. The Supreme Court’s

1955 Brown II decision ambitiously declared that schools should be integrated “with all deliberate speed,”

but in many districts integration was slow and incomplete. Integration policies nevertheless appear to have

been at least partly successful, in the sense that these policies increased the probability that white and black

students study togther (Welch and Light, 1987: Rosell and Armor, 1996). Moreover, research by labor

economists strongly suggests that the end of de jure segregation led to substantial economic gains for blacks.1

        Busing programs typically send black students to schools that were previously all-white and vice

versa, often in the face of resistance from local school boards and other elected officials. In an influential

paper, Coleman (1975) argued that court-ordered busing accelerated white’s exodus from central cities,

sparking a literature looking at the impact of desegregation efforts on racial mixing in schools. Few studies,

however, have looked at the impact of desegregation on the primarily white students who remain in the

schools to which black students are bused, i.e. on the students in schools where the percentage minority

increased as a consequence of busing.2 In this paper, we use the Boston area Metropolitan Council for

Educational Opportunities (Metco) desegregation program to study the impact of busing on students in

schools to which the Metco students were bused.

        The Metco program, one of the largest and longest-running desegregation programs in the US, is

unusual in that it sends mostly black students out of the Boston district into schools in the surrounding,

mostly white, suburban districts. In contrast with court-ordered desegregation efforts, Metco is voluntary

on the part of both the families of students being bused and the school districts receiving the bused students.



        1
         See, e.g., Smith and Welch (1989) and Card and Krueger (1992).
        2
         An exception is Guryan (2001), who looks at the impact of court-ordered busing on white and black
dropout rates. Clotfelter (1999) is a recent study of white flight.
Metco has not been associated with white flight. In 1970, four years before the 1974 Federal court decision

that imposed busing within the Boston district, 29 Metco-receiving districts enrolled almost 1400 students.

In the 2000-2001 school year, almost 3,200 Metco students attended school in 32 suburban districts. Metco-

receiving districts were and have remained relatively affluent suburban communities with growing

populations. In many of these districts, Metco students account for the majority of minority students. These

factors suggest that Metco provides a useful laboratory for the study of the impact of desegregation on

students in host districts.

        Our study focuses on the impact of Metco on the test scores of 3rd, 5th, and 7th graders in the

Brookline Public Schools, one of the largest Metco-receiving districts. The Brookline experience is of

historical interest since the Metco program was initiated by a group of Brookline civil rights activists. Along

with representatives from nine other school districts, Brookline School Committee member and MIT

professor Leon Trilling helped design the Metco program. While Brookline has one of the best school

systems in the state, it also has a substantial minority and immigrant population. This fact allows us to assess

the impact of Metco on different groups in the receiving district.

        In addition to providing an evaluation of the impact of Metco on students in Brookline schools, the

results presented here may shed light on more general questions regarding the school environment and peer

effects. As noted above, Metco substantially increases the minority population in schools in the receiving

districts. In addition, because Metco students have lower average test scores than suburban students, the

Metco program lowers average scores in the district. The relatively low scores of Metco students, a fact

noted by Metco critics, is politically significant in Massachusetts, where schools and districts are evaluated

on the basis of average test scores. More importantly, the increased presence of lower-performing students

in suburban districts may adversely affect students resident in the district if peer performance and/or racial




                                                       2
composition matters for student learning, a possibility explored in a large empirical literature.3

        The next section provides additional background on Metco and the Brookline school district.

Following this, Section II describes the data used here and presents descriptive statistics characterizing

Metco’s impact on the school environment. Section III discusses OLS and fixed-effects estimates of the

effect of Metco on the test scores of non-Metco students. In section IV, we report the results of an

instrumental variables (IV) strategy for estimating the effect of Metco. Section V concludes with an

assessment of the case for negative peer effects in the Metco program. There is some evidence of a negative

effect on the scores of minority 3rd grade girls in some subjects. But the highly specific nature of this result

suggests that negative peer effects, if any, are modest and short-lived.

        A noteworthy limitation of our study is the narrow focus on achievement as measured by test scores.

In particular, we have no information on the effect of Metco on racial attitudes and present only parenthetical

evidence suggesting a positive effect on the academic performance of the Metco pupils themselves. A

careful analysis of these issues is a prerequisite for a full evaluation of the program. Nevertheless, our results

support the view that there are no long-term effects on the academic performance of students in the receiving

district, a key concern in the Metco-policy debate.



                                             I. The Metco Program

A. Background

        The birth of Metco was an important chapter in the battle over school desegregation in Boston.4 In

1963 and 1964, black parents boycotted Boston schools for failing to integrate and, in 1974, Boston school

assignment was taken over by a Federal district judge after a protracted legal struggle. Against this backdrop,



        3
         Recent examples include Boozer, Krueger, and Wolkon, 1992; Hoxby, 2000; Kain, Hanushek, and Rivkin,
2002; Rivkin, 2000).
        4
         This section draws on Batson and Hayden (1987) and Metco (1970).

                                                        3
the Brookline Civil Rights Committee approached the Brookline School Committee in 1964 to request that

black students from Boston be enrolled in the Brookline Public Schools. In the first half of 1966, the

Brookline, Lexington, Newton, Wellesley, Braintree, Lincoln and Arlington School Committees agreed to

accept two hundred twenty students the following year. By 1970, twenty-nine suburban school districts had

enrolled 1,361 Metco students. Four of these districts later abandoned Metco, but 7 districts joined the

program.5 Metco-participating districts in the 2000-2001 school year, along with the number of Metco

students and the proportion minority in each district, are indicated on the enclosed map. Five percent of the

Boston district, or roughly 3,200 students, participate in Metco, and Metco students account for a substantial

fraction of the black and Hispanic students in most receiving districts.

         Boston parents who are interested in Metco place their child on a waiting list. Every year, Metco

coordinators in suburban districts notify METCO, Inc. of the number of openings they have for the following

year at each grade level. Applicants are selected from the waiting list on a first-come first-served basis.

Boston parents do not get to chose the suburban district where their child is placed although they may refuse

a placement. The waiting time for kindergarten entry is about 5 years and placement typically becomes more

difficult as grade advances. The state provides funding to districts that accept Metco students according to

a formula determined by legislators and the Massachusetts Department of Education. Today, state Metco

funding hovers around $2,800 per student, plus transportation costs, considerably below average per-student

expenditure in the state and less than provided by a state-wide school-choice program.6

         The Metco program remains controversial. There is a long waiting list and most suburban districts

still express strong support. But some Boston educators worry that Metco pulls relatively motivated or high-


         5
           Hamilton-Wenham, Milton, Dover, and Sherborn dropped out, though Dover-Sherborn, a joint high school
district, continues to enroll Metco students.
          6
            Under the state’s school choice law, school districts that participate in the school choice program receive
75% of costs, up to a limit of $5000 for students in regular, bilingual, or occupational education programs. The
tuition rate is 100% of costs for special education students. Transportation costs are paid by participating families.


                                                            4
achieving students out of the Boston Public Schools. Others believe Metco’s focus on race is anachronistic

(Tye, 1995a). Metco also generates controversy in some receiving districts. Critics argue that Metco is

costly, pulls down average test scores (a factor of increasing importance since Massachusetts introduced

mandatory state-wide testing), and negatively influences local students. In 1990, for example, the Lincoln

School Committee held a forum on Metco in response to concerns about costs, behavior problems, and the

time spent by teachers with Metco children (Cohen, 1990) . Lincoln’s Metco participation continues to be

high at about 13% of enrollment, but this is down from a target of 20% established in 1975. More recently,

the Lynnfield School Committee voted to withdraw from Metco in the wake of concerns that “minority

students are not being helped and are dragging down the rest of the school” (Vigue, 1999). The Lynnfield

decision was unpopular and later reversed.

         Despite strong public interest in the Metco program, there is little quantitative evidence on the effect

of Metco participation on the students commuting daily from Boston. This largely reflects the difficulty of

finding an appropriate comparison group for Metco students. Although METO students are more likely to

graduate from high school than are other Boston public school students, Metco students might well have had

more favorable outcomes in any event.7 On the other side of the Metco equation, there has been almost no

research on the impact of Metco participation in receiving districts, other than policy reviews of the sort

mentioned above.8



         7
          Two early largely descriptive studies are Boardman and Brandt (1968) and Clarke (1975) , who
interviewed Metco parents. Orfield, et al (1997) also surveyed Metco parents. More recently, Eaton (2001)
discusses interviews with adults who participated in Metco. These studies establish that most participants strongly
believe they benefitted from the program but were not designed to measure whether outcomes were improved for
participants. Armor (1972) compared Metco participants with a small number of non-participating siblings.
Recently, Elliott (1998) surveyed Metco graduates and a small comparison group, looking at the effect of Metco
participation on high school graduation and college attendance. These studies suffer from lack of a good control
group, and/or incomplete follow-up of applicants and controls. A small randomized study of the impact of a
desegregation program in Hartford is discussed in Crain and Strauss (1985).
         8
           Jaggia and Tuerck (2000) estimate the relation between district-level MCAS scores and a range of
variables, including percent Metco in district. They find a positive association between percent Metco and scores,
but this seems likely to be due to the fact that Metco-receiving districts are among the best in the state.

                                                          5
B. Metco in Brookline

        Brookline has about 6,000 public school students attending eight elementary schools with grades

kindergarten through eight and a single high school. Students generally attend neighborhood schools unless

they participate in a district-wide bilingual program. The Brookline School Committee has a long-standing

policy and a contractual agreement with the teachers’ union to cap class size at twenty-five. This is

accomplished by opening new classes where needed.

        The Brookline school district is affluent relative to Boston, but much more heterogeneous than most

suburban districts. Roughly 10% of Brookline students are black (including Metco students), 17% are Asian

and 4% are Hispanic. Typically, 10% are designated limited-English-proficient (LEP) and 12% qualify for

a free or reduced-price lunch. More than 30% come from homes in which English is not the first language.

Brookline also has a significant transient population with more renters than owners, yet maintains its

reputation as one of the best school systems in the state. Brookline students consistently do well on national

and state tests, have low dropout rates and a high probability of college attendance.

        As noted in the introduction, Brookline has a long-standing connection with the Metco program.

Under its current Metco participation agreement, Brookline enrolls 300 Metco students each year, about 5%

of total enrollment in the district. According to school administrators, Metco students are initially assigned

to classes where class size is anticipated to be small. Once a Metco student is assigned to a particular

Brookline school, transfer to a new school is highly unusual.



                                   II. Metco and the School Environment

A. Data and Descriptive Statistics

        Achievement is measured here using the Iowa Test of Basic Skills (ITBS) for 3rd, 5th and 7th graders.

ITBS tests were administered in March 1995 and March 1996 and then in November of each year after that.

Data are available for the 1994-2000 school years. In principle, all students except LEP or those with severe


                                                      6
special needs are tested. Parents may request that their child not be tested but such requests are rare. Our

analysis uses test scores reported as the national percentile rank (NPR), which measures achievement relative

to the score distribution in a 1992 reference population.

        For the purposes of this analysis and to assist the Brookline Schools with other evaluation efforts,

ITBS scores were linked with administrative data on student characteristics. This provides information such

as sex, race, and whether the student was a Metco student. Also included was programmatic information

such as whether students participated in an English as a second language/transitional bilingual English

(ESL/TBE) program or a special education program, and school characteristics such as enrollment in the

grade, number of classes in the grade and Metco enrollment in the grade.

        Table 1 presents descriptive information for the Brookline school system. A typical grade has close

to 500 students with an average class size of 20-21. Third and fifth grade classes are largely self-contained

except for special classes (e.g. art, physical education) so the class sizes for these grades represent the typical

number of students in the class for core subjects. For 7th grade students, the reported number of classes is the

number of “home rooms” and therefore a less accurate measure of class size for core subjects.

        The proportion of students taking the ITBS ranges from a low of 79% among 5th graders in 1995 to

a high of 95% among 7th graders in 1998. Special education and LEP students (in ESL/TBE programs)

account for most of those who do not take the test.          In particular, special education students with an

individualized education plan (IEP) that exempts them from taking standardized tests do not take the ITBS.

The remainder of those not tested consist of students who were ill or whose parents requested that they not

take the exam. Most of the variation in the proportion tested comes from efforts by school administrators

to increase the participation of special education students and from fluctuation in the number of special

education and LEP students. Variation in ESL/TBE participation across grades reflects the fact that most

Brookline students spend only one or two years in ESL or TBE programs.




                                                        7
         The percentage of students enrolled in special education programs averages somewhat below 20%.9

On the other hand, there has been a steady increase in the fraction of special education students tested. For

example, in 1996, special education students accounted for 8 percentage points of the almost 19% of 3rd

graders not tested. By the 2000 school year, special education students accounted for only about 4.5

percentage points of the 3rd graders not tested.

         We use two different measures of the proportion Metco. The first is an estimate of the proportion

of all students in a school, grade, and year from Metco. The second is the proportion of tested students from

Metco. Although Metco status is reasonably well measured from 1996 forward, both measures rely on

incomplete information for the 1994 and 1995 school years, for which Metco status must be inferred from

a variety of sources. The proportion Metco varies from a low of 2.6% in 1995 in 3rd grade to a high of 7.4%

in 1997 in 7th grade. Metco students generally represent a higher proportion of tested students than they do

of all students because few Metco students are LEP or have severe special needs. Consistent with the

program’s historical emphasis on desegregation, Metco students are overwhelmingly black. Hispanics

constitute the second largest Metco ethnic group, followed by a small number of Asians. Metco students are

also more likely to be female than male.10

         Table 2 reports the proportion of Metco students in total enrollment by grade, school, and year. The

table, which orders school from lowest to highest proportion Metco in each year, documents the considerable

variability in the proportion Metco across schools and over time. Nineteen of the 144 grade/school/year

combinations had no Metco students. At the other extreme, at one school over one-fifth of 7th graders in 1998

were Metco students, and of the 18 possible grade/year combinations, in 12 cases, there are at least two

schools where the proportion Metco was at least 9 percent of enrollment.



         9
         This excludes children in out-of-district placements. Special education status is unavailable for the first
two years in the sample but can be determined for students who remained in the school system after 1995.
         10
             Anecdotal evidence suggests Metco girls stay in the program longer than boys (Tye, 1995b).

                                                           8
        Not surprisingly given the relatively high average family income in Brookline and the reputation of

the school system, Brookline students generally perform well on the ITBS. As shown in Table 3, the average

core among non-Metco students NPR is 72 for 3rd and 5th graders and 76 for 7th graders. Test scores by

subject are similarly high, although language scores tend to be slightly lower than the overall scores, possibly

reflecting the high proportion of non-native English speakers. There is also a significant racial gap for

Brookline residents, with the average score for blacks around the overall national median (51st, 50th and 55th

percentiles in the three grades) while the scores of whites are around the top quartile (74th, 75th and 80th

percentiles in the three grades). The standard deviation of test scores ranges from 22-26 points, depending

on grade and subject. The standard deviation of school/year cell averages is naturally much smaller, in the

5-7 range.

        Among Brookline residents, the average NPR is almost one point higher for 5th graders than for 3rd

graders and 4 points higher for 7th graders than 5th graders. Since the ITBS is normed to a national standard

for each grade, this relative advancement suggests that a Brookline education increases student achievement

more than most school systems. Of course, this might also reflect differential selection, reflecting a process

whereby Brookline 7th graders are more favorably selected than 3rd and 5th graders.



B. Scores of Metco Students

        Metco students have test scores significantly below those of Brookline residents.11 The average core

NPR is about 22 points lower for Metco students, a gap almost as large as the standard deviation of test

scores among Brookline students. On the other hand, black students in the Metco program have scores

broadly similar to those of blacks from Brookline, while non-black Metco students, who are mostly Hispanic

and Asian, have scores between those of non-Metco Hispanics and Asians.


        11
          Children of town employees may attend Brookline schools regardless of where they live, and there are a
small number of (mostly foreign) students who pay tuition through a variety of programs. These groups are included
in our sample of Brookline residents.

                                                        9
         Despite the gap in scores by Metco status, Table 3 suggests that Metco students benefit from time

in the Metco program. In particular, Metco students generally show more improvement between 3rd and 7th

grades than do Brookline residents. Again, it is possible that this reflects more favorable sample selection

for older Metco students than for younger Metco students, but the simplest explanation is that the Brookline

Metco program raises the achievement of participants. Of course, the ideal evaluation strategy for assessing

the value of Metco for participants would use comparisons with an otherwise similar group of non-Metco

students from Boston.



C. Effect on the School Environment

         The differences in average achievement between resident and Metco students are large enough for

Metco participation to reduce average test scores in Brookline. This can be seen in Table 4. In particular,

Columns 1-8 report estimates of

                           yGgjt = "g + $j + (t + *mgjt + 8sgjt + ugjt,                                             (1)

where yGgjt is the average score in the grade g/school j/year t cell. sgjt is class size in the cell, including Metco,

and mgjt is percent Metco [where g×j×t=3×8×7=168 cells]. The results in the upper panel show estimated

effects of percent Metco enrolled and the lower panel shows estimates of coefficients on percent Metco

tested. The leftmost columns show unweighted estimates, while the middle columns shows estimates

weighted by the number of students tested in the cell. Columns 9-12 report the result of treating individual

students as the unit of observation and replacing yGgjt with Gygjt(i), the average score of students in the cell,

excluding student i. These estimates capture the effect of percent Metco on non-Metco students’ peer means

since Metco students are included in yGgjt(i) but excluded from the estimation sample.12

         The estimates tell a similar story for both Metco regressors and all three estimation strategies. The



         12
           Standard errors in columns 9-12 are adjusted for cell-clustering. All models include a set of cohort effects
(for 11 grade/year cohorts) . Models using micro-data include dummies for sex and race.

                                                            10
presence of Metco students has a marked negative effect on the average performance of the class. Increasing

the number of Metco students by ten percentage points (about two per class) lowers average performance

by about 2½ percentage points, or about 40 percent of the standard deviation of the group averages. This

does not imply that the presence of Metco students has a negative causal effect on non-Metco students,

however. As we show below, the estimated effect of percent Metco on average peer performance is

consistent with a pure composition effect arising from the large gap between the scores of Metco and non-

Metco students.

         Because Metco students’ scores are concentrated in the lower tail of the Brookline residents’ score

distribution, the percent Metco shifts the overall score distribution most sharply in the lower tail. To

illustrate this point, Table 5 shows the effect of percent Metco on the .2 quantile (2nd decile) of the score

distribution in each cell, denoted q.2gjt. The estimates in columns 1-8 were constructed by replacing yGgjt with

q.2gjt in equation (1), while columns 9-12 report quantile regression estimates using micro data. The estimates

in column 9 suggest that, on average, increasing the proportion Metco from 0 to 10 percent lowers the second

decile of the core NPR score distribution by 4-6 points.

         The results in Table 5, like those in Table 4, may simply reflect the fact that Metco students have

lower scores than Brookline residents on the ITBS. But the magnitude of this decline is important for other

reasons as well. First, previous research suggests a strong negative correlation between individual

achievement and the achievement levels of peers in the classroom. While the proper interpretation of this

correlation is disputed, it may indicate negative peer effects.13 The effect of percent Metco on average scores

is large enough that increases in percent Metco may induce a negative peer effect that should be evident in

our data if the effect is large enough. Second, increasing the number of students at the bottom of the

achievement distribution may have an especially adverse impact on other students if, for example, classroom



         13
          For references to empirical studies and a recent theoretical model of peer interactions in education see
Lazear (2001). For a skeptical look at peer effects, see Evans, Oates, and Schwab (1992).

                                                         11
instruction is targeted at low-achievers or if low-achieving students are more likely to be disruptive or require

more of the teacher’s attention. Since percent Metco pulls down the lower tail of the score distribution, again

there would seem to be scope for negative peer effects.

        Another aspect of the relation between percent Metco and the Brookline school environment, not

described in Tables 4 and 5, is the impact on racial composition. A number of authors have found a negative

association between percent minority in schools or classes and academic performance, particularly for

minority students. The mechanism behind this effect is unclear since percent minority is presumably a proxy

for a variety of economic and social differences. In any case, increasing the proportion Metco sharply

increases the proportion minority in Brookline schools; indeed the “first-stage effect” of percent Metco on

percent minority is close to one. As with peer effects that operate through test scores, any effects of school

composition may also be detected through an analysis of Metco.



                                     III. The Impact on non-Metco Students

A. OLS Estimates

        We estimated the effect of Metco students on the achievement of non-Metco students using two

models similar to those used to construct the estimates in Table 4. The first set of estimates is from a

regression of the average NPR of non-Metco students on the proportion Metco in a grade, school, and year.

The regression includes grade, school, and year main effects, as well as controls for class size:

                          Gy*gjt = "0g + $0j + (0t + *0mgjt + 80sgjt + 0gjt ;                                (2)

where yG*gjt is the average score in the cell, omitting Metco kids. The model includes controls for cohort when

grades are pooled since some students are observed more than once. Equation (2) was estimated without

weighting, since weighted estimation generates the same results as estimation using micro data if there are

no student-level controls.

        The second approach uses micro data and adds controls for student characteristics. The regression


                                                            12
model in this case can be written:

                          ygjti = "0g + $0j + (0t + *0mgjt + 80sgjt + XiN'0 + ,gjti,                           (3)

where Xi is a vector of race, sex, special education and TBE/ESL dummies and ,gjti is an individual random

error term. As in (2), the model includes cohort dummies when grades are pooled.

        The standard errors for the micro model were adjusted for clustering using the formula in Liang and

Zeger (1986), i.e., the procedure implemented by the Stata cluster command. In practice, the standard errors

from this procedure may be misleading, especially when there are few clusters, and inference using grouped

data has been shown to be more reliable (see, e.g., Feng, et al, 2001; or Donald and Lang, 2001). This leads

us to reported results using both cells and individuals. Unadjusted standard errors for the micro estimates

are also reported for purposes of comparison. Both the grouped and micro equations use the percent Metco

tested for mgjt since this is more consistently measured and probably more accurate than the percent Metco

enrolled (though estimates using percent enrolled are similar).

        Pooled estimates of equation (2) show small positive, but insignificant, effects of percent Metco on

average non-Metco scores in each subject. This can be seen in the first four columns of Panel A in Table

6. The estimates using micro-data, reported in columns 5-8, are negative but again small and insignificant,

suggesting that the proportion Metco has no effect on non-Metco students. On the other hand, it should be

noted that the standard errors for the micro-data estimates in column 5 are such that the smallest negative

effect that could be detected (i.e., the effect that would be significant at the 5% level in a one-tailed test) is

about 5.9×1.64=-9.7. Since the effect of percent Metco tested on peer means is -24 (see column 9 in Table

5), the smallest detectable peer effect that operates solely through the test scores of all classmates is therefore

about .4. On the other hand, if the lower tail of the score distribution matters for achievement, then peer

effects as small as .2 would be significant.

        Previous research on peer effects reports estimates in the range of detectable effects based on the

standard errors reported in Table 6, but smaller effects cannot be ruled out. For example, using data from


                                                          13
Texas, Hoxby (2000) reports estimates of the effect of the average peer score ranging from .1 to .55. Our

estimates for Brookline rule out the high end of these effects but not the low end. It bears emphasizing,

however, that previous research reports estimates of peer effects that are not fully captured by differences

in test scores. For example, Hanushek, et al (2002), also using data from Texas schools, report large effects

of racial composition that do not appear to be driven by the achievement differences of classmates.

        Earlier analyses also suggest that peer effects may be especially important within racial groups. For

example, black students may interact more with other blacks. Since Metco students are mostly black and

Hispanic, this motivates an analysis in samples limited to minority students from Brookline, about 10.5%

of the resident students tested.

        Estimates for minority residents of Brookline, reported in Panel B for blacks and Hispanics, and

Panel C for blacks only, show no significant Metco effects on 5th and 7th graders, but some of the estimates

for 3rd graders are negative and significant. The microdata estimates in column 6 are probably more reliable

since these control for individual student characteristics such as race (when blacks and Hispanics are pooled),

sex, special education status, and ESL/TBE status. These estimates show significant negative effects on

reading and language scores for blacks and Hispanics, and significant negative effects for all scores except

math for blacks. The difference between panels B and C suggest that the negative effect is coming primarily

from the impact on blacks. The estimated effects are such that adding a Metco student to a class (i.e., going

from 0 to about 5% Metco) is expected to reduce black test scores by 8-9 points, or .3 of the standard

deviation of the score distribution for black 3rd graders who live in Brookline.

        The effects on black students cannot be easily explained by a traditional peer effect that operates

solely through test scores since Table 5 suggest that increasing percent Metco by 5 percentage points reduces

average test scores among peers by only about 1.25 points. Effects a large as those in Panel C may therefore

signal some sort of endogeneity problem or omitted variables bias. On the other hand, this result could be

explained by a localized peer effect where additional Metco students displace relatively high-scoring and


                                                      14
high-SES resident students in a minority student’s immediate peer group. Moreover, as noted above, peer

effects need not operate solely through test scores. The fact that the negative effects appear for language

and reading is also consistent with Eaton’s (2001) account of Metco, since some Metco students reported

differences in speech patterns to be a major hurdle in adapting to the suburban environment.14 But the fact

that negative estimates are limited to the 3rd grade sample and absent for Math scores also suggests these

effects may be spurious or at least dissipate quickly.



B. Fixed-Effects Estimates

        Control for unobserved individual effects provides an initial check on the OLS estimates. To

implement the fixed effects strategy, we limited the sample to students observed in both 3rd and 5th grades

or 5th and 7th grades (about 40% of the pooled sample)15 and estimated the following grade-differenced model,

        ygjti ! yg+2,j,t+2,i /Lygjti = ($*gj! $*g+2,j) + ((*g,t!(*g+2,t+2)

                                         + (**gmgjt!**g+2mg+2,j,t+2) + (8*gsgjt! 8*g+2sg+2,j,t+2) + L,gjti,        (4)

where $*gj and (*g,t are grade-specific school and year effects, and **g and 8*g are grade-specific Metco and class-

size effects. Differencing in this case means either a change from g=3rd grade to g+2=5th grade or a change

from g=5th grade to g+2=7th grade.16 Estimates were computed separately for each pair of differences, with

and without the restriction that Metco and class size effects are the same across grades. Not that without this

restriction we obtain two estimates of the effect on 5th graders, depending on whether the contrast is with 3rd



        14
           Bethel (1999) recounts the concerns of upper middle class black parents from Concord, an affluent Metco-
receiving suburb of Boston. These parents worry about negative examples and a tendency of some of their children
to affect “a certain street savy style and language” when mixing with poorer blacks.
        15
          The sample size falls because 5th and 7th graders in 1994 and 1995 cannot be match with prior years and
 rd     th
3 and 5 graders in 1999 and 2000 cannot be matched with later years, and because students enter and leave the
Brookline system. The maximum theoretical match rate is about 70 percent.
        16
          All but a handful of students observed more than once advanced grades between observations. Multiple
observations on a student in the same grade were averaged. These students have different year effects than those
who advanced on schedule.

                                                                   15
or 7th graders.

         The fixed-effects estimates are generally in line with the OLS. This can be seen in Table 7, which

reports estimates for the sample of all races and for black students only. Further empirical results for the

sample of blacks and Hispanics are omitted since they primarily reflect the results for blacks. Results for

all non-Metco pupils show no effects, whether estimated in models pooled across grades or separately. Not

surprisingly, however, the fixed effects estimates are not as precise as those in Table 6.

         In contrast with the estimates in Panel A, those for blacks only, reported in Panel B, show some

evidence of negative effects on 3rd grade pupils. For example, the coefficient on percent Metco in the model

for 3rd grade scores is about -216 (unclustered s.e.=103), not far from the corresponding OLS estimate of -

170. One difference between the results in Table 7 and those in Table 6 are the negative and significant

estimates for 5th grade Math scores, and the generally larger estimates for 5th graders. This result is not very

robust, however, since it appears only in column 3, when the contrast is between 3rd and 5th grade, and not

in column 5, when the contrast is between 5th and 7th grade. It should also be noted that the clustered standard

errors for blacks are much lower than the unadjusted standard errors, suggesting an especially poor

asymptotic approximation in this sample. Since the unclustered standard errors may be biased downward,

the fixed effects estimates for blacks are at best suggestive.17



                                       IV. Instrumental Variables Estimates

         There are at least two reasons why the estimates in section III could be biased by omitted variables.

First, school officials may reduce class size when students are doing poorly or allow larger classes when




         17
           As with the cell means analog of the OLS estimates in Table 6, a grouped version of the fixed effects
analysis, following cohorts instead of pupils and limited to pupils observed in the same school in 3rd and 5th or 5th and
7th grades who did not repeat a grade, generates estimates similar to those in Table 7. Standard errors for the
grouped fixed effects estimates for blacks are slightly below the uncorrected (i.e., unclustered) standard errors in
Table 7.

                                                           16
students are doing well.18 This notion is supported by the fact that non-Metco students in smaller classes

have lower average scores than those in larger classes. Since Metco students are more likely to be assigned

to smaller classes, this can generate spurious negative correlation between percent Metco and non-Metco

achievement. Although both the OLS and fixed-effects estimates in Tables 6 and 7 control for class size,

linear control may be inadequate and class size may not be measured accurately. A second source of bias,

and one that works in the opposite direction, may arise from efforts to place Metco students where non-

Metco students are doing relatively well or performance is improving. Discussions with school officials

suggest that Metco placement is not as systematic as this hypothetical assignment mechanism requires. In

any case, the instrumental variables strategy provides a check on both sorts of bias.



A. Maimonides at 25

         The IV estimates exploit the fact that Metco students are assigned to Brookline schools partly on the

basis of a space constraint. Recall that class size in Brookline is contractually capped at 25. Moreover, in

practice, classes as large as 25 are rare. This motivates the following version of what Angrist and Lavy

(1999) termed Maimonides’ rule, after the biblical scholar Maimonides’, who proposed a maximum class

size of 40. With a maximum size of 25, the rule is:

                           rgjt = egjt/(int(egjt/25)+1),

where egjt is non-Metco enrollment and rgjt is predicted class size. Figure 1 plots rgjt against enrollment using

a dotted line and actual class size against enrollment using connected dots, for 3rd graders. The figure shows

that rgjt captures the relation between 3rd grade enrollment and class size remarkably well.

         Our discussions with school officials suggest that Metco students are typically assigned to schools

in light of information about enrollment anticipated for the coming year. When classes are expected to be



       18
          For example, accelerated Math classes at one school are offered with the stipulation (spelled out in a
memo to parents) that these classes are larger than usual.

                                                           17
small, the Boston Metco office is notified that space is available for Metco students. We model the Metco

assignment process as allocating 1 Metco student per classroom if predicted enrollment is less than 23. We

use predicted instead of actual class size to determine space availability since the latter may be endogenous

and is unknown when Metco students are accepted. This reasoning leads to the following instrumental

variable for the number of Metco students in a class:

                           zgjt = min[max(23-rgjt,0),1].                                                     (5)

The first stage is plotted in Figure 2 for 3rd graders, with enrollment again shown on the X-axis.

         Although much of the variation in the number of Metco students remains unexplained by this model,

zgjt is clearly correlated with Metco placements, at least in the 3rd grade. The IV analysis that follows is

limited to 3rd graders since zgjt is most highly correlated with the number of Metco students entering the

school system. The first-stage relation for 5th and 7th graders is weak, probably because most Metco students

in higher grades are inherited from earlier grades, and because the predictive power of rgjt for class size is

weaker for 5th and especially 7th grades.

         The second-stage equation for the IV estimates is:

                           yjti = $2j + (2t + *2ajt + 82njt + N2ejt + XiN'2 + >jti,                          (6)

where ajt is the average number of Metco students per classroom in grade j in year t, njt is the corresponding

number of non-Metco students, and ejt is total grade enrollment. Note that this model differs from that used

to construct the OLS estimates. Here, we replace mgjt, the percent Metco in a grade, with ajt, the average

number Metco in a class, while total class size, sgjt, is replaced with non-Metco class size, njt. Equation (6)

is more attractive than equation (3) in this context because it allows us to experiment with alternative

assumptions regarding non-Metco class size effects. In particular, it seems sensible to use (6) to explore

specifications where ajt is treated as endogenous while njt is not. In contrast, it is difficult to rationalize a

model that treats the percent Metco, mjt (= ajt/sgjt), as endogenous, while at the same time treating total class

size, sgjt (=ajt + njt), as exogenous.


                                                           18
          In principal, two instruments, zgjt and rgjt, are available for the two potentially endogenous variables,

ajt and njt. In practice, however, both of these instruments are nonlinear functions of the same underlying

grade-level enrollment variable, ejt (Note that zgjt is approximately equal to a dummy variable for rgjt < 23).

Consequently, two-stage least squares (2SLS) estimates treating class size as endogenous are imprecise. We

therefore begin by discussing models where only the number of Metco students per class is treated as

endogenous, while imposing alternative assumptions regarding the impact of non-Metco class size. The first

set of estimates is from models that include non-Metco class size as an exogenous covariate. The second set

is based on a model that restricts class size effects to be zero. Finally, we compute estimates assuming that

82 equals -.53, a value derived from the Angrist and Lavy (1999) class size study.

          For purposes of comparison, the top panel of Table 8 reports OLS estimates of equation (6) for each

score in the full sample of 3rd graders. Similar to the regressions in Table 6 with percent Metco as an

explanatory variable, these estimates show no relation between the number of Metco students in a class and

non-Metco students’ test scores. The table also reports positive and significant coefficients on non-Metco

class size when this variable is treated as an exogenous covariate. The positive class size coefficients seem

unlikely to have a causal interpretation, and probably reflect a tendency to group high achievers into larger

classes. The OLS estimates of the effect of the number Metco remain small and insignificant regardless of

whether the model includes non-Metco class size and non-Metco enrollment variables as controls.



B. First Stage and Reduced-form Effects

          The first stage equation for models where non-Metco class size is treated as exogenous can be

written

          ajt,i = $1j + (1t + *1zjt + 81njt + N1ej + XiN'1 + <jt,i;                                            (7)

where ajt,i is the average number of Metco students per class in school j at date t, and the i subscript indicates

that the equation is estimated using micro data. The reduced-form effect of zjt on test scores is


                                                              19
        B=*1*2,

obtained by substituting equation (7) into equation (6). First-stage estimates for models where the effects

of non-Metco class size are assumed to be 0 or -.53 were calculated by setting 81=0 in this equation, so that

the model is identified using zjt as the sole instrument.

        Panel B in Table 8 reports the first stage estimates for the sample with non-missing core NPR scores.

The estimates of *1, ranging from .87 to .92, are largely insensitive to assumptions regarding the impact of

non-Metco class size. The first-stage coefficients are precisely estimated with t-statistics of over 5 for each

model. Because the first stage estimates are close to one, the reduced form effect, B, is almost the same as

the second stage coefficient, *2.

        The corresponding reduced form estimates are reported in the bottom panel of Table 8. Consistent

with the OLS estimates reported in the top panel, estimates from models that treat non-Metco class size as

exogenous show no relation between zjt and test scores. The results become increasingly negative, however,

as we move to models where the assumed class size effect is zero, and finally to models where the class size

effect is set at -.53. In the latter specification, the estimated effect of Metco students on their non-Metco

peers is negative and at least marginally significant for the core NPR score and for two of the three subject

tests. For example, the estimate in column (3) suggests that the presence of a Metco student reduces average

non-Metco scores by 2.7 points, with a clustered standard error of 1.6.

        The strong positive OLS estimates of the effects of class size on achievement suggest an endogeneity

problem with this variable. Discounting positive effects, however, it remains to chose between specifications

where class size effects are zero and specifications where class size effects are substantially negative, as in

Angrist and Lavy (1999). Because classes are much smaller and SES much higher in Brookline, zero may

be a better estimate of the average causal effect in this context. In the next subsection, we discuss the results

of 2SLS estimates using multiple instruments in an attempt to estimate the effects of number Metco and non-

Metco class size jointly.


                                                       20
C. 2SLS estimates

        As noted above, the instrumental variable zgjt is approximately equal to an indicator for rgjt < 23.

Since predicted class size ranges from 16 to 24.67 in the 3rd grade sample, it seems natural to look for

increased statistical power by adding dummy instruments for values of rgjt other than 23. We therefore

computed 2SLS estimates using an instrument set consisting of 6 indicator variables for high values of

predicted class size:

        (19#rgjt<20), (20#rgjt<21), (21#rgjt<22), (22#rgjt<23), (23#rgjt<24),and (24#rgjt<25);

plus a linear term for rgjt itself. Both the number Metco and non-Metco class size were treated as

endogenous.

        The 2SLS estimates, reported in Table 9, support the notion that class size has no effect on non-

Metco achievement in Brookline. The estimated class size coefficients are all much smaller than the

corresponding OLS estimates in Table 8. Consistent with the fact that the estimated class size effects are

close to zero, the estimated effects of Metco are similar with and without class size controls (see, e.g.,

columns 1-2 for core NPR scores). Some models add linear enrollment controls as an exogenous covariate.

        Not surprisingly given the estimated non-Metco class size effects and the IV results in Table 8, the

expanded instrument set generates coefficient estimates for the effect of Metco that are not significantly

different from zero in the full sample. For example, the estimated effect of Metco on core NPR scores with

or without class size controls is about -.80, with a standard error of 1.35. The estimate in column 3, which

reports the results of dropping enrollment controls from the model for NPR scores, is -1.36 with a standard

error of 1.1, similar to the estimate in column 2 of Table 8, and slightly more precise. Note, however, that

the 2SLS estimates are only about half as precise as corresponding the OLS estimates in Table 6. (To make

the comparison, divide the standard errors in Table 6 by 20).

        The 2SLS estimates for black students are reported in panel B of Table 9. These estimates are also

broadly consistent with the OLS estimates reported in Table 6, suggesting Metco students have a negative


                                                     21
impact on the reading and language scores of their 3rd grade black peers. Like the OLS estimates, the 2SLS

estimates show no effect on math scores. The estimated effects of percent Metco on reading scores without

class size controls are significantly different from zero, while other estimates are not as sharp. Some of the

2SLS estimates for blacks are also markedly larger than the corresponding OLS estimates, perhaps

implausibly so. On the other hand, the 2SLS estimates with controls for class size and enrollment are

reasonably close to the OLS estimates in Table 6. The estimated class size effects are not significantly

different from zero for blacks.

        As a final check on the results, we re-estimated the OLS model separately for male and female

students. Just as the number of Metco students seem more likely to affect minority residents of Brookline

than whites, the fact that Metco students are disproportionately female suggests it is worth looking for

differential effects by sex. We return to OLS for this analysis since the IV and OLS estimates are broadly

consistent, while the OLS estimates are more precise. The additional OLS results, reported in Tables 10a

for boys and 10b for girls, support the notion that within-gender effects are more important. The only

significant estimates in the two tables are for black girls in 3rd grade. The estimates are significant for effects

on language and reading scores, but not math.



V. Summary and Conclusions

        Although Metco students have much lower test scores than students in the host district, we find little

evidence of socially or statistically significant effects of Metco students on their non-Metco classmates. Both

OLS and IV estimates show no effect of Metco students in the full sample of non-Metco students. The

standard errors for the OLS estimate are such that we can rule out pure test-score-mediated peer effects at

the high end of those reported in the literature, though the results are consistent with smaller effects. In

contrast with most of the findings in previous research on peer effects, our results also suggest there is no

adverse impact of increasing the percent minority on most students.


                                                        22
         On the other hand, consistent with previous research, which shows racial composition effects to be

strongest within racial groups, we find some evidence for a negative impact of percent Metco on the reading

and language scores of minority 3rd graders, especially blacks. These results turn out to be driven by effects

on 3rd grade girls, consistent with the fact that Metco students are more likely to be female. A possible

explanation for this result is that Metco students displace relatively high-scoring local students who interact

with young black girls who live in the host district. But many of these estimates are imprecise. Moreover,

the highly localized nature of this finding, and the fact that it does not appear in higher grades, lead us to

conclude that any effects of the Metco program on minority students in the host district are modest and short-

lived.

         In conclusion, it bears emphasizing that our analysis of Metco is limited to a narrow study of test

scores as measured by achievement on the ITBS. These results should be weighed against any possible

effects of Metco on racial attitudes in Boston and host districts, and any benefits for Metco participants.

For example, our results suggest that Metco students benefit from their time in the Brookline system since

their relative achievement improves as grade advances. In future work, we hope to look at the impact on

Metco pupils more systematically, as well as other aspects of this unique and historically significant program.




                                                      23
                                            REFERENCES

Angrist, Joshua D., and Victor Lavy (1999), “Using Maimonides’ Rule to Estimate the Effect of Class Size
         on Student Achievement," Quarterly Journal of Economics, May 1999.
Armor, David (1972), “The Evidence on Busing,” The Public Interest 28, 90-126.
Batson, Ruth M. and Hayden, Robert C., A History of Metco, The Metropolitan Council for Educational
         Opportunity: A Suburban Education for Boston’s Urban Students, Boston, MA: Select Publications,
         1987.
Bertrand, Marianne, Erzo Luttmer, and Sendhil Mullainathan (2000), “Network Effects and Welfare
         Cultures,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, August.
Bethel, Alison (1999), “black Children from Well-Off Families Face Dueling Identities,” Boston Globe,
         September 19, Page C1.
Boardman, Richard, and Linda Brandt (1968), Metco–A Descriptive Report (ERIC No: ED088225).
Boozer, Michael A., Alan B. Krueger, and Shari Wolkon (1992), “Race and School Quality Since Brown v.
         Board of Education,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 269-326.
Case, Anne, and Lawrence Katz (1991), “The Company You Keep: The Effects of Family and Neighborhood
          on Disadvantaged Youth,” NBER Working Paper 3705, May.
Cohen Muriel (1990), “After 25 years, Lincoln Takes a Hard Look at Metco,” Boston Globe, June 9, p. 21.
Coleman, James S. (1975), “Trends in School Segregation: 1968-73,” Urban Institute Paper No. 722-03-01,
         Washington, DC: August.
Clarke, Keith W. (1975), A Descriptive Study of the Metco Program, Boston University School of Education,
         D. Ed. thesis, July (ERIC No: ED124631).
Clotfelter, Charles (1999), “Are whites Still ‘Fleeing’? Racial Patterns and Enrollment Shifts in Urban
         Public Schools, 1987-1996,” NBER Working Paper No. 7290, August.
Crain, Robert L., and Jack Strauss (1985), “School Desegregation and black occupational Attainment:
         Results from a Long-Term Experiment,” working paper, Center for Social Organization of Schools,
         Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore.
Donald, Stephen, and Kevin Lang (2001), “Inference with Differences-in-Differences and Other Panel Data,”
         Boston University Department of Economics, mimeo, March.
Eaton, Susan E., The Other Boston Busing Story. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, March 2001.
Elliott, Cary A. (1998), “Get on the Bus? The Long Run Effect of Metco Suburban Education on Inner-City
         Students,” Chapter II in Three Essays in Applied Microeconomics, Princeton University Economics
         Department, Ph.D. thesis, November.
Evans, William N., Wallace E. Oates, and Robert M. Schwab (1992), “Measuring Peer Effects: A Study of
         Teenage Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy 100, 966-991.
Feng, Ziding, P. Diehr, A. Peterson, and D. McLerran (2001), “Selected Statistucal issues in Group
         Randomized Trials,” Annual Review of Public Health 22, 167-87.
Guryan, Jonathan (2001), “Desegregation and black Dropout Rates,” NBER Working Paper 8345,
         June.
Hanushek, Eric, J.F. Kain, and S.G. Rivkin (2002), “New Evidence About Brown v. Board of Education:
         The Complex Effects of School Racial Composition on Achievement,”NBER Working
         Paper 8741, January.
Hoxby, Caroline (2000), “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning from Gender and Race Variation,” NBER
         Working Paper 7867, August.
Jaggia, Sanjay, and David G. Tuerck (2000), Promoting Good Schools Through Wise Spending, Boston: The
         Beacon Hill Institute at Suffolk University.
Katz, Lawrence F., Jeffrey R. Kling, and Jeffrey B. Leibman (2001), “Moving to Opportunity in Boston:
          Early Results of a Randomized Mobility Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
         116, 607-654.

                                                   24
Lazear, Edward P. (2001), “Educational Production,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 777-803.
Liang, Kung-yee, and Scott L. Zeger (1986), “Longitudinal Data Analysis Using Gerealized Linear Models,”
        Biometrika 73, 13-22.
Metropolitan Council for Educational Opportunity, Report of the Executive Director (Interim Report),
        Boston, MA, October 19, 1970.
_______, Annual Report, 1985-86, Boston, MA 1986.
Orfield, Gary, et al (1997), “City-Suburban Desegregation: Parent and Student Perspectives in
        Metropolitan Boston,” working paper, The Civil Rights Project: Harvard University.
Rivkin, Steven G. (2000), “School Desegregation, Aacdemic Attainment, and Earnings,” Journal of Human
        Resources 35 (Spring), 333-346.
Rossell, Christine, and David Armor (1996), “The Effectiveness of School Desegregation Plans, 1968-1991,”
        American Politics Quarterly 24, 267-302.
Rouse, Cecilia E. (1998), “Private School Vouchers and Student Achievement: An Evaluation of the
        Milwaukee Parental Choice Program,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (May 1998), 553-602.
Smith, James P., and Finis Welch (1989), “black Economic Progress After Myrdal,” Journal of Economic
        Literature XXVII, 519-64.
Tye, Larry (1995a), “High Hopes, Hard Questions: Metco Faces Scrutiny in Era of Education Change,”
        Boston Globe, December 3, Metro Section, page 1.
Tye, Larry (1995b), Metco has Opened up New World,” Boston Globe, December 4, Metro Section, p. 1.
Vigue, Doreen Iudica (1999), “Metco Students May be Ousted from Lynnfield,” Boston Globe, March 2,
        page A1.
Welch, Finis, and Audrey Light (1987), “New Evidence on School Desegregation,” US Commission on Civil
        Rights Clearinghouse Publication 92, June.




                                                   25
                                                                                                    Table 1

                                                                                     Summary Statistics
                             School                                           All                                                     Tested                                  Metco Tested
                          Characteristics                                    Pupils                                                   Pupils                                     Pupils
                        classes class size         Enrolled   Metco   % Metco % ESL/TBE % Sp. Ed. % Tested                    % Metco % Black % Sp. Ed.            % Black % Asian % Hispanic % Male
Grade School Year            (1)       (2)             (3)     (4)        (5)           (6)           (7)         (8)            (9)        (10)         (11)         (12)       (13)        (14)         (15)

  3         1994             24       20.8             498     16        3.21         9.24            -          88.2           3.64       9.79        14.12         81.3       6.25        6.25          25.0
            1995             24       20.7             496     13        2.62         9.07            -          86.5           3.03       8.16        14.45         84.6       0.00        15.38         38.5
            1996             23       22.2             511     20        3.91         11.94         18.79        81.2           4.34       9.64        15.42         88.9       0.00        5.56          38.9
            1997             24       20.4             490     25        5.10         11.43         21.22        85.3           4.78       11.48       16.99         85.0       15.00       0.00          50.0
            1998             23       21.9             503     34        6.76         9.94          21.27        87.9           7.24       14.03       21.27         90.6       3.13        6.25          37.5
            1999             22       20.6             454     16        3.52         11.45         18.50        87.9           3.76       6.77        18.05         66.7       13.33       13.33         33.3
            2000             24       18.8             451     19        4.21         11.09         18.18        88.9           4.24       10.97       16.46         100.0      0.00        0.00          35.3

  5         1994             24       21.1             506     27        5.34          9.29           -          89.1           5.99       11.53       10.86          88.9      3.70        0.00          51.9
            1995             23       20.3             467     27        5.78          9.42           -          79.0           7.32       11.38       15.45          85.2      0.00        3.70          40.7
            1996             24       20.1             483     24        4.97          6.63         19.05        88.0           4.94       12.00       14.12          85.7      4.76        4.76          33.3
            1997             22       22.8             501     18        3.59          6.39         19.76        91.4           3.06       7.64        16.59          85.7      0.00        14.29         35.7
            1998             23       21.2             487     27        5.54          6.57         21.77        90.3           6.14       12.27       19.32          85.2      0.00        7.41          40.7
            1999             24       20.5             493     25        5.07          7.91         20.08        89.2           5.45       10.45       17.95          83.3      16.67       0.00          50.0
            2000             23       20.4             470     34        7.23          7.87         20.43        90.9           7.49       13.35       20.14          87.5      3.13        6.25          31.3

  7         1994             19       21.9             417     25        6.00          6.95           -          89.4           6.70       13.14       13.40          88.0      4.00        0.00          52.0
            1995             23       19.9             457     24        5.25          7.00           -          87.3           6.02       11.28       16.54          79.2      4.17        12.50         37.5
            1996             23       20.8             479     30        6.26          8.35         13.78        89.4           6.54       10.51       12.62          82.1      3.57        3.57          53.6
            1997             21       20.0             420     31        7.38          6.19         24.52        93.1           7.42       12.28       20.46          69.0      13.79       10.34         41.4
            1998             23       20.0             460     28        6.09          3.91         20.43        94.6           6.21       11.95       18.16          88.9      3.70        3.70          44.4
            1999             23       20.6             473     20        4.23          6.13         19.87        93.7           4.29       9.26        17.83          94.7      0.00        5.26          36.8
            2000             23       19.9             457     26        5.69          7.44         22.54        92.8           6.13       12.74       21.46          84.6      0.00        11.54         38.5
Notes: Column 1 shows the number of classes per grade. Column 2 shows the average number of students per class. Columns 3-8 show statistics for the population of all pupils. Column 7 shows the percent of
students inn special education. Information on special educaiton status is missing for 1994 and 1995. Columns 9-10 show statistics for students tested. Columns 11-15 show statistics for the population of Metco
students tested. Tests were adminstered in March in the 1994 and 1995 school years and in November in other years.




      fnltbls9_27_02-c.xls     9/30/2002     2:01 PM
                                                       Table 2

                                    Distribution of Percent Metco by School
 Grade School Year           (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)              (6)         (7)        (8)

    3          1994          0.0         0.0         2.2          3.8       3.9         4.7         5.6         6.0
                            (0,1)       (0,2)       (1,3)        (3,4)     (3,5)       (3,6)       (3,7)       (4,8)
               1995          0.0         0.0         1.4          2.0       2.3         3.0         3.5         8.1
                            (0,3)       (0,6)       (1,1)        (1,7)     (1,2)       (2,5)       (3,4)       (5,8)
               1996          0.0         1.4         1.6          2.2       3.3         5.8         6.0        11.6
                            (0,2)       (1,5)       (1,7)        (1,8)     (3,4)       (4,6)       (5,1)       (5,3)
               1997          1.2         1.4         2.8          3.4       5.3         7.0        11.1        12.7
                            (1,5)       (1,4)       (2,1)        (2,7)     (3,6)       (3,2)       (5,3)       (8,8)
               1998          1.7         1.8         4.5          6.1       6.3         7.4         9.3        12.0
                            (1,5)       (1,6)       (2,2)        (3,8)     (3,3)       (5,7)       (8,4)      (11,1)
               1999          0.0         0.0         0.0          2.3       4.4         4.5         4.9         9.5
                            (0,6)       (0,8)       (0,3)        (1,7)     (4,4)       (2,2)       (3,5)       (6,1)
               2000          0.0         0.0         1.3          1.7       5.8         6.1         7.7        18.4
                            (0,7)       (0,1)       (1,4)        (1,6)     (4,5)       (3,2)       (3,3)       (7,8)

    5          1994          1.5         1.5         3.7          4.3       6.6         7.0         8.9         9.6
                            (1,6)       (1,1)       (2,7)        (3,5)     (4,2)       (4,8)       (7,4)       (5,3)
               1995          2.4         2.6         2.9          3.8       7.0         8.9         9.5        14.3
                            (2,4)       (2,1)       (2,5)        (2,2)     (3,8)       (4,7)       (4,3)       (8,6)
               1996          0.0         0.0         2.7          4.5       4.9         7.1         9.1        14.0
                            (0,2)       (0,1)       (2,5)        (3,8)     (4,4)       (4,7)       (5,6)       (6,3)
               1997          0.0         1.4         1.5          2.0       2.8         3.9         5.9        10.0
                            (0,3)       (1,1)       (1,6)        (1,7)     (2,5)       (2,2)       (5,4)       (6,8)
               1998          0.0         1.6         1.8          2.4       3.3         9.1        10.2        12.7
                            (0,2)       (1,5)       (1,7)        (1,8)     (3,4)       (6,6)       (5,3)      (10,1)
               1999          1.2         1.6         2.7          3.6       4.2         6.0        12.2        14.0
                            (1,5)       (1,6)       (2,4)        (2,7)     (3,1)       (3,2)       (5,3)       (8,8)
               2000          2.0         3.4         6.7          7.3       7.7         7.7         9.3        12.5
                            (1,6)       (2,5)       (3,2)        (3,3)     (5,7)       (6,4)       (8,1)       (6,8)

    7          1994          0.0         0.0         2.2          6.1       6.3        11.1        11.5        12.3
                            (0,6)       (0,4)       (1,3)        (3,7)     (3,2)       (5,1)       (7,5)       (7,8)
               1995          1.7         2.5         3.5          4.7       6.3         6.5         8.5        10.4
                            (1,1)       (2,4)       (2,8)        (2,2)     (4,5)       (4,6)       (4,3)       (5,7)
               1996          1.7         4.0         4.5          5.3       5.4         8.9        10.4        11.1
                            (1,6)       (2,7)       (3,5)        (3,1)     (3,8)       (7,4)       (7,2)       (5,3)
               1997          2.6         3.9         4.6          4.8       7.5         7.7        16.2        19.1
                            (2,4)       (2,2)       (3,1)        (3,5)     (3,7)       (3,8)       (6,3)       (9,6)
               1998          0.0         0.0         4.0          5.0       5.3         7.1         9.8        21.3
                            (0,2)       (0,1)       (3,5)        (3,8)     (4,4)       (3,3)       (5,7)      (10,6)
               1999          1.7         2.0         2.0          2.3       2.8         3.0         6.0        14.0
                            (1,6)       (1,7)       (1,2)        (1,3)     (2,1)       (2,5)       (5,4)       (7,8)
               2000          0.0         1.4         2.0          2.2       2.8        10.0        12.5        14.9
                            (0,2)       (1,5)       (1,7)        (2,4)     (1,8)       (5,6)       (5,3)      (11,1)
Notes: The table shows percent Metco in the 8 Brookline elementary schools, ordered from lowest to highest by date and
grade. The first number in parentheses is the number of Metco pupils and the second is the rank for percent Metco in
grade 3, 1994.
                                                         Table 3: Test Scores
                                                 Non-Metco Students                                               Metco Students
                               All          Black     Hispanic      Asian             White                All        Black     Non-Black
Grade     Subject              (1)           (2)         (4)          (3)              (5)                 (6)          (8)        (9)

  3        Core               71.6           51.2          54.2          71.9           74.3              49.0           47.2          60.1
                             (24.2)         (27.6)        (27.6)        (22.8)         (22.7)            (25.5)         (25.1)        (25.2)
                              [6.8]                                                                      [22.2]
         Reading              70.7           51.7          54.9          63.7           74.8              47.9           46.1          58.8
                             (24.7)         (28.4)        (26.4)        (23.8)         (22.8)            (26.8)         (26.8)        (24.8)
                              [5.9]                                                                      [21.4]
           Math               72.0           50.8          54.9          76.4           74.0              47.9           45.7           62
                             (24.7)         (28.4)        (28.0)        (22.6)         (23.3)            (26.4)         (26.3)        (23.4)
                              [7.3]                                                                      [22.9]
        Language              67.8           49.9          52.9          71.6           69.5              52.9           51.6          60.8
                             (25.7)         (27.4)        (28.5)        (23.7)         (24.8)            (25.9)         (25.6)        (27.2)
                              [7.1]                                                                      [21.2]
  5        Core               72.3           49.8          56.9          72.2           75.0              50.6           48.0          67.3
                             (22.7)         (25.7)        (26.3)        (21.8)         (20.9)            (22.1)         (20.9)        (22.8)
                              [5.1]                                                                      [15.8]
         Reading              72.4           52.2          57.9          65.2           76.3              52.5           49.9          68.9
                             (22.7)         (25.9)        (25.8)        (23.4)         (20.3)            (23.6)         (22.8)        (21.9)
                              [4.3]                                                                      [16.9]
           Math               70.6           47.8          57.2          76.0           72.3              46.7           44.4          61.6
                             (23.2)         (25.3)        (26.8)        (21.3)         (21.8)            (26.4)         (22.3)        (24.3)
                              [6.1]                                                                      [18.3]
        Language              69.2           49.2          54.8          70.1           71.5              52.9           50.5          67.8
                             (24.4)         (27.3)        (28.2)        (23.3)         (23.0)            (23.4)         (22.4)        (24.4)
                              [6.1]                                                                      [16.6]
  7        Core               76.4           55.0          59.6          76.4           79.5              57.1           55.1          66.5
                             (21.8)         (24.4)        (27.9)        (19.8)         (19.8)            (20.7)         (20.2)        (20.5)
                              [4.7]                                                                      [15.7]
         Reading              77.0           57.4          63.8          70.7           80.8              57.5           55.6          66.4
                             (22.6)         (25.3)        (27.5)        (23.5)         (20.2)            (22.6)         (22.5)        (21.2)
                              [4.4]                                                                      [15.9]
           Math               74.0           51.4          55.4          78.7           76.4              55.9           54.5          63.3
                             (23.4)         (25.7)        (29.0)        (20.2)         (21.5)            (22.2)         (22.0)        (20.2)
                              [5.0]                                                                      [17.1]
        Language              73.9           55.0          59.0          75.0           76.5              57.1           55.1          66.8
                             (22.4)         (24.6)        (27.9)        (19.9)         (21.1)            (21.8)         (21.3)        (20.9)
                              [5.3]                                                                      [17.5]
Notes: Reported test scores are means of the National Percentile Rank from the Iowa Test of Basic Skills administered from the 1994-1995
school year through the 2000-2001 school year. Standard deviations are reported in parentheses. Standard deviations for the year, school, and
grade cell means are in brackets in columns 1 and 6.
                                                    Table 4: The Effect of Metco on Average Test Scores

                              Unweighted Means                                  Weighted Means                                      Peer Means
                      (1)       (2)      (3)             (4)           (5)       (6)      (7)            (8)            (9)        (10)     (11)          (12)
Subject              Pool       3rd      5th             7th          Pool       3rd      5th            7th           Pool        3rd      5th           7th

                                                                     A. %Metco Enrolled
Core                -25.5       -22.7       -34.8       -15.6        -26.4    -18.8     -34.4           -17.9          -27.0      -19.2      -35.6      -18.1
                     (8.8)      (17.3)      (16.0)      (13.2)        (8.9)   (17.9)    (16.2)          (13.0)         (7.5)      (15.5)     (12.1)     (10.3)
                     [8.0]      [16.5]      [13.9]      [12.6]        [8.0]   [17.9]    [14.2]          [11.8]
Reading             -20.4       -21.3       -31.4       -14.5        -21.2    -16.7     -31.0           -16.5          -21.6      -16.6      -31.6       -16.5
                     (7.8)      (16.2)      (14.0)      (11.3)        (7.9)   (16.5)    (13.9)          (11.3)         (6.7)      (14.2)     (12.0)      (9.1)
                    [7.24]     [15.96]     [13.93]     [10.97]       [7.16]  [16.36]   [14.12]         [10.47]
Math                -23.5       -16.9       -40.4       -12.0        -25.1    -12.1     -39.7           -14.5          -25.6      -11.4      -40.7      -14.8
                    (10.1)      (19.2)      (19.7)      (14.9)       (10.1)   (19.9)    (19.5)          (14.5)         (8.9)      (18.5)     (15.7)     (11.4)
                     [9.5]      [20.0]      [18.9]      [14.3]        [9.5]   [21.3]    [18.2]          [13.1]
Language            -25.0       -29.9       -25.2       -13.0        -27.0    -31.3     -25.7           -16.2          -28.1      -33.0      -26.7      -16.5
                     (9.3)      (17.2)      (17.2)      (13.0)        (9.5)   (18.0)    (17.8)          (13.0)         (7.9)      (15.7)     (12.1)     (10.5)
                     [8.5]      [16.6]      [13.7]      [12.5]        [8.5]   [18.2]    [14.1]          [12.2]
N                     56          56          56         168           56       56        56             168           8159       2672        2797       2690

                                                                      B. %Metco Tested
Core                 -22.1      -21.8      -28.0        -16.9         -23.3   -17.7         -29.2       -18.9          -23.9      -18.1      -30.3       -19.3
                     (8.0)      (15.4)     (15.1)       (11.8)        (8.1)   (15.9)        (15.1)      (11.8)         (6.7)      (13.5)     (11.2)      (9.5)
                      [7.2]     [14.6]     [12.8]       [11.8]         [7.2]  [15.6]        [13.1]      [10.9]
Reading              -18.7      -22.7      -27.3        -14.0         -19.6   -18.6         -27.1       -15.9          -20.1      -18.7      -27.7       -16.1
                     (7.1)      (14.3)     (13.1)       (10.2)        (7.2)   (14.6)        (12.9)      (10.2)         (6.1)      (12.0)     (10.9)      (8.4)
                      [6.7]     [14.0]     [12.8]       [10.2]         [6.5]  [14.0]        [12.8]       [9.6]
Math                 -20.7      -19.8      -30.2        -14.3         -22.7   -15.0         -32.0       -16.5          -23.2      -14.6      -33.0      -17.0
                     (9.2)      (17.0)     (18.7)       (13.4)        (9.2)   (17.7)        (18.2)      (13.2)         (7.8)      (14.9)     (14.4)     (10.5)
                      [8.4]     [16.5]     [17.2]       [13.5]         [8.4]  [17.1]        [16.7]      [12.2]
Language             -19.5      -22.0      -19.0        -14.2         -21.7   -22.6         -21.1       -17.1          -22.6      -24.1      -22.0       -17.6
                     (8.5)      (15.6)     (16.1)       (11.6)        (8.7)   (16.3)        (16.4)      (11.8)         (7.3)      (14.3)     (11.7)      (9.6)
                      [7.8]     [15.1]     [13.3]       [11.6]         [7.8]  [16.6]        [13.5]      [11.2]
N                      56         56         56          168            56      56            56         168           8159       2672        2797       2690

    Notes: Columns 1 - 4 report OLS estimates of the coefficient on the percent Metco variable in equation (1) in the text. Columns 5-8 report weighted least
    squares estimates, weighting by the number of observations in the relevant grade/school/year cell. Columns 9-12 report student-level OLS estimates.
    Standard errors are reported in parentheses and robust standard errors are reported in brackets. Standard errors in columns 9-12 are clustered by
    grade/school/year cell. Covariates in columns 9-12 include class size and fixed effects for school and year. Pooled models include cohort and grade
    fixed effects. For Columns 9-12 , N is the number of observations in the Core regression. Panel A uses a measure of the percent Metco variable
    constructed from enrollment data. Panel B uses a measure of the percent Metco variable constructed from the Riverside data. Metco students are
    omitted from the sample used to construct the estimates in columns 9-12 but the score of Metco students are included in the peer means.
                                Table 5: The Effect of Metco on the 2nd Decile of the Test Score Distribution
                          Unweighted Means                           Weighted Means                     Micro Data Quantile Regression
                 Pool       3rd       5th       7th         Pool      3rd       5th        7th         Pool      3rd       5th      7th
Subject           (1)       (2)       (3)       (4)          (5)      (6)        (7)       (8)          (9)     (10)      (11)     (12)

                                                                     A. %Metco Enrolled

Core              -56.9      -64.3       -51.2       -46.1          -59.3       -65.4       -50.7       -48.9          -55.8       -63.6       -62.9      -49.1
                 (16.8)     (34.9)      (29.9)      (26.5)         (17.2)      (36.3)      (30.4)      (26.8)         (18.7)      (50.2)      (31.9)     (27.4)
                 [16.2]     [37.4]      [26.0]      [25.4]         [16.3]      [38.5]      [27.5]      [24.4]
Reading           -50.4      -53.5       -54.8       -43.9          -52.8       -49.6       -57.5       -47.6          -48.7       -63.5       -60.6      -37.1
                 (16.4)     (33.4)      (25.5)      (26.6)         (16.7)      (33.6)      (26.1)      (27.3)         (19.8)      (34.1)      (34.7)     (39.6)
                 [16.7]     [39.2]      [25.1]      [25.4]         [16.2]      [36.4]      [26.8]      [26.0]
Math              -39.8      -38.9       -44.1       -34.0          -42.8       -31.5       -44.3       -36.1          -45.2       -29.0       -48.3      -24.7
                 (18.9)     (38.0)      (31.8)      (31.7)         (19.2)      (39.9)      (31.9)      (31.3)         (21.2)      (42.4)      (37.2)     (41.1)
                 [19.1]     [41.5]      [31.3]      [31.8]         [18.9]      [43.2]      [31.8]      [29.7]
Language          -42.1      -53.5       -14.8       -40.4          -45.4       -55.7       -17.2       -46.4          -48.4       -73.7       -30.8      -37.8
                 (17.0)     (36.2)      (32.6)      (26.2)         (17.6)      (38.4)      (33.3)      (26.8)         (17.3)      (45.0)      (33.1)     (27.7)
                 [15.6]     [35.8]      [24.7]      [23.7]         [16.2]      [40.5]      [25.8]      [24.1]
N                  168        56          56          56             168         56          56          56            8629       2798        2966        2865

                                                                      B. %Metco Tested

Core              -51.4      -61.7       -37.8       -48.6          -54.4       -62.2       -40.1       -51.5          -48.6       -56.7       -43.0      -51.9
                 (15.3)     (31.0)      (28.1)      (23.6)         (15.7)      (32.2)      (28.2)      (24.1)         (15.5)      (38.0)      (31.2)     (28.1)
                 [14.4]     [31.8]      [23.3]      [23.1]         [14.4]      [32.7]      [24.7]      [22.1]
Reading           -45.2      -58.3       -41.3       -41.1          -47.8       -54.3       -44.3       -44.6          -43.3       -57.5       -45.8      -31.7
                 (15.0)     (29.4)      (24.1)      (24.0)         (15.2)      (29.6)      (24.4)      (24.9)         (16.5)      (33.8)      (25.8)     (32.0)
                 [15.2]     [35.1]      [22.0]      [23.8]         [14.7]      [32.3]      [23.5]      [24.2]
Math              -37.6      -48.3       -31.4       -35.3          -40.6       -41.7       -33.1       -37.8          -44.4       -40.5       -40.0      -31.2
                 (17.2)     (33.5)      (29.8)      (28.5)         (17.5)      (35.2)      (29.6)      (28.4)         (14.5)      (47.1)      (36.7)     (33.2)
                 [17.1]     [34.6]      [28.7]      [29.3]         [16.7]      [35.2]      [29.2]      [27.1]
Language          -35.7      -43.0        -1.8       -44.5          -39.7       -44.9        -8.7       -50.1          -40.3       -47.4       -23.0      -49.6
                 (15.5)     (32.5)      (30.3)      (23.3)         (16.0)      (34.4)      (30.8)      (24.1)         (15.6)      (42.8)      (31.5)     (29.5)
                 [14.1]     [31.2]      [23.4]      [21.7]         [14.7]      [35.3]      [24.1]      [22.1]
N                  168        56           56         56             168         56           56         56            8629       2798        2966        2865
Notes: The table reports results analogous to those in Table 4, replacing cells means with the .2 quantile for each cell in columns 1-8, and using quantile
regression with micro data in columns 9-12.
                            Table 6: OLS Results for Non-Metco Students
                                Means                                   Micro Data
               Pooled       3rd       5th     7th         Pooled     3rd       5th                   7th
Subject          (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)           (5)      (6)      (7)                   (8)

                                       A. All Non-Metco Students
Core             3.2         1.4        1.6       6.6         -5.2            -1.6       -6.5        -3.4
                (8.0)      (14.8)     (15.6)    (12.2)       (5.4)           (11.4)     (10.6)       (7.5)
                [7.5]      [14.2]     [13.7]    [12.3]        [5.9]          [10.9]     [10.2]       [8.2]
Reading          5.3        -2.1       -1.1      10.2         -2.8            -3.9       -5.8         0.1
                (7.1)      (13.9)     (13.5)    (10.3)       (5.5)           (11.5)     (10.5)       (8.0)
                [6.9]      [13.9]     [13.5]    [10.1]        [5.1]           [9.7]     [11.2]       [6.9]
Math             4.5         4.7       -0.3       8.3         -4.8             4.5      -11.8        -2.9
                (9.3)      (17.5)     (18.7)    (13.9)       (5.7)           (11.6)     (11.2)       (8.3)
                [8.7]      [16.7]     [17.5]    [14.1]        [7.0]          [12.1]     [12.9]       [9.4]
Language         0.5        -4.6        4.9       5.4         -8.4           -11.5       -3.2        -5.0
                (8.5)      (14.8)     (16.8)    (12.0)       (5.7)           (12.1)     (11.4)       (7.8)
                [8.1]      [14.1]     [13.9]    [12.3]        [6.6]          [11.6]     [10.2]       [8.1]
N                168         56         56        56         8146             2672       2796        2678

                              B. Black and Hispanic Non-Metco Students
Core            -33.3      -152.4     39.1     -19.9        -12.2    -95.7                5.8        10.0
                (30.0)     (64.7)    (62.2)   (41.9)        (22.3)  (50.9)              (47.0)      (30.2)
                [33.2]     [60.1]    [69.9]   [45.6]        [23.3]   [53.4]             [42.5]      [29.3]
Reading         -49.9      -256.2     17.7     16.8         -23.3   -116.6              -14.7        10.8
                (28.0)     (65.9)    (50.4)   (32.9)        (22.7)  (50.0)              (46.8)      (32.5)
                [34.8]     [68.7]    [54.9]   [32.5]        [21.7]   [50.2]             [33.4]      [26.3]
Math            -10.1       -54.9     27.3     -16.0         13.1     19.2                0.2        14.2
                (31.0)     (66.4)    (69.2)   (42.8)        (23.6)  (52.1)              (48.2)      (33.8)
                [33.1]     [62.2]    [78.3]   [45.9]        [25.9]   [57.2]             [50.8]      [34.1]
Language        -34.8      -120.8     41.8     -23.0        -15.9   -116.2               35.4        10.5
                (32.2)     (58.9)    (68.7)   (48.7)        (22.5)  (49.1)              (47.9)      (30.0)
                [38.2]     [65.0]    [77.2]   [54.6]        [22.7]   [43.7]             [45.3]      [30.0]
N                162         53        54       55           859      281                286         292

                                      C. Black Non-Metco Students
Core             -78.1     -218.0      21.8     -68.0        -33.1           -170.2      26.9        -3.7
                (32.5)     (77.1)     (71.9)    (45.2)       (28.2)          (67.9)     (60.9)      (38.4)
                [36.6]     [92.8]     [79.8]    [45.0]       [24.5]          [54.4]     [49.8]      [30.4]
Reading          -66.2     -288.2      14.9      -2.4        -29.7           -180.5      20.0        19.2
                (32.9)     (81.4)     (65.5)    (43.2)       (29.4)          (69.9)     (60.7)      (41.3)
                [36.0]     [94.9]     [62.1]    [43.6]       [24.5]          [56.6]     [39.5]      [33.2]
Math             -50.0      -92.1      22.5     -61.2         -5.4            -31.1      32.7        2.6
                (33.6)     (73.6)     (72.7)    (50.8)       (30.0)          (71.2)     (60.4)      (43.1)
                [37.0]     [81.0]     [81.6]    [51.9]       [28.3]          [66.1]     [55.6]      [36.5]
Language        -102.3     -236.6       0.5     -83.4        -47.3           -174.6      29.4       -12.4
                (34.7)     (66.0)     (80.2)    (49.9)       (28.0)          (63.2)     (62.3)      (37.7)
                [41.0]     [65.7]     [88.9]    [52.5]       [25.0]          [52.9]     [57.8]      [32.0]
N                 146        45         49        52          534              169       183         182
Notes: The table reports OLS estimates of equation (2) using means and equation (3) using micro data. The
percent Metco regressor is constructed from the Riverside testing data. Robust standard errors are
reported in brackets in columns 1-4. Robust standard errors clustered by grade/school/year cell are
reported in columns 5-8. Covariates for columns 1-4 include class size and fixed effects for school and
year. The micro covariates include race, gender, ESL/TBE and special education status. Pooled models
include grade and cohort fixed effects. N in columns 5-8 shows the number in the Core regression.
                                               Table 7

                        Differenced Equations for Non-Metco Students
                           3rd - 5th Difference                  5th - 7th Difference
                     Pooled         3rd         5th       Pooled          5th         7th
Subject                (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)

                                    A. All Non-Metco Students

Core                    3.2          7.3         -9.7               -9.7        -10.0         -8.0
                      (14.8)       (15.9)       (15.3)             (11.2)       (15.8)       (12.3)
                      [19.4]       [18.7]       [16.8]             [14.4]       [19.5]       [16.4]
Reading                 6.0         11.9         -2.1               -4.4          7.6          1.1
                      (17.6)       (18.9)       (18.3)             (12.8)       (18.0)       (14.1)
                      [12.5]       [11.9]       [13.6]             [11.7]       [17.0]       [14.0]
Math                  -17.7         -5.5        -29.8              -21.5        -25.9        -16.7
                      (19.5)       (20.9)       (20.3)             (14.6)       (20.5)       (16.0)
                      [29.5]       [30.7]       [26.2]             [18.8]       [24.7]       [19.8]
Language               12.3          1.9          3.9               -1.3         -5.1         -5.5
                      (18.2)       (19.5)       (18.8)             (14.3)       (20.1)       (15.7)
                      [20.8]       [24.1]       [20.6]             [18.2]       [21.8]       [19.9]
N                                   1613                                         1615

                                  B. Black Non-Metco Students

Core                 -240.1       -215.7       -169.3              -10.9        -57.7        -15.0
                      (99.6)      (102.7)      (112.4)             (62.8)       (81.7)       (66.2)
                      [60.9]       [60.4]       [63.0]             [45.7]       [61.5]       [44.6]
Reading              -183.1       -194.4       -167.9               -7.7        -60.3         -9.3
                     (110.4)      (114.4)      (125.4)             (72.2)       (96.4)       (76.9)
                      [94.3]       [99.4]       [92.5]             [46.1]       [52.0]       [43.1]
Math                 -247.9       -193.9       -312.6               -7.2         -8.2        -26.5
                     (121.2)      (123.7)      (133.1)             (84.4)      (113.4)       (90.2)
                      [90.2]       [75.4]      [102.4]             [52.4]       [58.7]       [53.2]
Language             -202.6       -214.6       -143.2               21.4        -39.8         17.9
                     (123.1)      (125.9)      (147.5)             (91.6)      (118.9)       (96.5)
                      [69.9]       [76.9]       [72.6]             [73.9]      [114.5]       [78.2]
N                                    99                                          101
Notes: The table shows estimates of equation (4) in the text. Regressions are differenced across grades 3
and 5 or across grades 5 and 7. Estimates in columns 1 and 4 are from models that restrict the effects of
percent Metco to be the same across grades.
                                  Table 8: OLS, Reduced Form and First-Stage Estimates for All Non-Metco 3rd Graders
                                                                         Dependent Variable
                               Core                          Reading                             Math                                            Language
                     (1)         (2)       (3)          (4)      (5)       (6)          (7)        (8)      (9)                         (10)        (11)      (12)
                                                                       A. OLS
# Metco              0.59       0.16      -0.15        0.37     0.08     -0.18         0.59       0.34     0.06                        -0.018     -0.34      -0.61
in class            (0.63)     (0.61)    (0.62)       (0.62)   (0.61)    (0.62)       (0.64)     (0.63)   (0.63)                       (0.66)     (0.65)     (0.65)
                    [0.60]     [0.63]    [0.71]       [0.50]   [0.52]    [0.60]       [0.66]     [0.65]   [0.73]                        [0.65]    [0.67]     [0.73]

Non-Metco            0.66                  -0.53           0.58                  -0.53           0.37                  -0.53            0.66                  -0.53
class size          (0.22)                                (0.22)                                (0.22)                                 (0.23)
                    [0.22]                                [0.21]                                [0.25]                                 [0.21]

Non-Metco          -0.033                 -0.038         -0.0029                -0.0042         -0.047                -0.049           0.012                 0.0089
enrollment         (0.067)                (0.067)        (0.067)                (0.067)         (0.068)               (0.069)         (0.070)                (0.071)
                   [0.076]                [0.077]         [0.060]                [0.061]        [0.084]               [0.084]         [0.080]                [0.081]

                                                B. First-Stage - Dependent Variable is Number Metco in Class
Instrument           0.92       0.88        0.87
                   (0.034)    (0.030)     (0.030)
                    [0.18]     [0.16]      [0.17]

Non-Metco           0.021
class size        (0.0064)
                   [0.040]

Non-Metco          0.0014                 0.0016
enrollment        (0.0018)               (0.0018)
                   [0.016]                [0.016]

                                                                        C. Reduced Form
Instrument         -0.069      -1.50      -2.67            0.28      -1.10     -2.36             0.37       -0.51      -1.64           -0.43      -1.85      -3.13
                   (1.22)      (1.09)     (1.10)          (1.25)     (1.11)   (1.12)            (1.26)      (1.12)     (1.13)          (1.31)     (1.16)     (1.17)
                    [1.39]     [1.33]     [1.60]          [1.01]     [1.02]   [1.32]            [1.63]      [1.41]     [1.63]          [1.53]     [1.49]     [1.75]

Non-Metco            0.61                  -0.53           0.59                  -0.53           0.36                  -0.53            0.62                  -0.53
class size          (0.24)                                (0.24)                                (0.24)                                 (0.25)
                    [0.26]                                [0.24]                                [0.30]                                 [0.24]

Non-Metco          -0.029                -0.0209         -0.0020                0.0087          -0.045                -0.037           0.015                  0.025
enrollment         (0.067)               (0.067)         (0.067)                (0.067)         (0.069)               (0.069)          (0.07)                (0.071)
                   [0.078]                [0.073]         [0.062]               [0.058]         [0.086]               [0.082]         [0.080]                [0.076]

N                              2672                                   2773                                  2716                                   2763
Notes: Panel A reports OLS estimates of equation (6) in the text. Panel B shows the impact of predicted number Metco on actual number Metco using equation (7).
Panel C shows reduced-form estimates of the effect of predicted Metco on test scores. Standard errors clustered by grade/school/year are reported in brackets.
Models in columns 3, 6, 9 and 12 of Panels A and C constrain the effect of non-Metco class size to be -.53, as in Angrist and Lavy (1999).
                    Table 9: 2SLS Estimates for Non-Metco 3rd Graders with Number Metco and Non-Metco Class Size Endogenous
                                                                         Dependent Variable
                                Core                           Reading                         Math                         Language
                        (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)          (7)     (8)      (9)         (10)     (11)   (12)
                                                             A. All Non-Metco Students
# Metco               -0.77     -0.80     -1.36        -1.14    -1.12      -1.27       -0.89   -0.95    -0.95       -1.163    -1.11  -1.62
in class              (1.35)    (1.35)   (0.95)       (1.29)    (1.29)    (0.98)       (1.36)  (1.35)  (0.97)       (1.36)    (1.35) (1.03)
                      [1.34]    [1.35]    [1.08]      [1.20]    [1.21]    [0.89]       [1.47]  [1.47]   [1.12]       [1.41]   [1.40] [1.24]

Non-Metco              -0.03                                   0.005                                  -0.04                                   0.017
class size             (0.07)                                 (0.067)                                 (0.07)                                 (0.070)
                       [0.08]                                 [0.059]                                 [0.08]                                 [0.078]

Non-Metco               0.27        0.27                       0.07        0.08                       0.005       -0.002                     0.244       0.253
enrollment             (0.46)      (0.46)                     (0.42)      (0.42)                      (0.47)      (0.47)                     (0.44)      (0.44)
                       [0.47]      [0.47]                     [0.43]      [0.43]                      [0.55]      [0.56]                     [0.42]      [0.42]

1st stage F-Stat        9.79       9.58                        8.14        8.10                        9.89        9.72                       8.24       8.13

N                                  2672                                    2773                                   2716                                   2763

                                                                     B. Black Non-Metco Students
# Metco                -8.27      -10.52      -12.33          -11.05     -13.75   -16.09         2.72             -1.63      -0.61           -10.36     -14.09      -10.91
in class               (8.75)     (7.91)      (6.95)          (9.46)      (8.18)   (7.17)      (9.21)             (8.60)     (7.24)          (8.20)     (7.51)      (6.19)
                       [6.91]      [6.42]     [6.06]          [7.95]      [7.49]   [6.92]       [6.79]            [6.59]     [5.08]           [7.10]     [6.89]      [5.30]

Non-Metco              -0.06                                  -0.006                                  -0.25                                  -0.15
class size             (0.40)                                 (0.451)                                 (0.41)                                 (0.38)
                       [0.28]                                 [0.333]                                 [0.26]                                 [0.33]

Non-Metco               0.95        0.76                       1.31        1.01                       -0.06       -0.39                      -0.94       -1.29
enrollment             (1.61)      (1.62)                     (1.77)      (1.76)                      (1.75)      (1.75)                     (1.65)      (1.66)
                       [1.16]      [0.47]                     [1.22]      [1.31]                      [1.39]      [1.38]                     [1.34]      [1.34]

1st stage F-Stat        2.28       2.59                        2.22        2.78                        2.48        2.65                       2.59       3.05

N                                   169                                    182                                     176                                    182
Notes: The table reports 2SLS estimates of equation (7) in the text. Standard errors clustered by school and year are reported in brackets. The instrument set includes
a linear term for predicted non-Metco class size and the following six indicator variables : 1(24<=pclass<25) 1(23<=pclass<24), 1(22<=pclass<23), 1(21<=pclass<22),
1( 20<=pclass<21), 1(19<=pclass<20). The 1st stage F-stat refers to the F-statistic for the vector of instruments in the first stage. The F-statistic uses clustered
standard errors.
                                                  Table 10a

                              OLS Results for Male Non-Metco Students
                                Means                                  Micro Data
                Pool        3rd       5th      7th         Pool      3rd      5th                   7th
Subject          (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)          (5)      (6)      (7)                   (8)

                                     A. All Male Non-Metco Students

Core              7.7       -1.9        8.3        16.7              2.5        -4.2        5.5      8.1
                (10.6)     (19.4)     (24.6)      (15.3)            (7.8)      (16.6)     (15.4)   (10.9)
                 [8.8]     [18.7]     [23.0]      [12.7]            [8.0]      [16.7]     [16.5]   [11.5]
Reading           9.2      -11.3        5.8        22.2              2.8       -10.5        6.3     11.1
                 (9.8)     (17.8)     (22.2)      (14.0)            (7.8)      (16.9)     (14.9)   (11.3)
                 [9.0]     [17.2]     [22.7]      [10.8]            [7.6]      [13.8]     [17.3]   [10.4]
Math              0.4       -7.7       -5.9        10.4             -4.0        -7.3      -12.1      5.3
                (10.9)     (20.5)     (24.4)      (16.1)            (8.1)      (16.4)     (16.0)   (12.1)
                 [8.8]     [19.2]     [21.3]      [13.6]            [8.0]      [16.4]     [15.1]   [11.4]
Language          9.0       -7.0       21.8        18.4              2.4        -9.3       16.4      8.3
                (11.7)     (23.2)     (25.3)      (15.8)            (8.4)      (18.0)     (16.8)   (11.7)
                 [9.8]     [21.3]     [22.4]      [14.1]            [8.9]      [18.9]     [16.0]   [12.3]
N                 168        56         56          56              4086        1322       1395     1369

                                    B. Black Male Non-Metco Students

Core           -115.4     -163.4       -98.5      -112.1           -26.0      -155.6       69.4    -31.3
               (52.7)     (129.1)     (133.2)     (80.8)           (46.2)     (128.8)    (130.0)   (57.2)
               [56.6]     [128.7]     [145.2]     [77.5]           [41.0]     [106.2]    [119.6]   [51.7]
Reading         -68.6     -152.5      -117.4       -47.8           -14.7      -188.8       44.9     -3.1
               (47.7)     (145.4)     (111.3)     (69.3)           (46.3)     (132.5)    (120.9)   (58.7)
               [49.4]     [121.5]     [114.6]     [71.7]           [37.4]     [102.8]     [97.4]   [54.8]
Math            -74.0      47.3       -119.6       -63.5             2.2       80.3        31.6     -1.6
               (53.5)     (127.3)     (118.7)     (82.9)           (47.4)     (120.1)    (120.7)   (62.5)
               [53.7]     [114.9]     [133.3]     [73.0]           [43.6]     [122.8]    [118.3]   [52.7]
Language       -137.7     -101.4       -34.0      -150.8           -46.4       -90.3       92.7    -55.2
               (54.5)     (124.1)     (131.9)     (87.9)           (45.2)     (106.3)    (124.0)   (58.9)
               [56.2]     [121.4]     [154.0]     [83.2]           [42.6]     [129.3]    [125.7]   [54.9]
N                118        36          39          43              276         81          93      102
Notes: The table reports estimates analogous to those in Table 6, for the sample of boys only.
                                                   Table 10b

                              OLS Results for Female Non-Metco Students
                                 Means                                  Micro Data
                 Pool        3rd       5th      7th         Pool     3rd       5th                    7th
Subject           (1)        (2)       (3)      (4)          (5)      (6)      (7)                    (8)

                                      A. All Female Non-Metco Students

Core             -1.4         8.7        -5.5       -3.5             -11.6        2.9       -19.4    -15.1
                (10.0)      (19.5)      (19.4)     (15.8)            (7.4)      (15.7)      (14.6)   (10.3)
                [10.9]      [21.7]      [14.3]     [17.2]             [7.8]     [12.6]      [10.7]   [10.6]
Reading           1.2        11.0        -7.0       -3.2              -7.3        5.5       -19.6    -11.2
                 (9.7)      (19.8)      (18.0)     (15.9)            (7.7)      (15.8)      (14.9)   (11.4)
                [10.0]      [20.8]      [15.3]     [16.8]             [6.9]     [11.2]      [11.8]   [10.8]
Math              6.3        18.3        -0.8        4.9              -3.6       15.3       -11.0    -10.5
                (11.6)      (20.9)      (23.0)     (18.1)            (8.0)      (16.5)      (15.9)   (11.5)
                [11.9]      [22.4]      [20.4]     [18.8]             [9.1]     [14.1]      [15.2]   [11.6]
Language         -6.9         1.2        -7.4       -7.0             -18.1       -8.8       -23.0    -19.3
                (10.5)      (19.5)      (21.9)     (15.5)            (7.7)      (16.3)      (15.4)   (10.5)
                [11.8]      [20.3]      [19.1]     [17.0]             [9.0]     [13.9]      [15.4]   [11.0]
N                 168         56          56         56              4060        1350        1401     1309

                                     B. Black Female Non-Metco Students

Core            -42.9      -340.2        31.5       40.9             -37.8      -197.1        0.8     6.6
                (49.6)     (120.9)      (88.9)     (68.6)            (39.6)      (98.9)     (69.4)   (63.7)
                [55.0]     [137.7]      [93.1]     [66.4]            [38.0]     [107.4]     [53.3]   [54.3]
Reading         -37.0      -341.6        74.5       63.4             -40.7      -178.7       -0.4     17.4
                (52.5)     (127.1)      (91.3)     (70.0)            (42.7)     (102.3)     (76.4)   (70.8)
                [57.6]     [135.8]      [92.9]     [66.1]            [39.2]     [104.1]     [57.7]   [45.3]
Math            -36.5      -204.3        39.6      -10.4             -15.4       -74.8        7.2    -44.0
                (45.3)     (109.2)      (69.9)     (72.1)            (42.6)     (104.5)     (70.8)   (71.2)
                [47.6]     [116.2]      [70.2]     [64.9]            [41.5]     [117.6]     [57.3]   [62.9]
Language        -28.0      -360.9        22.0       82.1             -31.6      -195.2        0.2     39.7
                (49.8)     (114.4)      (91.6)     (66.5)            (40.2)      (96.6)     (74.4)   (60.5)
                [55.1]     [132.6]      [94.7]     [68.0]            [38.2]      [98.6]     [61.5]   [56.5]
N                124         41           40         43               258          88         90       80
Notes: The table reports estimates analogous to thise in Table 6, for the sample of girls only.
