                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   THE HIGH DEMAND FOR INTERNATIONAL RESERVES
                         IN THE FAR EAST: WHAT’S GOING ON?


                                           Joshua Aizenman
                                            Nancy Marion


                                          Working Paper 9266
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9266


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




This paper was prepared for the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco conference on Financial
Issues in the Pacific Basin Region, September 26-27, 2002. We wish to thank our discussant, Hali
Edison, and the other conference participants for their helpful comments. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Joshua Aizenman and Nancy Marion. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The High Demand for International Reserves in the Far East: What’s Going On?
Joshua Aizenman and Nancy Marion
NBER Working Paper No. 9266
October 2002
JEL No. F31, F32, F34

                                             ABSTRACT

       This paper explores econometric and theoretical interpretations for the relatively high
demand for international reserves by countries in the Far East and the relatively low demand by
some other developing countries. Using a sample of about 125 developing countries, we show that
reserve holdings over the 1980-1996 period seem to be the predictable outcome of a few key factors,
such as the size of international transactions, their volatility, the exchange-rate arrangement, and
political considerations. The estimating equation does a good job of predicting reserve holdings in
Asia before the 1997 financial crisis. After the crisis, the estimating equation significantly under-
predicts the reserve holdings of several key Far East countries, as one might expect from the Lucas
Critique. This under-prediction is consistent with models explaining reserve demand in developing
countries. Specifically, we show that sovereign risk and costly tax collection to cover fiscal
liabilities lead to a relatively large precautionary demand for international reserves. In the aftermath
of a crisis, countries that have to deal with higher perceived sovereign risk and higher fiscal
liabilities (both funded and unfunded) will opt to increase their demand for reserves. The models
also help us understand why some developing countries do not hold large precautionary reserve
balances in the aftermath of crises. Countries with high discount rates, political instability or
political corruption find it optimal to hold smaller precautionary balances. We also show that models
that incorporate loss aversion predict a relatively large demand for international reserves. Hence,
if a crisis increases the volatility of shocks and/or loss aversion, it will greatly increase the demand
for international reserves. Consequently, we conclude that the ‘puzzling’ pattern in international
reserve holdings is reasonably explained by the extended models described in this paper.


Joshua Aizenman                                                Nancy Marion
Department of Economics                                        Department of Economics
University of California, Santa Cruz                           Dartmouth College
Social Science I                                               6106 Rockefeller Hall
Santa Cruz, CA 95064                                           Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER                                                       nancy.marion@dartmouth.edu
jaizen@ucsc.edu
                                                  1


Introduction
        In the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis, emerging markets in the Far East have built

up large stockpiles of international reserves. Today, China, Taiwan, Hong Kong, South Korea

and Singapore rank just behind Japan as the world’s biggest holders of international reserves.

These five Asian emerging markets together hold reserves totaling nearly US$700 billion.

        There is a growing debate about the need to hold so many reserves. Some critics point

out that holding a lot of reserves is costly. Reserves held in dollar-denominated Treasuries, for

example, earn a modest return, far below the government’s own cost of borrowing either in local

currency or in dollars. Why hold cash in the bank and pay high interest on outstanding

liabilities? Critics also note that the yield on reserves is much lower than the opportunity cost of

those reserves as measured by the potential return on real investments in the economy.

        Those who support large reserve balances argue that the cost of holding reserves is small

relative to the economic consequences of a crisis. Large stockpiles are needed to forestall-- or at

least weather-- currency and financial crises that are increasingly frequent and severe in today’s

international monetary system. Moreover, just when an emerging market most needs reserves --

in a crisis -- it can be shut out of the international capital markets because of sovereign risk

concerns. An IMF bailout is not guaranteed, and even when forthcoming, comes with strict

conditions. Holding large reserve stockpiles is therefore prudent policy.1

        In this paper, we examine some of the factors that influence the decision to hold

international reserves in developing countries. We also explore why these holdings are


1
  In addition, international reserves have traditionally been used to manage fixed exchange rates.
Even though a number of countries have moved to more flexible exchange-rate arrangements in
the 1990s, some studies suggest that emerging markets still hold large reserve stockpiles to limit
exchange-rate volatility, particularly when they have large external liabilities denominated in
foreign currency. (Hausmann, et al, 2001; Calvo and Reinhart, 2002).
                                                  2


particularly large in the Far East. We begin with a standard estimating equation that does quite

well in predicting central bank reserve holdings through 1996. For a sample of about 125

developing countries, reserve holdings seem to be the predictable outcome of a few key factors,

such as the size of international transactions, their volatility, the exchange-rate arrangement, and

political considerations. The explanatory variables do a good job of predicting reserve holdings

in Asia. If anything, they over-predict reserve holdings for some emerging markets in the Far

East over the 1980-1996 period. After the 1997 Asian financial crisis, however, the estimating

equation significantly under-predicts the reserve holdings of key Far Eastern countries.

       We present two models that illustrate why the recent reserve build up in the Far East may

represent precautionary holdings. The first model shows that the desire to smooth consumption

and distortions intertemporally in the face of conditional access to global capital markets and

costly tax collection generates a large precautionary demand for reserves. Sovereign risk and

costly tax collection generate a high demand for reserves even if agents are risk neutral. The

model also helps us understand why some developing countries do not hold large precautionary

reserve balances in the aftermath of last decade’s crises. Countries with high discount rates,

political instability or political corruption find it optimal to hold smaller precautionary balances.

The second model shows how increased loss aversion and/or increased volatility in the aftermath

of a financial crisis can generate a precautionary demand for reserves even when the equity

premium is positive.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes recent trends in reserve

holdings by developing countries and demonstrates that the emerging markets of the Far East are

outliers in terms of their sizeable reserve holdings. Section 3 presents a standard estimating

equation that does a good job of predicting reserve holdings in a panel of developing countries
                                                3


over the 1980-1996 period but fails to capture the tremendous build-up in reserves in the Far East

after the Asian crisis. In Section 4 we explore some theories that enhance our understanding of

why emerging markets may want to hold large precautionary reserve balances in the aftermath of

that crisis. Section 5 presents some concluding thoughts.




2. Recent Trends in Reserve Holdings by Developing Countries

       At the end of 1994, global reserves (minus gold) were US$1,254 billion. As shown in

Figure 1, half were held by industrial countries and half by developing ones. Among developing

countries, Asian economies held the most by far. Asian economies held 30.5% of global

reserves, while Western Hemisphere countries held only 8.3%, Middle Eastern countries 5.3%,

developing Europe 3.6% and Africa 1.9%.

       In the past seven and a half years, global reserves have almost doubled in nominal terms,

to US$2,223 billion at the end of May, 2002. Today, developing countries hold the bulk of

reserves -- 60.4% of the total. Asian economies hold an even more commanding lead, having

increased their share of global reserves from 30.5% in 1994 to 38% at the end of May, 2002.

The developing countries in Europe hold the next largest share, but it is much smaller than

Asia’s, only 7.1% of total reserves.2




2
 We focus on reserves minus gold for three reasons. First, there are concerns on how to value
gold. Second, gold now accounts for less than 3% of global reserve holdings when gold is
measured at 35 SDRs per ounce. Third, gold holdings by developing countries are negligible.
When we include gold and follow the IMF in valuing it at 35 SDRs per ounce, we find that
developing countries held 48.3% of total reserves in 1994 while Asia held 29.6%. Developing
countries held 59.6% of total reserves in May, 2002, and Asia 37.5% of the total.
                                                 4


        Figure 2 reveals that today’s biggest reserve holders are all Asian economies. Japan

holds more reserves than any other nation, US$411.6 billion at the end of May, 2002. China is

second, with US$241.9 billion in reserve holdings. Next in order come Taiwan (US$139.8

billion), Hong Kong (US$111.2 billion), South Korea (US$109.6 billion) and Singapore (US$78

billion).

        Figures 3-7 provide additional details about the reserve holdings of these Asian countries

(except Japan).3 In order to get a sense of magnitudes and to facilitate comparisons across

countries, we have scaled reserve holdings by a number of different measures, such as weeks of

import cover, GDP, M2, and, when available, total external debt and total short-term external

debt. For example, the plots in Figure 3 show that China has increased its reserve holdings since

1985 regardless of how reserves are scaled. In terms of weeks of import cover, China’s reserves

have more than doubled over the 1985-2000 period. As a share of GDP they have quadrupled.

As a share of short-term external debt, they have quintupled. As a share of M2 or total external

debt, reserves have also increased over the 1985-2000 period, but more modestly. China’s

reserve holdings in the 1997-2000 period have been the largest in its history for all scaling

measures except M2.

        Hong Kong and South Korea follow the same pattern as China. Reserves have increased

over the 1985-2000 period regardless of scaling measure, and the increase has been most

pronounced in the aftermath of the Asian financial crisis. For Korea, the recent growth in

reserves is quite dramatic, whether reserves are scaled by weeks of imports, GDP, M2, or




3
 The reasons for Japan’s large reserve holdings are not addressed in this paper, since our
empirical and theoretical focus will be on the reserve holdings of developing countries.
                                                  5


external debt. Interestingly, Korea’s reserves are not yet equal to its total external debt. In

contrast, China’s reserve holdings exceeded total external liabilities by the end of 1999.4

        Taiwan and Singapore show a somewhat different pattern. Both have maintained

considerable reserve holdings for an extended period of time. We therefore do not see the big

build-up in reserve holdings that occurred in other Asian economies following the Asian

financial crisis.

        The pattern in reserve holdings is striking. Developing countries, and specifically

emerging markets in the Far East, hold an increasing share of global reserves. The world’s top

reserve holders are all located in Asia. Using a number of scaling measures, Asian emerging

markets hold record levels of reserves today. What is going on?




3. Estimating Reserve Holdings – How Well Do We Predict For Asian Economies?

        We wish to estimate reserve holdings for a panel of developing countries and examine

whether the estimation performs well in predicting reserves for the Asian emerging markets both

in sample and out-of-sample.

        We start with a standard estimating equation, where reserve holdings depend on scale

factors, international transactions volatility, and openness. The latter variable is a proxy for the

country’s vulnerability to external shocks. Thus our estimating equation in log-linear form is:




4
  China’s large and growing stock of international reserves may be due to concerns about the
solvency of its banking system more than the size of its external debt. In May, 2002, China’s
Central Bank Governor said that 25-30% of all bank loans were not being repaid. The credit-
rating agency Standard & Poor’s estimated that the situation might be twice as bad, with half of
all loans classifiable as non-performing. (Wall Street Journal, May 10, 2002.)
                                                               6


           (1)

      Rit
ln(       ) = α 0 + α 1 ln(popit ) + α 2 ln(gpc it ) + α 3 ln(exait ) + α 4 ln(imy it ) + α 5 ln(neerit ) + ε t
      Pit



where R is actual holdings of reserves minus gold, valued in millions of U.S. dollars and deflated

by the U.S. GDP deflator (P), pop is the total population of the country, gpc is real GDP per

capita, exa is the volatility of real export receipts, imy is the share of imports of goods and

services in GDP, and neer is the volatility of the nominal effective exchange rate.

           Real reserve holdings should increase with the size of international transactions, so we

would expect reserve holdings to be positively correlated with the country’s population and

standard of living. Reserve holdings should increase with the volatility of international receipts

and payments if they are intended to help cushion the economy, so we would expect reserve

holdings to be positively correlated with the volatility of a country’s export receipts. Reserve

holdings should also increase with the vulnerability to external shocks. We therefore expect

reserve holdings to be positively correlated with the average propensity to import, a measure of

the economy’s openness and vulnerability to external shocks. Finally, since greater exchange-

rate flexibility should reduce the demand for reserves because central banks no longer need a

large reserve stockpile to manage a fixed exchange rate, reserve holdings should be negatively

correlated with exchange-rate volatility.5




5
  In theory, reserve holdings should also be negatively correlated with the opportunity cost of
holding them. The opportunity cost is often measured by the spread between the country’s own
bond yield and the return on U.S. Treasury bills. Previous studies have found that it is not a
significant explanatory factor. (See Flood and Marion (2002) and the references cited there.)
Moreover, interest-rate data have not been available for many developing countries until quite
recently.
                                                    7


          Table 1 presents two regressions for a panel consisting of 122 developing countries over

the 1980-96 period.6 Regression (1) confirms our priors. The scale variables, population size

and real GDP per capita, are positive and highly significant. The volatility of real export receipts

and the vulnerability to external shocks measured by openness are also positive and highly

significant. Greater exchange-rate variability significantly reduces reserve holdings. These five

variables account for 88 percent of the variation in actual reserve holdings when country fixed

effects are included; they account for over 70 percent of the variation without the fixed effects.7

          Regression (2) in Table 1 adds some political measures to the explanatory variables used

in regression (1). Aizenman and Marion (2002) show that political uncertainty and political

corruption each act as a tax on the return to reserves and hence reduce optimal holdings.

Regression (2) illustrates this point for a smaller sample of countries for which we have political

measures. An increase in an index of political corruption (corrupt) significantly reduces reserve

holdings, as does an increase in the probability of a government leadership change by

constitutional means (pol).8

          Figures 8-10 use Regression (1), the estimation without political variables, to illustrate

how well our five explanatory variables predict reserve holdings for various geographical regions

and for specific emerging markets. To obtain the figures, we first compute the average (non-

weighted) value of the coefficients on the country dummies. The average coefficient value is

–0.2573. We then compute one, two and three standard deviations around this average. These

6
    See the data appendix for details about the regression variables and country sample.
7
  We also experimented with adding a measure of financial openness, but it did not have a
significant effect.
8
 The political corruption data is from Tanzi and Davoodi (1997). The political uncertainty
measure was obtained from Leblang (2000).
                                                 8


values are shown as gridlines in the figures. Finally, we compute the average value of the

coefficients on country dummies for various geographical regions of the world, using the IMF’s

regional classification, and we also plot the coefficient on the country dummy for specific

emerging markets of interest.

       An examination of Figure 8 shows that when we estimate reserve holdings without

explanatory political variables, our predictions for the broad regions of Asia, Latin America and

Africa are quite good. The average values of the coefficients for these regions are close to the

sample average. However, for the smaller sample of Far East emerging markets (China,

Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Philippines and Thailand) and Latin American emerging markets

(Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, Uruguay, and Venezuela), average

coefficient values are considerably more negative than the sample average. Consequently, the

regression’s explanatory variables over-predict reserve holdings for these subsets of countries in

the 1980-96 period.

       Figures 9 and 10 illustrate the extent of over-prediction for each of the countries in these

two regions. In the Far East, the coefficient on China’s dummy is two standard deviations below

the average, while the coefficients on Indonesia, Korea, the Philippines and Thailand are all

below the average by at least one standard deviation. In Latin America, no country has a

coefficient more than two standard deviations below the average, though Brazil comes close.

       Figures 11-13 repeat the exercise for estimates derived from Regression (2), the one that

includes political variables. In Figure 11 we see that the average values of the dummy

coefficients for Latin America and Africa are close to the sample average of 0.102. The average

value for Asia is more negative but still within one standard deviation of the average. However,

when we examine specific countries in Figures 12-13, we see that the coefficient on the country
                                                   9


dummy is more than two standard deviations below the average for Korea and Brazil, again

suggesting that the explanatory variables inclusive of political factors are over-predicting reserve

holdings for these important emerging markets.

          Figure 14 shows the deviation of each country’s dummy coefficient from the sample

average for both regression (1) and (2). One can see specific outliers, both positive and negative.

For example, when political variables are considered, the biggest negative outliers are Brazil,

Cote d’Ivoire, South Korea and South Africa. The dummy coefficients for these countries are

more than two standard deviations below the average. China and Mexico have dummy

coefficients more than one standard deviation below the average.

          We now use data for 1997-1999 to check how well our two regressions predict out-of-

sample for the Asian emerging markets.9 Table 2 displays the results.

          For Korea, the regression that includes the political variables continues to over-predict

reserve holdings for 1997, the year of Korea’s financial crisis. However, the regression

dramatically under-predicts Korea’s reserve holdings in both 1998 and 1999. The estimation

under-predicts Korea’s reserve holdings by $14.6 billion in 1998 and by $25.8 billion in 1999.

The 1999 prediction error is 37 percent of actual reserves. 10 These findings suggest that the

1997-98 Asian financial crisis increased Korea’s optimal long-run demand for reserves.11 With




9
  We do not have corruption and political instability data for the 1997-99 period, but since these
data change slowly, if at all, over the 1990s, we just extrapolate forward using the political data
from 1996.
10
  These prediction errors are expressed in real terms. If there were no prediction errors on price
deflators, the under-prediction of Korean reserves would be $15.3 billion in nominal terms in
1998 and $27.5 billion in 1999.
11
     In the next section, we examine several reasons for the increase in optimal reserve holdings.
                                                  10


limited access to global capital markets following the crisis, Korea could not immediately adjust

its stock to the higher optimal level.12

       For the other emerging Asian economies, the gap between the actual and predicted value

of reserves over the 1997-99 period is less dramatic in absolute terms though not always in

percentage terms. In the case of China, the regression with political variables included under-

predicts China’s reserve holdings in real terms in 1997 and 1998 by $12 billion and $11.4 billion,

respectively, while it over-predicts China’s reserve holdings in 1999 by $12.3 billion. The

estimation under-predicts Thailand’s reserve holdings in all three years, 1997-1999, with the

greatest under-prediction being $10 billion in real terms in 1999. That prediction error represents

31 percent of actual reserves. The estimation also under-predicts Philippine reserve holdings in

all three years as well, with the 1999 under-prediction being the largest, at $6.9 billion, or 55

percent of the actual level. Interestingly, the estimation over-predicts Malaysian reserve holdings

in all three years, with the largest over-prediction being $16 billion in crisis year 1997. The

Malaysian results suggest a possible trade off between the willingness to adopt capital controls

and the willingness to hold international reserves. Because Malaysia chose to impose capital

controls during the financial crisis, it reduced its effective integration with the global capital

markets and its demand for international reserves. 13



12
   Evaluating empirically the impact of access to global capital markets on the demand for
international reserves may be subject to a “peso problem” -- access matters most when a crisis
hits. A regression using data with infrequent or shallow crises will under-estimate the increase in
reserve demand following a severe crisis.
13
  The regression with political variables included also under-predicts out-of-sample for some
emerging markets in Latin America. For example, it under-predicts Brazil’s reserve holdings by
$23.1 billion, $16.7 billion and $11.7 billion in years 1997-99, respectively, and under-predicts
Mexico’s reserve holdings by $8.4 billion, $9.7 billion and $8.8 billion in those same years. The
regression does better out-of-sample for Chile, over-predicting its reserve holdings by a mere
$0.5 to $3 billion.
                                                   11


        Based on our data analysis, we conclude that a standard estimating equation does well in

predicting Asian reserve holdings in the 1980-1996 period. If anything, the explanatory

variables over-predict reserve holdings for some Far East countries. However, the equation

mostly under-predicts reserve holdings for countries in the Far East post-1996. These

observations suggest that behavior has changed since the Asian financial crisis. In the next

section, we put forward some hypotheses for why reserve holdings in the Far East have increased

so much in recent years.




4. Some Reasons for Large Reserve Holdings
        The recent build-up of large international reserve holdings in a number of Asian

emerging markets may represent precautionary holdings. While these holdings are undoubtedly

motivated by many factors, we focus on two. The first is the need to smooth consumption and

distortions intertemporally in the face of conditional access to global capital markets and costly

domestic tax collection. The second is an increase in the volatility of shocks and/or loss aversion

after the 1997-98 Asian financial crisis. Since these motivating factors could induce all

emerging markets to hold large precautionary balances, why is it that some do not? We show

that countries with relatively high discount rates, political instability, or political corruption find

it optimal to hold less precautionary reserves.

        We now examine in turn the roles of conditional access to global capital markets and loss

aversion.
                                                  12


        a. Conditional access to global capital markets

        The demand for international reserves is frequently analyzed in terms of a buffer stock

model. That model suggests central banks should choose a level of reserves to balance the

macroeconomic adjustment costs incurred in the absence of reserves with the opportunity cost of

holding reserves. An alternative strategy is to view international reserve holdings as a form of

precautionary saving for economies with conditional access to global capital markets and costly

domestic tax collection. Even if consumers are risk neutral, these considerations can be

important enough to generate a positive and potentially large stockpile of international reserves.

Formally, both costly taxation and imperfect integration with the global capital market due to

sovereign risk generate non-linearities that make precautionary balances welfare-improving.

        To simplify our example, we assume agents are risk neutral. (Recall that risk-neutral

agents choose no precautionary saving in the conventional analysis.) Focusing on risk neutrality

allows us to isolate the effects of non-linearities introduced by imperfect capital markets and

costly taxation.

        We study a two-period, two-states-of-nature model of an emerging-market economy.

The economy is subject to productivity shocks that create a volatile tax base. It faces inelastic

fiscal outlays and finds it costly to collect taxes. The economy can borrow internationally in the

first period, but because there is some chance it will default in the second period, it faces a credit

ceiling.14

        The central bank actively targets the stock of reserves. Even so, a variety of exchange-

rate arrangements are possible, such as a fixed exchange rate or a managed float, because the


14
  A detailed model along these lines is described in Aizenman and Marion (2002). The model
described here is a simplified version of that model.
                                                   13


balance sheets of the central bank and treasury are consolidated and the net taxes paid by

consumers are determined as a residual.15

        Suppose ε is a productivity shock that occurs only in the second period. Then GDP in

period i (i = 1, 2) is



                              1 + ε     with probability 0.5
                              
        (2)      Y1 = 1; Y2 = 
                              1 − ε     with probability 0.5
                              


        The emerging market can borrow in international capital markets. It borrows B in period

1 at a contractual rate r and owes (1+ r)B in period 2. If it faces the bad productivity shock in

the second period, it defaults. Default is not without penalty, however. International creditors

can confiscate some of the emerging market’s export revenues or other resources equal to a share

α of its output. The more open the economy, the greater α is likely to be. We assume that the

defaulting country’s international reserve holdings are beyond the reach of creditors.16

        In the second period, the country repays its international obligations if repayment is less

costly than the default penalty. The country ends up transferring S2 real resources to

international creditors in the second period, where:



        (3)      S 2 = MIN [(1 + r ) B; αY2 ] ,         0 <α <1

15
  This structure would also apply to the operation of export stabilization funds, such as Chile’s
copper fund.
16
   This is a realistic assumption. For example, on January 5, 2002, The Economist reported
“[President Duhalde] confirmed that Argentina will formally default on its debt, an overdue
admission of an inescapable reality. The government has not had access to international credit
(except from the IMF) since July. It had already repatriated nearly all of its liquid foreign assets
to avoid their seizure by creditors.” (The Economist, p. 29)
                                                        14



        Suppose the risk-free interest rate is rf . The interest rate attached to the country’s

acquired debt, r , is determined by the condition that the expected return on the debt is equal to

the risk-free return:



        (4)       E[S2 ] = (1+ r f )B


Applying the above assumptions and recognizing that E[S2 ] = 0.5(1− ε)α + 0.5(1+ r)B , we infer

that the supply of fund facing the economy is

                                                                 (1 − ε )α
                     r f                             for    B≤
                                                                   1 + rf
                     
        (5)        r=
                                 (1 − ε )α                  (1 − ε )α       α
                      1 + 2r f −                     for              ≤B≤
                                    B                       1 + rf       1 + rf


        The demand for public goods, such as health, pensions, and defense, is assumed to be

completely inelastic and set at G . Public goods expenditures are financed, in part, by tax

revenues. Collecting taxes is assumed to be costly. Costs include direct collection and

enforcement costs as well as indirect deadweight losses associated with the distortions induced

by taxes. Like Barro (1979), we model these costs as a non-linear share of output and let them

depend positively on the tax rate. Thus, a tax at rate t yields net tax revenue of



        (6)               T (t ) = Y [t − 0.5λt 2 ]


The term 0.5λt 2 measures the fraction of output lost because of inefficiencies in the tax

collection system. For a given net tax revenue Ti ; i = 1, 2 , the needed tax rate is
                                                         15




       (7)                             1 − 1 − 2λξ i ,
                         ti (ξ i ) =
                                            λ


              Ti
where ξ i =      ; i = 1, 2 denotes the effective tax rate from the consumers’ point of view.
              Yi
       The government can acquire international reserves in the first period, let them earn the

risk-free rate, and spend them in the second period. One way of acquiring reserves is through

sovereign borrowing. Even if reserves are acquired as the counterpart of private-sector

borrowing, full sterilization by the central bank implies an ultimate swap of sovereign debt for

reserves. Another way of accumulating reserves is through taxation. Higher taxes depress

domestic absorption and generate a bigger current-account surplus in the first period. In the

second period, reserves may be spent to finance repayment of the international debt and

government expenditures. In a two-period model, there is no need to hold reserves beyond the

second period. Thus the terminal demand for reserves is zero.

       The government faces the following budget constraints:



                      T1 = G + R − B;
       (8)
                      T2,h = G + B (1 + r ) − (1 + r f ) R; T2,l = G + α (1 − ε ) − (1 + r f ) R


where T2, h ; T2,l correspond to net taxes in the second period when output is high and low,

respectively. In the first period, taxes and foreign borrowing must finance spending on public

goods and reserve accumulation. In the second period, spending on public goods and debt

repayments must be financed by taxes and available reserves.
                                                            16

       We now wish to evaluate the optimal foreign borrowing and demand for international

reserves by a country with a costly tax collection system and some chance of defaulting. Subject

to the government budget constraints in (8), the policy maker chooses the foreign debt and

international reserves to acquire in the first period in order to maximize the intertemporal utility

of risk-neutral consumers:




                        
                   Max 1 - t 1 +
                                   0.5
                                       [(1 + ε )(1 − t2,h ) + (1 − ε )(1 − t2,l )]
       (9)                       1+ ρ                                             
                   B, R


where ρ is the discount rate. Consumer spending in each period is merely output net of taxes,

where taxes include collection costs. Applying (8), the effective tax rate facing consumers in

each period is:

       (10)
                                  G + B(1 + r ) − (1 + r f ) R                 G + α (1 − ε ) − (1 + r f ) R
ξ 1 = G + R − B;        ξ 2,h =                                  ;   ξ 2,l =                                   .
                                              1+ ε                                        1−ε


       Suppose that external borrowing occurs in the range where sovereign risk applies. (Our

solution will later identify this range.) The first-order condition that determines optimal

borrowing is:



                       1              1 + rf     1         
       (11)                       =                        .
                    1 − 2λξ1          1 + ρ  1 − 2λξ 2,h   
                                             
                                                        17

Note that (7) implies that the marginal cost of public funds (the drop in disposable income

needed to increase net taxes by one dollar) is17



                    d [Yi (1 − ti )]      1
        (12)    −                    =           .
                         dTi           1 − 2λξ i


Applying (11) and (12), we infer that optimal borrowing equates the expected second-period

marginal cost of public funds evaluated over the distribution of shocks that induce full repayment

to the cost of public funds in the first period. Condition (11) implies that external borrowing

alone is insufficient for achieving intertemporal smoothing of the tax burden in all states of

nature. If a bad shock reduces future output and the country defaults, then the absence of

international reserves to finance second-period public expenditures implies the country must

raise taxes to finance them.

        The first-order condition that determines optimal first-period reserve holdings is:



                      1                 1 + rf     1             1         
        (13)                   = 0 .5                      +               .
                    1 − 2λξ1            1 + ρ  1 − 2λξ 2,h   1 − 2λξ 2,l   
                                               


Reserves are chosen optimally to equate the expected present value of the marginal cost of public

funds in the two periods. They permit expected smoothing of the tax burden over time.

        Applying (11) and (13) we find



        (14)              ξ 2,h = ξ 2,l



17
  In order to obtain (11), we use the observation that d [ B(1 + r )] / dB = 2(1 + r f ) that follows from
(5).
                                                       18

                                 2
                        1+ ρ                2λ
       (15)                        −1 =             [ξ 2,h − ξ1 ].
                        1 + r f       1 − 2λξ 2,h


The combination of optimal borrowing and optimal reserve holdings equalizes the cost of public

funds across the future two states of nature. [See (14).] The gap between the subjective time

preference and the risk free interest rate determines the intertemporal profile of the costs of

public funds. The greater the bias towards present consumption, the greater the bias towards

lower present tax rates. This bias, in turn, increases borrowing (B) and reduces saving (R).

       A useful benchmark case is one where the intertemporal bias is zero ( r f = ρ ). In this

case, the tax rate is equalized across time and across the two future states of nature. Applying

(14)-(15) to this benchmark case we find:



                                εG + α (1 − ε )
       (16)       B = R =                       .
                                   1+ ρ


        The result in (16) yields several insights. First, the demand for reserves and external

borrowing each depend linearly and positively on the size of fiscal commitments and on a

measure of openness ( G , α , respectively). They also depend on the variability of shocks ( ε ).

This result contrasts with a conventional precautionary demand that depends on the square of the

variation. Hence, the size of precautionary reserve holdings in our example is potentially large.

If G is interpreted to include the now explicit government liabilities to banks and other

institutions in the aftermath of a financial crisis, then the demand for reserves after a crisis could

be quite large.
                                                 19

       A second insight is that the net borrowing position, B – R, increases with the bias towards

present consumption, ρ − r f .18 This result is illustrated in Figure 15, where a simulation traces

the dependence of optimal borrowing and international reserves on the subjective discount rate.

A greater bias towards early consumption tilts the tax rate towards the future. To satisfy the

budget constraints, international reserve holdings must fall and external borrowing must rise,

increasing the country’s net borrowing position.

       Third, the result that choosing reserve holdings and external borrowing optimally

accomplishes tax smoothing between various states is the outcome of having only three states of

nature -- one realization of first-period output and two possible realizations of the second-period

output. If there were more than three state of nature but no additional financial instruments,

complete tax smoothing could not occur. Yet even in that environment, holding international

reserves as well as external debt would allow better tax smoothing because it would smooth the

expected tax burden across periods.

       In Aizenman and Marion (2002), we examine the contribution of reserves and external

debt to tax smoothing for the case where the second-period productivity shock has a continuous

distribution and agents may be risk averse. We also show that political uncertainty and political

corruption each tax the return on reserves, reducing optimal reserve holdings and increasing

external borrowing. In our simplified example here, the effect of increasing the bias toward

present consumption is very similar to the effect of political uncertainty or corruption. As shown

in Figure 1, it increases the net borrowing position, B – R. The bias towards present



18
   For the case where the risk-free interest rate is zero, the condition for having an internal
solution with a partial default is that the government expenditure not be ‘too large’-- α > G . A
large enough fiscal demand would induce a corner solution where borrowing is at the credit
ceiling.
                                                 20

consumption, like political uncertainty or corruption, may cause some countries to hold fewer

precautionary reserve balances than would otherwise be the case.

       Fourth, the results are the outcome of two features interacting with each other, costly

taxation and conditional access to the global capital markets induced by sovereign risk. It is easy

to verify that we need both features to obtain a meaningful demand for reserves and external

borrowing. If the probability of default is zero or if taxes are lump sum, the solution identifies

only the net debt, B – R, because borrowing and reserve depletion are perfect substitutes.



       b. Loss aversion

         Loss aversion is the tendency of agents to be more sensitive to reductions in their

consumption than to increases, relative to some reference point. It is modeled using a

generalized expected utility framework that attaches bigger weights to ‘bad’ states of nature and

smaller ones to ‘good’ states than in the conventional expected utility set up. Loss aversion has

important implications for the size and the benefits of buffer stocks. An optimizing policy

authority may choose a small buffer stock if it is maximizing the expected utility of agents with

conventional preferences. It will choose a much larger buffer stock if it is maximizing the utility

of loss-averse agents. [See Aizenman (1998).] Consequently, our focus on a non-linearity in

preferences induced by loss aversion complements our previous examination of conditional

access to global capital markets and costly tax collection, where different non-linearities

generated a demand for precautionary reserve holdings.

       Even though loss aversion provides an incentive for holding substantial international

reserves, critics argue that large reserve holdings waste resources. The opportunity cost of

holding reserves in safe, low-return assets is not having those funds channeled to capital
                                                      21

formation, a higher return activity.19 We evaluate this criticism and show that even when there is

a sizeable equity premium, such that the return on domestic capital far exceeds the return on the

safe asset, it can still be optimal to hold large reserve balances if agents are loss-averse. We

illustrate the point using a simple two-period example.

          Consider the case where initial income, Z, is allocated across international reserves (R),

investment in tangible capital (I), and consumption (C). International reserves earn a relatively

low but risk-free real interest rate, r f . Their opportunity cost is the forgone return on risky

domestic capital. The intertemporal budget constraints imply that consumption in periods 1 and

2 are:



                         C1 = Z − R − I
          (17)
                         C2 = f ( K + I )(1 + ε ) + R(1 + rf )


where f ( K + I )(1 + ε ) is a neoclassical production function, K is the initial stock of capital, and

ε is a second-period productivity shock. Note that reserves boost consumption in the second

period.

          To simplify, suppose there are only two future states of nature. There is an equal chance

of the productivity shock being good or bad:



                    + δ        with probability 0.5
                    
          (18)   ε =                                      .
                    − δ        with probability 0.5
                    



19
   One rebuttal has been to suggest that some fraction of a country’s reserves could be held in
riskier, higher-return assets. See Feldstein (2002).
                                                         22

         Private agents choose a level of domestic investment spending and the policy authority

chooses a stock of international reserves to maximize the utility (V) of loss-averse agents:


                   MAX       V
         (19)
                   I, R
where

V = u1 +
             0.5
                 [(1 − θ )u 2,H +(1 + θ )u 2,L ] ;
            1+ ρ
u1 = u ( Z − R − I ); u 2,H = u ( f ( K + I )(1 + δ ) + R(1 + r f ));


u 2,L = u ( f ( K + I )(1 − δ ) + R(1 + r f )).


         In (19), the extent of loss aversion is captured by the extra weight ( θ ) attached to the bad

state of nature in the utility function ( V ). The loss aversion ratio is the marginal utility of a loss

relative to the marginal utility of a gain. It is equal to (1 + θ ) /(1 − θ ) . The ratio measures the

tendency of agents to be more sensitive to reductions in their utility than to increases. [See

Tversky and Kahneman (1991) and Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler (1990)]. The ratio has a

value of one in the conventional utility framework where agents assign no extra weight to bad

outcomes, but it exceeds one for agents exhibiting first-order loss aversion. Empirical estimates

of the loss-aversion ratio are typically in the neighborhood of 2 (corresponding to a weight of

θ = 1 / 3 ).

         The marginal product of capital, which is also the opportunity cost of holding reserves, is

obtained from one of the first-order conditions of the optimization problem. Loss-averse agents

choose their optimal investment spending level when R = 0 in order to maximize their utility:



                   ∂V
         (20)         |R =0 = 0
                   ∂I
                                                        23

The corresponding first-order condition can be reduced to


                         0.5                                                df
        (21)    MU1 =
                        1+ ρ
                             [(1− θ )MU 2, H(1+ δ) + (1+ θ )MU 2,L (1− δ )]
                                                                            dI
                                                                               .



        df
where      is capital’s marginal product.
        dI

        The utility gain associated with acquiring the first unit of international reserves is:



                ∂V            0.5(1 + r f )
        (22)       = − MU 1 +               [(1 − θ )MU 2,H +(1 + θ )MU 2,L ].
                ∂R               1+ ρ


The demand for international reserves is positive if obtaining a unit of reserves increases utility.

Applying (21) to (22), we infer that the demand for international reserves is positive iff




                                   (1 + r f − dI )[(1 − θ ) MU 2, H +(1 + θ ) MU 2, L ] + 
                                               df                                           
                ∂V           0.5
        (23)       | R =0 =                                                                  > 0.
                ∂R          1+ ρ    δ  df
                                           [
                                     dI (1 + θ ) MU 2 , L −(1 − θ ) MU 2, H
                                                                              ]              
                                                                                             


Suppose that the productivity shock (δ) is small. Then a first-order approximation of second-

period marginal utility as a function of δ gives



        (24)    MU 2, H ≅ u' |δ =0 +δf ( K + I )u" |δ =0 ; MU 2, L ≅ u' |δ =0 −δf ( K + I )u" |δ =0 .


Applying (24) to (23) and collecting terms, we find that a first-order approximation of the

marginal gain from accumulating reserves around R = 0 is
                                                            24


                  ∂V         u '|                        df 
          (25)       | R =0 ≅ δ = 0   − κ (1 + θδφ ) + θδ 
                  ∂R         1+ ρ                        dI 


              df                      u"
where κ =        − (1 + rf ) and φ = − f ( K + I ) . The term κ denotes the equity premium, while
              dI                      u'

φ is the coefficient of relative risk aversion.

          Examination of (25) shows that if agents have the conventional expected utility ( θ = 0 ),

there is no demand for international reserves when the equity premium is positive.20 When

agents are loss-averse, having reserves reduces losses in bad states. Reserves generate extra

gains proportional to θ δ, where θ is the aversion to downside loss and δ is the variation of

shocks. If the product θ δ is large enough, the demand for international reserves is positive.21

Thus a policy authority maximizing the expected utility of loss-averse agents may find it optimal

to hold sizeable international reserves even if the equity premium is significantly positive.

          In these circumstances, the optimal demand for reserves is determined by solving

simultaneously



                  ∂V ∂V
          (26)      =   =0.
                  ∂R ∂I




                                       ∂V
20
     This follows from the fact that sign |R=0; θ =0 ≅ − sign{κ } . One must qualify this statement
                                       ∂R
somewhat because (25) is a first-order approximation. The more precise statement is to say that
the gain from obtaining reserves when θ = 0 is of a second-order magnitude, proportional to δ 2 .
Indeed, one can show that in these circumstances, optimal reserves are proportional to
δ 2 (u”’/u’).

                                      df
21
     The precise condition is θδ         > κ (1 + θδφ ) .
                                      dI
                                                  25


Optimal reserve holdings will be proportional to θδ as well. Consequently, an increase in loss

aversion ( θ ) and/or an increase in the volatility of shocks ( δ ) boost precautionary reserves.




5. Conclusion

        A standard estimating equation that focuses on a parsimonious set of explanatory factors

does a good job in explaining central bank reserve holdings of developing countries through

1996, but it under-predicts reserve holdings of countries in the Far East after that. Undoubtedly,

the recent large build-up of international reserve holdings in the Far East is motivated by the

experience of the recent Asian financial crisis. Countries facing increased sovereign risk and

high taxation costs associated with large inelastic fiscal liabilities find it optimal to hold large

precautionary reserve balances. When countries attach more weight to bad outcomes than to

good ones, they also find it optimal to hold sizeable precautionary balances of international

reserves, even if the opportunity cost is significantly positive. Not all developing economies,

indeed not all emerging markets, will hold large reserve stockpiles in the aftermath of crises,

however. Countries that strongly favor current consumption, that experience political instability,

or suffer from political corruption face a lower effective return on holding reserves and will

acquire more modest stockpiles.

        Our analysis highlights several new themes. First, political-economy considerations are

useful in improving the explanatory power of econometric models of international reserves.

Second, the demand for international reserves by emerging markets can be explained by a

generalized precautionary saving model, allowing for limited integration with international

capital markets, costly tax collection, and relatively inelastic fiscal outlays. These factors explain
                                                 26

the high demand for international reserves even if agents are risk neutral. While such a model is

a useful framework for understanding the issues involved, our paper does not provide a formal

test of this model. Indeed, a hybrid model combining adjustment costs and precautionary saving

may provide a better interpretation of some of the relevant issues.

          In our estimation of the demand for reserves, we experimented with various measures of

commercial and financial openness but surprisingly found only the commercial measures to be

significant. Our findings may be due to the limited information content of readily available

measures of financial integration. Our hope is that better measures of financial integration can

improve our understanding of the determinants of reserve demand.22

          While our analysis focused on the demand for international reserves, we recognize that

equilibrium reserve holdings in the Far East are determined by supply-side factors as well, such

as the willingness of the United States to supply international liquidity through its current-

account deficits and the willingness of foreign creditors to finance investments in the Far East.23

Taking these factors as exogenous, we focused on explaining the heterogeneity in the demand

for international reserves among developing countries in light of these and other exogenous

events.

          While our study is consistent with the view that hoarding international reserves may

serve a useful role, it does not follow that all countries will benefit from adopting this strategy.

First, to the extent that hoarding reserves provides a signal of prudence and stability, an

aggressive attempt to use this signal by politically unstable or corrupt regimes may be welfare

reducing. Those countries would be better advised to deal with underlying institutional



22
     See Edison (2001) and Chinn (2002) for some newly proposed measures of financial openness.
23
     See McKinnon (2001) for a recent analysis of some of these factors.
                                                 27

weaknesses. Second, while our model suggests that stabilization funds may be beneficial, it also

suggests that their benefits accrue only when countries optimally control both the saving of

precautionary reserves and external borrowing. Attempts to focus only on the reserves side may

disappoint if the borrowing side is abused as a result of political uncertainty or corruption.

Attempts to explore these issues are left for future work.
                                               28

                                            References


Aizenman, Joshua (1998) "Optimal Buffer Stocks and Precautionary Savings with
      Disappointment Aversion," Journal of International Money and Finance, 17, 931-947.

Aizenman, Joshua and Nancy Marion (2002). “International Reserve Holdings with Sovereign
      Risk and Costly Tax Collection,” NBER Working Paper 9154, September.

Barro, Robert (1979). “On the Determination of the Public Debt,” Journal of Political Economy
       87, 940-971.

Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart (2002). “Fear of Floating”, Quarterly Journal of
       Economics 117(2), 379-408.

Chinn, Menzie and Hiro Ito (2002). “Capital Account Liberalization, Institutions and Financial
       Development: Cross Country Evidence,” NBER Working Paper No. 8967, June.

Edison, Hali and Frank Warnock (2001), “A Simple Measure of the Intensity of Capital
       Controls,” International Finance Discussion Paper No. 708, Board of Governors of the
       Federal Reserve System.

Feldstein, Martin (2002). “Economic and Financial Crises in Emerging Market Economies:
       Overview of Prevention and Management,” NBER Working Paper No. 8837, March.

Flood, Robert and Nancy Marion (2002). “Holding International Reserves in an Era of High
       Capital Mobility,” Brookings Trade Forum 2001, Washington, DC: Brookings
       Institution, 2002.

Hausmann, Ricardo, Ugo Panizza and Ernesto Stein (2001). “Why Do Countries Float the Way
     They Float?” Journal of Development Economics 66 (2), 387-414.

Kahneman, D., J. Knetsch, and R. Thaler (1990) "Experimental Tests of the Endowment Effect
     and the Coase Theorem," Journal of Political Economy, 98, 1325-48.

Leblang, David (2000). “Political Uncertainty and Speculative Attacks,” working paper,
      Department of Political Science, University of Colorado, Boulder.

McKinnon, Ron (2001). “The International Dollar Standard and Sustainability of the U.S.
     Current Account Deficit,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 1, 227-240.

Tanzi, Vito and Hamid Davoodi (1997). “Corruption, Public Investment, and Growth,” IMF
       working Paper WP/97/139, October.

Tversky, A. and D. Kahneman (1991) "Loss Aversion and Riskless Choice: A Reference
      Dependence Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106, 1039-61.
                                                29


                                         Data Appendix

rmg/usp = reserves minus gold, deflated by the U.S. GDP deflator (1995=100). Source:
      International Financial Statistics (IMF) for the reserves data and World Economic
      Outlook (IMF) for the deflator.

lpop = total population, logged. Source: World Development Indicators.

lgpc =   real GDP per capita, logged. Source: World Development Indicators.

lexa = volatility of real export receipts, logged. Volatility is calculated using annual data and
       is the standard error of a regression of trend real exports. Source: International
       Financial Statistics.

limy = the percentage share of imports in GDP, logged. Source: World Development
       Indicators.

lneer = volatility of the nominal effective exchange rate, logged. Annual volatility is calculated
        using the previous 24 months of data and is the standard deviation of the innovation of
        the percentage change in the nominal effective exchange rate. Source: Information
        System Network, IMF.

corrupt = corruption index is from Tanzi and Davoodi (1997). The index is spliced from two
         sources, Business International and International Country Risk Guide. Business
         International asks informed correspondents to measure the degree to which business
         transactions involved corruption or questionable payments. The index ranges from 0
         (most corrupt) to 10 (least corrupt) and is available for the 1980-1983 period.
         International Country Risk Guide asks foreign investors to assess the extent to which
         high government officials will demand special payments or illegal payments are
         expected throughout the lower levels of government in the forms of bribes connected
         with import and export licenses, exchange controls, tax assessment, police protection,
         or loans. The index ranges from 0 (most corrupt) to 6 (least corrupt) and is available
         for the 1982-1995 period. It has been re-scaled by multiplying it by 10/6 so that both
         indexes range from 0 to 10. Because the data change very little from year to year, 1995
         values are used for 1996 observations. For ease in interpreting results, the index has
         been multiplied by minus one so that higher values of the index imply higher
         corruption.

pol = the probability of a leadership change by constitutional means. Source: Leblang (2000).

Countries: The 137 countries listed in the World Bank’s Global Development Finance. Note that
Hong Kong, Singapore and Taiwan are not included in the GDF data set.
                                                       30

                               Figure 1: Share of World Reserves Minus Gold

                                                      1994


             60


                    50.5         49.5
             50




             40
Percentage




                                                            30.5
             30



             20



                                                                                                    8.3
             10
                                                                                     5.3
                                                                       3.6
                                            1.9
              0
                  industrial   developing   Africa          Asia     Europe       Middle East   Western Hemi
                                                                   (developing)




                                                     May 2002


             70


                                 60.4
             60



             50


                    39.6                                     38
             40
Percentage




             30



             20


                                                                       7.1                          6.7
             10
                                                                                     5.7
                                            2.9

              0
                  industrial   developing   Africa          Asia     Europe       Middle East   Western Hemi
                                                                   (developing)
                                       31




              Figure 2: Top Holders of International Reserves*
                              $ bil, May 2002
450
      411.6
400


350


300


250           241.9


200


150                           139.8
                                                  111.2      109.6
100                                                                      78

 50


  0
      Japan   China           Taiwan            Hong Kong   S Korea   Singapore

                       * Excluding Gold, except Singapore
                                                                                                                                                    32
                                                                                                        Figure 3: China’s Reserve Holdings
                                                             China: Reserves Minus Gold                                                                                                  China: Reserves Minus Gold
                                                                                                                                                                                          (Weeks of Imports Cover)
             250

                                                                                                                                                                      60



             200
                                                                                                                                                                      50



                                                                                                                                                                      40
             150
Billions $




                                                                                                                                                          Weeks
                                                                                                                                                                      30

             100


                                                                                                                                                                      20


              50
                                                                                                                                                                      10




               0
                                                                                                                                                                       0
                   1985   1986   1987   1988   1989   1990   1991    1992   1993   1994   1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   Mar-02                          1985   1988         1991            1994   1997   2000




                                                         China: Reserves Minus Gold                                                                                                      China: Reserves Minus Gold
                                                                 (% of GDP)                                                                                                                        (% M2)

             18                                                                                                                                                       14


             16
                                                                                                                                                                      12

             14
                                                                                                                                                                      10
             12

                                                                                                                                                                       8
Percentage




                                                                                                                                                         Percentage




             10


              8                                                                                                                                                        6

              6
                                                                                                                                                                       4
              4

                                                                                                                                                                       2
              2


              0                                                                                                                                                        0
                   1985                   1988                      1991                  1994                    1997                     2000                            1985   1988         1991           1994    1997   2000
                                                                              33


                                 China: Reserves Minus Gold                                                           China: Reserves Minus Gold
                                  (% of Total External Debt)                                                         (% of Short-Term External Debt)


             120                                                                                1200



             100                                                                                1000



             80                                                                                  800
Percentage




                                                                                   Percentage
             60                                                                                  600



             40                                                                                  400



             20                                                                                  200



               0                                                                                   0
                   1985   1988         1991              1994   1997   2000                            1985   1988           1991               1994   1997   2000
                                                                                                                  34
                                                                                 Figure 4: Taiwan’s Reserve Holdings

                                                Taiwan: Reserves Minus Gold                                                                                      Taiwan: Reserves Minus Gold
                                                                                                                                                                    (Weeks of Import Cover)
                140
                                                                                                                                    140

                120
                                                                                                                                    120

                100
                                                                                                                                    100
Billions US $




                 80
                                                                                                                                    80




                                                                                                                       Weeks
                 60
                                                                                                                                    60

                 40
                                                                                                                                    40

                 20
                                                                                                                                    20

                  0
                      1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Mar-                       0
                                                                                                            02                            1985    1987    1989        1991     1993      1995    1997    1999      2001




                                                Taiwan: Reserves Minus Gold                                                                                      Taiwan: Reserves Minus Gold
                                                         (% of GDP)                                                                                                        (% M2)

                50                                                                                                                  25

                45

                40                                                                                                                  20

                35

                30                                                                                                                  15
  Percentage




                                                                                                                       Percentage




                25

                20                                                                                                                  10

                15

                10                                                                                                                   5

                 5

                 0                                                                                                                   0
                        1994        1995       1996       1997        1998       1999        2000       2001                               1994    1995   1996        1997     1998      1999   2000    2001    Mar-02
                                                                                                                        35
                                                                                   Figure 5: Hong Kong’s Reserve Holdings

                                                    Hong Kong: Reserves Minus Gold                                                                                            Hong Kong: Reserves Minus Gold
                                                                                                                                                                                  (Weeks of Import Cover)
                120
                                                                                                                                           35


                100                                                                                                                        30



                                                                                                                                           25
                80
Billions US $




                                                                                                                                           20




                                                                                                                             Weeks
                60

                                                                                                                                           15

                40
                                                                                                                                           10


                20
                                                                                                                                            5



                 0                                                                                                                          0
                      1990   1991   1992     1993      1994       1995   1996      1997   1998     1999   2000   2001                           1990   1991   1992     1993      1994          1995   1996      1997   1998    1999   2000   2001




                                              Hong Kong: Reserves Minus Gold                                                                                                  Hong Kong: Reserves Minus Gold
                                                         (% GDP)                                                                                                                          (% M2)

                70                                                                                                                         35



                60                                                                                                                         30



                50                                                                                                                         25



                40                                                                                                                         20
percentage




                                                                                                                              Percentage




                30                                                                                                                         15



                20                                                                                                                         10



                10                                                                                                                          5



                  0                                                                                                                         0
                      1990            1992                 1994                 1996             1998            2000                           1991            1993                    1995                 1997             1999           2001
                                                                                                                    36
                                                                                  Figure 6: Korea’s Reserve Holdings


                                                  Korea: Reserves Minus Gold                                                                                Korea: Reserves Minus Gold
                                                                                                                                                              (Weeks of Import Cover)
                120
                                                                                                                                  40


                100                                                                                                               35


                                                                                                                                  30
                 80
Billions US $




                                                                                                                                  25

                 60




                                                                                                                         Weeks
                                                                                                                                  20


                 40                                                                                                               15


                                                                                                                                  10
                 20

                                                                                                                                   5

                  0
                      1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001   Apr-                  0
                                                                                                              02                       1985   1987   1989      1991       1993       1995   1997   1999   2001




                                                  Korea: Reserves Minus Gold                                                                                Korea: Reserves Minus Gold
                                                           (% GDP)                                                                                                    (% M2)

                30                                                                                                                30



                25                                                                                                                25



                20                                                                                                                20
  Percentage




                                                                                                                     Percentage




                15                                                                                                                15



                10                                                                                                                10



                 5                                                                                                                 5



                 0                                                                                                                 0
                      1985      1987       1989      1991       1993       1995       1997      1999         2001                      1985   1987   1989      1991       1993       1995   1997   1999   2001
                                                                             37

                                Korea: Reserves Minus Gold                                                          Korea: Reserves Minus Gold
                                 (% of Total External Debt)                                                        (% of Short-Term External Debt)


             80                                                                                250


             70
                                                                                               200
             60


             50                                                                                150




                                                                                  Percentage
Percentage




             40

                                                                                               100
             30


             20
                                                                                               50

             10


              0                                                                                 0
                  1985   1988        1991               1994   1997   2000                           1985   1988          1991               1994    1997   2000
                                                                                                                     38

                                                                                      Figure 7: Singapore’s Reserve Holdings
                                                      Singapore: Total Reserves                                                                                   Singapore: Total Reserves
                                                                                                                                                                   (Weeks of Import Cover)
                90
                                                                                                                                       40
                80
                                                                                                                                       35
                70

                                                                                                                                       30
                60
Billions US $




                                                                                                                                       25
                50




                                                                                                                            Weeks
                40                                                                                                                     20


                30                                                                                                                     15


                20                                                                                                                     10

                10
                                                                                                                                        5

                 0
                         1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 Mar-                      0
                                                                                                               02                            1985   1987   1989       1991      1993      1995   1997   1999   2001




                                                        Singapore: Total Reserves                                                                                 Singapore: Total Reserves
                                                               (% of GDP)                                                                                                  (% M2)

                100
                                                                                                                                       120
                 90

                 80                                                                                                                    100

                 70
                                                                                                                                       80
                 60
Percentage




                                                                                                                          Percentage




                 50
                                                                                                                                       60

                 40

                                                                                                                                       40
                 30

                 20
                                                                                                                                       20
                 10

                     0                                                                                                                   0
                          1985      1987       1989       1991        1993          1995   1997    1999       2001                           1985   1987   1989       1991      1993      1995   1997   1999   2001
                                                                                      39
                                                  Figure 8: Regional Deviations from Average Dummy Coefficient
                                                                        (Excludes Political Variables)


                            4.7099



Average dummy coefficient

                            2.2263




                                            Asia                 Far East             Latin America            Latin America               Africa
                                                                                                                 Emerging
                            -0.2573




                            -2.7409




                            -5.2245




                                                               Figure 9: Deviations in Far East Countries
                                                                        (Excludes Political Variables)

                             4.7099




                             2.2263
    Dummy coefficient




                                         China             Indonesia            Korea               Malaysia             Philippines       Thailand
                            -0.2573




                            -2.7409




                            -5.2245




                            -7.7081




                                                       Figure 10: Deviations in Latin American Emerging Markets
                                                                            (Excludes Political Variables)


                             4.7099




                             2.2263
    Dummy coefficient




                                      Argentina       Brazil        Chile        Colombia          Mexico         Peru           Uruguay     Venezuela
                            -0.2573




                            -2.7409




                            -5.2245




                            -7.7081
                                                                                                    40
                                                          Figure 11: Regional Deviations from Average Dummy Coefficient
                                                                                      (Political Variables Included)


                                     3.068


Average dummy coefficient



                                     1.585




                                                   Asia                    Far East                 Latin America           Latin America               Africa
                                                                                                                              Emerging
                                     0.102




                                     -1.381




                                     -2.864




                                                                           Figure 12: Deviations in Far East Countries
                                                                                      (Political Variables Included)


                                     3.068




                                     1.585



                                                 China                Indonesia             Korea                Malaysia             Philippines       Thailand
                 Dummy coefficient




                                     0.102




                                     -1.381




                                     -2.864




                                     -4.347




                                                               Figure 13: Deviations in Latin American Emerging Markets
                                                                                      (Includes Political Variables)


                                     3.068




                                     1.585
           Dummy coefficient




                                              Argentina      Brazil           Chile          Colombia           Mexico         Peru           Uruguay     Venezuela
                                     0.102




                                     -1.381




                                     -2.864




                                     -4.347
                                                                        41
                                               Figure 14: Deviation From Average Dummy Coefficient


                                                               Excludes Political Variables

                            7.1935




                            4.7099




                            2.2263




                            -0.2573




                            -2.7409



                                                                                     Korea
                            -5.2245
                                      Brazil
                                                                     India                        Russia          South Africa
                                               China

                            -7.7081



                                                                Includes Political Variables


                            4.551



                                                                        Guinea-Bissau
                            3.068
Average dummy coefficient




                            1.585




                            0.102




                            -1.381




                                               China                                     Mexico
                            -2.864


                                      Brazil   Cote d'Ivoire                 Korea
                                                                                                   South Africa
                            -4.347
                                                   42



                                               Figure 15




                                 B, R

                                                                     B




                                                             R




                                                                          ρ




Optimal borrowing (B) and international reserves (R) as a function of the subjective rate of time preference.
                         The Figure reports the values of B and R corresponding to
                             r f = 0; G = 0.06; α = 0.14; ε = 0.2; λ = 0.7.
                                                             43


                             Table 1: Determinants of Reserve Holdings

                                      (1)                                    (2)

obs                                   1954                                   915
countries                             122                                    65

dep var                               ln(R/P)                                ln(R/P)

lpop                                  2.1762**                               1.6764**
                                      (0.4607)                               (0.6124)

lgpc                                  1.5436**                               1.8111**
                                      (0.2878)                               (0.3633)

lexa                                  0.2512**                               0.1176
                                      (0.1044)                               (0.1456)

limy                                  0.4954**                               0.4976**
                                      (0.2020)                               (0.2675)

lneer                                 -0.1065**                              -0.1092*
                                      (0.367)                                (0.0613)

corrupt                                  ---                                 -0.1283**
                                                                             (0.0442)

pol                                     ---                                  -0.2904**
                                                                             (0.1481)

R2                                    0.88                                   0.88


Standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity and autocorrelation. All regressions include fixed country
effects. Constant terms not reported. When regression (1) is rerun using the smaller sample of regression (2), lexa
loses its significance and the R 2 falls to 0.85.

‘**’ (‘*’) indicates statistical significance at the 5 percent (10 percent) level.

Sample based on annual data over the 1980-1996 period for 137 developing countries listed in the World Bank’s
Global Development Finance. Sample size reduced because of data availability. Dependent variable is reserves
minus gold in US$ deflated by the US GDP deflator, logged. Explanatory variables are total population (logged),
real GDP per capita (logged), the volatility of real export receipts (logged), imports of goods and services as a share
of GDP (logged), the volatility of the nominal effective exchange rate (logged), an index of political corruption
(scale 0-10, with 10 being the most corrupt), and the probability of government change by constitutional means.
                               Table 2: Out-of Sample Forecast Error

                  actual rmg/usp          predicted rmg/usp   actual-predicted       error
    KOREA             ($bil)                    ($bil)             ($bil)
      97          19.60519043               41.2493085         -21.64411807      overpredicts
      98          49.39624203               34.82217335        14.57406868       underpredicts
      99          69.35403645               43.58418473        25.76985171       underpredicts


CHINA, Mainland
      97          137.4162099               125.3781473        12.03806263       underpredicts
      98          141.7867756               130.360586         11.42618965       underpredicts
      99          147.8509023               160.1922008        -12.34129846      overpredicts


  THAILAND
      97          25.19950494               24.01609784        1.183407094       underpredicts
      98          27.39455714               18.94962892        8.444928222       underpredicts
      99          31.92994707               21.88571956        10.04422751       underpredicts



 PHILIPPINES
      97          6.994291729               6.404522293        0.589769436       underpredicts
      98          8.767698551               5.851888028        2.915810523       underpredicts
      99          12.40158577               5.534185213        6.867400556       underpredicts


  MALAYSIA
      97          20.01004403               36.01171669        -16.00167266      overpredicts
      98          24.29096205               31.21548697        -6.924524925      overpredicts
      99          28.67295514               36.28826276        -7.615307615      overpredicts
