                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               COMPETITION AND INNOVATION:
                                AN INVERTED U RELATIONSHIP


                                           Philippe Aghion
                                           Nicholas Bloom
                                           Richard Blundell
                                            Rachel Griffith
                                             Peter Howitt


                                         Working Paper 9269
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9269


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




The authors would like to thank Daron Acemoglu, Tim Bresnahan, Wendy Carlin, Paul David, Janice Eberly,
Dennis Ranque, Robert Solow, Manuel Trajtenberg, Alwyn Young, John Van Reenen and participants at
CIAR, Harvard and MIT. Financial support for this project was provided by the ESRC Centre for the
Microeconomic Analysis of Fiscal Policy at the IFS. The data was developed with funding from the
Leverhulme Trust. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Philippe Aghion, Nicholas Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Competition and Innovation: An Inverted U Relationship
Philippe Aghion, Nicholas Bloom, Richard Blundell, Rachel Griffith, and Peter Howitt
NBER Working Paper No. 9269
October 2002
JEL No. O0, L1

                                           ABSTRACT

       This paper investigates the relationship between product market competition (PMC) and
innovation. A growth model is developed in which competition may increase the incremental profit
from innovating; on the other hand, competition may also reduce innovation incentives for laggards.
There are four key predictions. First, the relationship between product market competition (PMC)
and innovation is an inverted U-shape. Second, the equilibrium degree of technological ‘neck-and-
neckness’ among firms should decrease with PMC. Third, the higher the average degree of ‘neck-
and-neckness’ in an industry, the steeper the inverted-U relationship. Fourth, firms may innovate
more if subject to higher debt-pressure, especially at lower levels of PMC. We confront these
predictions with data on UK firms’ patenting activity at the US patenting office. They are found to
accord well with observed behavior.


Philippe Aghion                                             Peter Howitt
Department of Economics                                     Department of Economics
Harvard University                                          Brown University, Box B
Littauer Center 309                                         Providence, RI 02912
Cambridge, MA 02138                                         and NBER
and NBER                                                    peter_howitt@brown.edu
p_aghion@harvard.edu

Nicholas Bloom and Rachel Griffith                          Richard Blundell
Institute for Fiscal Studies                                University College London
nbloom@ifs.org.uk                                           r.blundell@ucl.ac.uk
rgriffith@ifs.org.uk
1. Introduction

Economists have long been interested in the relationship between product market
competition (PMC) and innovation. Both the theoretical IO and the more recent
endogenous growth literatures tackle the issue. Standard IO theory1 predicts
that innovation should decline with competition, as more competition reduces the

monopoly rents that reward successful innovators. However, empirical work such
as Geroski (1995), Nickell (1996) and Blundell, Griﬃth and Van Reenen (1999)
has pointed to a positive correlation between product market competition and
innovative output. Several theoretical approaches have been used in an attempt

to reconcile the Schumpeterian paradigm with the evidence provided in these
studies, generating various predictions as to the shape of the relationship between
PMC and innovation.2
       One such approach, introduced by Aghion-Harris-Vickers (1997) and sub-

sequently analyzed in Aghion-Harris-Howitt-Vickers (2001), extends the basic
Schumpeterian model by allowing incumbent firms to innovate. In these mod-
els, innovation incentives depend not so much upon post-innovation rents per se,
but more upon the diﬀerence between post-innovation and pre-innovation rents

(the latter were equal to zero in the basic model where all innovations were made
by outsiders). In this case, more PMC may end up fostering innovations and
growth as it may reduce a firm’s pre-innovation rents by more than it reduces its
   1
     See, inter alia, Dasgupta-Stiglitz (1980) and also the first generation of Schumpeterian
growth models (Aghion-Howitt (1992), Caballero-Jaﬀe (1993).
   2
     For example, Aghion-Dewatripont-Rey (1999). See Aghion-Howitt (1998), Chapter 7, for a
survey of some of these these attempts.


                                             2
post-innovation rents. In other words, competition may increase the incremental
profits from innovating, and thereby encourage R&D investments aimed at “es-
caping competition”; and it will do so to a larger extent in more “neck-and-neck”

industries, that is in industries in which oligopolistic firms face more similar pro-
duction costs; the firm with lower (resp. higher) unit costs is referred to as the
technological leader (resp. follower) in the corresponding industry, and when both
firms have the same unit costs they are referred to as neck-and-neck firms.

   In this framework firms innovate in order to reduce production costs, and
they do it “step-by-step”, in the sense that a laggard firm in any industry must
first catch up with the technological leader before becoming itself a leader in the
future. In neck-and-neck industries competition is particularly intense and it is

also in those industries that the “escape-competition” eﬀect pointed out above
is strongest. On the other hand, in less neck-and-neck, or more “unleveled”, in-
dustries, more competition may also reduce innovation as the laggard’s reward to
catching up with the technological leader may fall (this is a “Schumpeterian eﬀect”

of the kind emphasized in the earlier models). Finally, by increasing innovation
incentives relatively more in neck-and-neck industries than in unleveled indus-
tries, an increase in product market competition will tend to reduce the fraction
of neck-and-neck industries in the economy; this “composition eﬀect” reinforces

the Schumpeterian eﬀect in inducing a negative correlation between PMC and
aggregate productivity growth or the aggregate rate of innovations.
   The paper begins with the derivation of four key empirical predictions of this
“step-by-step innovation” model. The first prediction is that the relationship be-

                                         3
tween PMC and innovation is an inverted-U shape: that is, the escape-competition
eﬀect tends to dominate for low initial levels of competition, whereas the Schum-
peterian eﬀect tends to dominate at higher levels of PMC. This prediction is in

line with earlier findings of Scherer (1967), Levin, Cohen and Mowery (1985) and
others.3 The second prediction is that the equilibrium degree of neck-and-neckness
should decrease with PMC, as more PMC will increase innovation incentives com-
paratively more in neck-and-neck sectors, thereby reducing the expected time

interval during which an industry remains “neck-and-neck”. Third, the higher
the average degree of neck-and-neckness of an economy, the stronger the escape-
competition eﬀect will be on average and therefore the steeper the positive part
of the inverted-U relationship between PMC and innovation. Fourth, this model

predicts that the escape-competition eﬀect should also be stronger in industries
where firms’ managers face harder budget constraints. As a result, firms with
higher debt/cash-flow ratios may innovate more for any level of PMC.
      These predictions are confronted with data from a panel of UK firms. We

argue that the changes in product market competition and the extensive level
of patenting across industries over the last thirty years in the UK make it a
particularly interesting environment to assess these predictions. These predictions
are examined across a range of industries drawn from a firm panel for the UK. The

data are on UK listed firms over the period 1968-1997 and include information
on costs, sales, investments and the number of successful patent applications at
the US patent oﬃce. Detailed information on citations are used to weight our
  3
      See Cohen and Levin (1989, p.1075) for a brief discussion of this ealier literature.


                                                  4
measure of patents granted for each firm in each year.
   A sequence of competition policy reforms, that diﬀer in their impact across
industries, are used to argue that the Lerner index we adopt provides a reliable

measure of changes in product market competition over the period under study.
These policy reforms are further used as instruments to control for the potential
endogeneity in the competition index. To capture the degree of neck-and-neckness
within each industry we construct a measure of the size of technology gap based

on the dispersion of firm level technology and cost indicators. We have matched
information at the industry level from the US and other OECD countries which
we use to provide further exogenous instruments for the technological gap between
leaders and followers across industries. Finally, the long time series on firms in

each industry allow us to control for industry level eﬀects as well as common time
eﬀects that plague cross-section and time series analyses of these relationships.
   The theoretical discussion provides a specification for the average arrival rate
of innovations in an industry according to the level of product market competi-

tion and the degree of neck-and-neckness. Our empirical specification considers
a model for the hazard rate for patenting and uses this to derive a generalized
Poisson model for the citation weighted count of patents, which is our main mea-
sure of innovative activity. Since we are interested in investigating whether there

is a non-monotonic relationship between innovation and product market compe-
tition we adopt a semiparametric approach and begin our analysis using a hazard
rate specification which is an exponential polynomial spline function in our com-
petition measure. To allow for endogeneity in the measure of product market

                                        5
competition we include individual eﬀects and use variation in competition policy
across industries. Thus our identifying variation comes from diﬀerential changes
in competition across industries over time.

   A striking finding is of a strong inverted U relationship. We find an exponen-
tial quadratic model fits the data extremely well once industry and time eﬀects
are allowed for. This single peaked relationship is robust to many alternative
specifications and to the endogeneity of the competition index. Controlling for

endogeneity and including time and industry eﬀects shifts the peak toward the
competitive direction but still suggests the importance of the Schumpeterian ef-
fect for a significant minority of firms and industries. This inverted U relationship
continues to hold when we split by the degree of neck-and-neckness and when

we consider the impact of debt pressure. It is robust to controlling for firm size
and for fixed capital costs. The relationship is also found in the data for many
individual industries.
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 lays out the basic

theoretical framework. Section 3 derives our main predictions analytically in the
special case of a maximum technological gap equal to one. Section 4 simulates
the general model with unbounded gaps and concludes the theoretical part by
summarizing our key empirical predictions. Section 5 provides a description of

the data and assesses the degree to which the variables used are likely to provide
good measures of their theoretical counterparts developed in the earlier sections of
the paper. In section 6 we present our main empirical findings. We find a strong
accordance between the main theoretical predictions and the empirical results.

                                         6
Section 7 provides a short summary and concludes with directions for further
research.

2. A theoretical framework
2.1. Consumers

Suppose that the representative consumer has a utility function of the form:
                                    Z 1
                                u=      ln xj dj,                           (2.1)
                                               0

where each xj is an aggregate of two goods produced by duopolists in sector j,4
defined by the subutility function:

                                       xj = v(xAj , xBj )

where v is homogeneous of degree one and symmetric in its two arguments. We
are particularly interested in the special case:
                                          ¡ α      α ¢
                                                        1
                                      xj = xAjj + xBjj αj                                  (2.2)

where a higher αj ∈ (0, 1] reflects a higher degree of substitutability between the

two goods in industry j.
      The log-preference assumption made in (2.1) implies that in equilibrium indi-
viduals spend the same amount on each basket xj . We normalize this common
amount to unity by using expenditure as the numeraire for the prices pAj and

pBj at each date. Thus the representative household chooses each xAj and xBj to
maximize v(xAj , xBj ) subject to the budget constraint: pAj xAj + pBj xBj = 1.
  4
      See Aghion-Howitt (2001) for variants of this model with N firm- industries and free entry.

                                                   7
                                                 ¡ α      α ¢
                                                               1
       In the special case where v (xAj , xBj ) = xAjj + xBjj αj , the demand functions
facing the two firms in industry i are:
                                       1                                   1
                                     a −1                                a −1
                                  pAjj                                pBjj
                    xAj =     αj             αj     and xBj =     αj             αj     .   (2.3)
                             aj −1          aj −1                aj −1          aj −1
                            pAj      + pBj                      pAj      + pBj
For simplicity we suppress the notation for the industry index j from here on.

2.2. Technology levels, R&D and innovations

Each firm produces using labor as the only input, according to a constant-returns

production function, and takes the wage rate as given. Thus the unit costs of
production cA and cB of the two firms in an industry are independent of the
quantities produced. Now, let k denote the technology level of duopoly firm i in
some industry j; that is, one unit of labor currently employed by firm i generates

an output flow equal to:
                                     Ai = γ ki ,         i = A, B,                          (2.4)

where γ > 1 is a parameter that measures the size of a leading-edge innovation;
(equivalently, it takes γ −ki units of labor for firm i to produce one unit of output).
The state of an industry is then fully characterized by a pair of integers (l, m),
where l is the leader’s technology and m is the technology gap of the leader over

the follower (m = 0 when firms are neck and neck). We define πm (respectively
π −m ) to be the equilibrium profit flow of a firm m steps ahead of (respectively
behind) its rival.5
   5
    The above logarithmic technology along with the cost structure c(x) = x.γ −k implies that
the profit in the industry depends only on the gap m between the two firms, and not on absolute
levels of technology.

                                                     8
    We denote by ψ(n) = βn2 /2 the R&D cost (in units of labor) of a leader (or
neck-and-neck) firm moving one technological step ahead with a Poisson hazard
rate of n6 . We call n the “innovation rate” or “R&D intensity” of the firm. We

assume that a follower firm can move one step ahead with hazard rate h even if
it spends nothing on R&D, by copying the leader’s technology. Thus βn2 /2 is the
R&D cost of a follower firm moving ahead with a hazard rate n+h. Let nm denote
the R&D intensity of a firm that is m steps ahead of its rival (where m < 0 in the

case of a follower firm).

2.3. Bellman equations

Let Vm denote the steady state value of being currently a leader (or follower if
m < 0) in an industry with technology gap m, and let w denote the wage rate,
which we take as given assuming an infinitely elastic supply of labor. We have

the following Bellman equations:

 rVm = πm + nm (Vm+1 − Vm ) + (n−m + h) (Vm−1 − Vm ) − wβ(nm )2 /2;

rV−m = π−m + nm (V−m−1 − V−m ) + (n−m + h) (V−m+1 − V−m ) − wβ(n−m )2 /2;

  rV0 = π0 + n0 (V1 − V0 ) + n0 (V−1 − V0 ) − wβ(n0 )2 /2.

In words, the annuity value rVm of currently being a technological leader in an
industry with gap m at date t equals the current profit flow πm minus the current
   6
     Aghion et al (2001) analyze a diﬀerent model in which the laggard in an industry with tech-
nological gap m catches up immediately with the technological leader whenever she innovates,
thereby reducing her unit labor cost by γ −m . This alternative formulation however tends to
exaggerate the importance of the escape-competition eﬀect and to downplay the Schumpeterian
eﬀect of PMC.


                                               9
R&D cost wβ (nm )2 /2, plus the expected capital gain nm (Vm+1 −Vm ) from making
an innovation and thereby moving one further step ahead of the follower, minus
the expected capital loss (n−m + h) (Vm−1 − Vm ) from having the follower catch

up by one step with the leader. The equation for the annuity value of a follower
is similarly explained. Finally, in the Bellman equation for a neck-and-neck firm,
there is no help factor h because there is no leader, and in a symmetric Nash
equilibrium both firms’ R&D intensities are equal.

      Now, using the fact that each firm chooses its own R&D intensity to maximize
its current value, i.e. to maximize the RHS of the corresponding Bellman equation,
we obtain the first order conditions:

                                  βwnm = Vm+1 − Vm ;

                                βwn−m = V−(m−1) − V−m ;

                                   βwn0 = V1 − V0 .

2.4. Product-market competition

Boone (2000) makes a convincing argument that any parameter increase that
would result in increasing the relative profit shares of more advanced firms, that
is the profitability of a greater technological lead, would be a suitable measure of
product market competition. Thus one possible (inverse) measure of competition7
would be the profit flow of neck-and-neck firms, π 0 , with a higher π0 resulting from
higher collusion among otherwise similar firms in the same sector.
  7
      especially in the m ≤ 1 case analyzed in the next section.



                                                10
   Another potential “measure” of competition from this theoretical standpoint,
is the elasticity of substitution parameter α in the case:
                                                               1
                               v(xA , xB ) = (xαA + xαB ) α .

More specifically, assume that in any sector the two duopolists in that sector
compete in prices, arriving at a Bertrand equilibrium. According to the de-

mand functions in (2.3), the elasticity of demand faced by each firm i is η i =
(1 − αλi ) / (1 − α) , where λi = pi xi is the firm’s revenue:
                                            α
                                          piα−1
                              λi =     α           α    , i = A, B.             (2.5)
                                      α−1         α−1
                                     pA     + pB
Thus each firm’s equilibrium price is:
                                ηi         1 − αλi
                       pi =          ci =             ci , i = A, B             (2.6)
                              ηi − 1      α (1 − λi )
and its equilibrium profit is:
                                  λi   λi (1 − α)
                          Πi =       =            , i = A, B.                   (2.7)
                                  ηi    1 − αλi
   Equations (2.5) ∼ (2.7) can be solved for unique equilibrium revenues, prices
and profits. Given the degree of substitutability α, the equilibrium profit of each

firm i is determined by its relative cost z = ci /c−i ; an equiproportional reduction
in both cA and cB would induce each firm to reduce its price in the same propor-
tion, which, because industry demand is unit-elastic, would leave the equilibrium
revenues and profits unchanged. More formally, (2.5) ∼ (2.7) implicitly define a

function φ (z, α) such that:

                    ΠA = φ (cA /cB , α) and ΠB = φ (cB /cA , α) .               (2.8)

                                                11
       The substitutability parameter α is our measure of the degree of product mar-
ket competition in each industry. The limiting case of α = 0 defines the minimal
degree of competition; the opposite limiting case of α = 1 is the case of Bertrand

competition between undiﬀerentiated products, which results in perfect compe-
tition when the two firms have the same unit cost. Although α is ostensibly a
taste parameter, it can be shown to satisfy Boone’s requirement.8 Furthermore,
in this model α corresponds to standard measures of competition. For example,

it is a monotonically increasing transformation of the elasticity of substitution in
         ¡ 1 ¢
demand 1−α      between the two rivals’ outputs in the industry. Given a firm’s
share λ of industry revenue, α is also a monotonically increasing transformation
                                 1−αλ
of the elasticity of demand       1−α
                                        faced by the firm. Given a firm’s industry share

λ, α is a monotonically decreasing function of the firm’s Lerner index:

                                                 1−α
                                         LI =          .                                     (2.9)
                                                1 − αλ

In our empirical analysis, we shall use the Lerner index itself as a measure of PMC,
being aware that this index also depends upon the firm’s market share λ9 . We
also use data on firms’ market shares to recover a measure of α for each industry.
   8
     See Aghion et al (2001) for a formal proof.
   9
     The following considerations, suggest that the average Lerner index of a random sample of
firms in an industry should be a decreasing function of the α measure of PMC, even after taking
into account the eﬀect of α on R&D intensities and therefore on average market shares. First,
for λ suﬃciently small (which is typically the case in practice), the Lerner index LI is clearly
decreasing in α; second, we show in the Appendix that for small innovation size γ a firm’s Lerner
is approximately linear in the firm’s lead size, so that when averaging across the two firms in the
same industry, we approximately get the Lerner index of a neck-and-neck firm (with λ = 1/2),
which itself is decreasing in α; third, when we calculate the expected Lerner index of a randomly
selected firm under the steady-state distribution of lead size, using the parameters underlying
our simulations in section 4, we again find that the average Lerner index is a decreasing function
of α.

                                                12
Both measures are found to produce similar results.

3. The one-step case

For expositional simplicity we shall first concentrate on the simple case where
knowledge spillovers between leader and follower are such that the maximum
sustainable gap is m = 1. That is, if a firm is one step ahead and it innovates the

follower will automatically copy the leader’s previous technology and so remain
only one step behind. Therefore, given that profitability is only dependent on the
gap between leader and follower, no innovation will be undertaken by the leader.
At any point in time there will therefore be two types of sectors in the economy:

leveled sectors where firms are neck and neck, that is m = 0, and unleveled sectors
where one firm is leading the other in the same industry, with m = 1.
       Assume for simplicity that w = β = 110 , and that there is no help factor for
followers (h = 0) . Using the fact that in this one-step case a technological leader

has no incentive to invest in R&D (n1 = 0), the above Bellman equations become:
                                                                     
               rV1 = π 1 + n−1 (V0 − V1 )                            
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                      2
               rV−1 = π−1 + n−1 (V0 − V−1 ) − (n−1 ) /2                    (3.1)
                                                                     
                                                                     
                                                                 2
               rV0 = π 0 + n0 (V1 − V0 ) + n0 (V−1 − V0 ) − (n0 ) /2 

with corresponding first order conditions:
                                                         
                                   n−1 = V0 − V−1        
                                                                                        (3.2)
                                   n0 = V1 − V0          

  10
    We thus take the wage rate as given, with the implicit assumption of an infinitely elastic
supply of labor at wage w = 1. See Aghion et. al (1997) for a discussion of the case where the
supply of labor is inelastic.

                                             13
   Thus, for example, the annuity value rV1 of being a leader is the current flow
of profit π1 minus the expected capital loss per unit of time from being caught up
with by the laggard. The expected loss is the loss in value V1 − V0 that will occur

if the laggard innovates, multiplied by the flow probability n−1 of the laggard
innovating.

3.1. Individual innovation intensities

Equations (3.1) and (3.2) solve for n−1 and n0 . Eliminating the V ’s between these
equations yields the reduced form R&D equations:

                                    (n0 )2
                                           + rn0 − (π1 − π0 ) = 0               (3.3)
                                      2
                (n−1 )2                                (n0 )2
                        + (r + n0 )n−1 − (π0 − π−1 ) −        = 0.              (3.4)
                  2                                      2

This system is recursive, as the first equation solves for n0 , and then given n0 the
second equation solves for n−1 . We obtain:
                              p
               n0 = −r +     r 2 + 2(π1 − π 0 )                                 (3.5)
                                  q
              n−1   = −(r + n0 ) + (r + n0 )2 + n20 + 2(π 0 − π−1 ).            (3.6)

Combining (3.5) and (3.6) yields the alternative expression:
                                    q
                n−1 = −(r + n0 ) + r 2 + (n0 )2 + 2(π1 − π−1 ).                 (3.7)

   Here, we shall focus on the eﬀects of an increase in product market competition

as represented by a reduction in π0 leaving π−1 and π1 unchanged. (The analysis
and results in the remaining part of this section can be replicated using the elas-
ticity parameter α as an alternative way to parametrize PMC). We immediately

                                         14
see that n0 increases whereas n−1 can be shown to fall.11 The latter eﬀect (on n−1 )
is the basic Schumpeterian eﬀect that results from reducing the rents that can be
captured by a follower who succeeds in catching-up with its rival by innovating.12

The former eﬀect (on n0 ) is what we refer to as an “escape-competition eﬀect”,
namely that more competition induces neck-and-neck firms to innovate in order
to escape competition, as the incremental value of getting ahead is increased with
higher PMC. Thus, if we were to treat the fractions of leveled and unleveled sec-

tors in the economy as an exogenous parameter, we would get the conclusion that
the higher the fraction of neck-and-neck sectors in the economy, the more positive
the eﬀect of product market competition on the average innovation rate. This
complementarity between PMC and neck-and-neckness will appear more clearly

in section 4 below when we simulate the general model with unbounded gaps.
  11
       From (3.5):
                                 ∂n0          1
                                     = −p                <0
                                 ∂π0     r + 2(π1 − π0 )
                                          2

From this and (3.7):
                                                                  
                       ∂n−1   ∂n0                   n0              >0
                            =      −1 + q
                        ∂π0   ∂π 0                 2
                                         r2 + (n0 ) + 2(π 1 − π −1 )
(since π1 − π−1 > 0).
   12
      As we will see when we allow for m arbitrarily large, this Schumpeterian eﬀect may be
counteracted by an “anticipated” escape competition eﬀect. More PMC induces a laggard in
a sector with small technological gap (between the leader and that laggard) to increase its
R&D investment in order to enter the race for a large technological lead sooner. This and the
Schumpeterian eﬀects together give rise to an inverted U-shape relationship between n−m and
PMC as measured by α for all m < 0 (see section 4.2 below).




                                              15
3.2. Average innovation rate

An increase in product market competition will have an ambiguous eﬀect on the

steady-state aggregate innovation rate because it will induce more frequent in-
novations in currently neck-and-neck sectors and slower innovations in currently
unleveled sectors. The overall eﬀect on the average innovation rate and on aver-
age productivity growth will depend on the steady-state fraction of time a sector

spends being neck-and-neck.
   More formally, let µ1 (resp. µ0 ) denote the steady-state probability of being
an unleveled (resp. neck-and-neck) industry. During any unit time interval, the
steady-state probability that a sector moves from being unleveled to leveled is

µ1 n−1 , and the probability that it moves in the opposite direction is 2µ0 n0 . In
steady state, these two probabilities must be equal:

                                 µ1 n−1 = 2µ0 n0 .

This, together with the fact that:

                                     µ1 + µ0 = 1,

implies that the average flow of innovations is:

                                                      4n0 n−1
                   I = µ0 2n0 + µ1 n−1 = 2µ1 n−1 =             .              (3.8)
                                                     2n0 + n−1

Figure 1 shows a numerical example in which r = .04, π−1 = 0, π1 = 10. As π0
decreases from π = π1 , the innovation rate I follows an inverted-U shaped pattern.



                                         16
3.3. The logic of the inverse-U

The reason for the inverted-U shape is that when there is not much product

market competition, π0 is close to π 1 , so that there is hardly any incentive for
firms to innovate when the sector is leveled, and the overall innovation rate will
be highest when the sector is unleveled and there is asymmetric competition. Thus
the industry will be quick to leave the unleveled state (which it does as soon as

the laggard innovates) and slow to leave the leveled state (which won’t happen
until one of the neck-and-neck firms innovates), and as a result the industry will
spend most of the time in the leveled state, where the escape-competition eﬀect
dominates (n0 is decreasing in π0 .) In other words, if the degree of competition is

very low to begin with, an increase will result in a faster average innovation rate.
       On the other hand, when competition is very high, π0 is close to π −1 so there
is relatively little incentive for the laggard in an unleveled state to innovate.13
Thus the industry will be relatively slow to leave the unleveled state. Meanwhile

the large incremental profit π1 − π0 gives firms in the leveled state a relatively
large incentive to innovate, so that the industry will be relatively quick to leave
the leveled state. As a result, the industry will spend most of the time in the
unleveled state where the Schumpeterian eﬀect is at work on the laggard, while

the leader never innovates. In other words, if the degree of competition is very
high to begin with, an increase may result in a slower average innovation rate.
  13
    Of course there is still an incentive for the laggard to innovate even if π0 = π −1 , because,
although an innovation will not raise current profits, it will take the firm one step closer to
possibly attaining a leader’s profit π1 .




                                               17
   Hence the possibility of an inverse-U relationship between competition and
innovation. When competition is low, an increase will raise innovation through
the escape-competition eﬀect, but when it becomes intense enough it may lower

innovation through the Schumpeterian eﬀect on laggards. The reason why one ef-
fect dominates when competition is low and the other when competition is intense
is the “composition eﬀect” on the steady-state distribution of technology gaps.
   To see this composition eﬀect more clearly note that in the steady state dis-

tribution:
                              n−1                        2n0
                    µ0 =                and    µ1 =
                           n−1 + 2n0                  n−1 + 2n0
In the limit when there is no competition (π 0 = π1 ), (3.5) implies that n0 = 0, so
that in the steady state the industry is always leveled (µ0 = 1), whereas when there
is the maximum competition (π0 = π−1 ), (3.5) and (3.7) imply that n0 > n−1 , so
that the overall rate of innovation in the leveled state is more than twice that in
the unleveled state and as a result the fraction of time µ0 spent leveled in steady
state is less than 1/3.

   In the general model with no upper bound on the technological gap this in-
verted U will be reinforced by the fact that in an unleveled industry the laggard’s
individual R&D intensity will itself be inverse-U shaped. This is because the an-
ticipated escape-competition eﬀect mentioned in footnote 12 on laggards, which

is always dominated by the Schumpeterian eﬀect in the one-gap model, is the
dominant eﬀect in the general model when competition is low.




                                        18
3.4. Debt pressure and product market competition

In this subsection we explore the interplay between product market competition

and debt pressure indicators such as debt-exposure (and the resulting probability
of incurring bankruptcy costs) and the magnitude of default costs (which one
could interpret as reflecting the hardness of firms’ budget constraints). Clearly,
debt pressure can reduce innovation by making R&D investments hard to finance.

However, our model implies that there is also an eﬀect going in the opposite
direction, which is similar to the escape-competition eﬀect. Specifically, we show
that higher debt pressure and/or higher default costs may induce firms to innovate
more in order to escape debt pressure and costly bankruptcy.

       To formalize the interplay between competition and the exposure to bank-
ruptcy costs, we consider the following variant of the basic one-step model: (1)
                           e0 are random, i.i.d. over time and uniformly distrib-
neck-and-neck profit flows π
uted over the interval [π0 , π0 + 1]; (2) π −1 ≡ 0; π1 constant with π 1 >> π 0 + 1;

(3) firms finance their investments through debt financing, which we define here
as involving a fixed flow repayment obligation D, and a default cost f incurred
per period of time by the firm whenever its profit falls below D.14
       Consider first the case where exit costs are negligible and where D ∈ (π0 , π 0 +

1); then, the Bellman equations for equilibrium R&D investments, can be ex-
  14
    This formulation is inspired from the costly state verification literature (e.g Townsend
(1979), Gale-Hellwig (1985)) on debt-financing, in which firms’ revenues are assumed to be
unverifiable by outside investors, unless they incur a flow verification cost f . For simplicity, we
abstract in this section from firms’ choice over the optimal financial contract.




                                                19
pressed as:

              rV1 = π1 − D + n−1 (V0 − V1 );

              rV0 = ψ(π 0 , D, f ) + n0 (V1 − V0 ) + n0 (V−1 − V0 ) − n20 /2,

           rV−1 = −f + n−1 (V0 − V−1 ) − (n−1 )2 /2.

where
                                        Z   π0 +1                   Z    D
                     ψ(π 0 , D, f ) =               (u − D)du − f            du,
                                        D                               π0

is the expected flow utility of a manager in a new industry, net of the expected

verification costs. From these Bellman equations and the corresponding first order
conditions, we obtain the following expression for the equilibrium neck-and-neck
firm’s innovation rate:

                                p                           √
                    n0 = −r +    r 2 + 2(π 1 − D − ψ) = −r + δ,                     (3.9)

where we re-express ψ as:

                             1
                          ψ = (π0 + 1 − D)2 − f(D − π0 ).
                             2

Hence:
                          ∂n0                          √
                               = − (π 0 + 1 − D + f ) / δ < 0.                     (3.10)
                          ∂π 0
   Suppose first that the default cost f is constant. Then, provided f is large
enough we find that the eﬀect of increasing the firm’s leverage D, will be to raise

innovation. That is:
                               ∂n0                   √
                                   = (π 0 − D + f ) / δ
                               ∂D

                                                20
which is positive if f > D − π0 . Thus, for any level of PMC, higher debt pressure
as measured by a higher level of D will result in more R&D by neck and neck
firms.

   Consider next the eﬀect of an increase in the default cost f , which we interpret
as a hardening of the firm’s budget constraint. We immediately have:

                                     ∂n0
                                         > 0,
                                     ∂f

that is, a higher cost of default induces firms to innovate more in order to escape
the threat of bankruptcy.

4. The general model

In principle, one can solve the general model, but closed form solutions are hard

to derive when m is large, and the best one can do is to solve it numerically. We
use the parameter values r = 0.1, γ = 1.75, w = 1, β = 15, h = 0.025. Figure 2
shows how the value Vm of a firm depends on m and on α, which we now use to
parametrize PMC. The larger α, that is the higher the degree of PMC, the higher

the curvature of the logistic Vm as a function of m in the neighborhood of m = 0.

4.1. Industry innovation rate

Using the same equations, we can also characterize the relationship between α
and the individual R&D intensities nm and n−m . Figure 3 depicts the relationship
between α and total intra-industry R&D intensity (nm + n−m ). We see an inverted-

U shaped pattern for m 6= 0, which in turn results from the interplay between the


                                        21
escape-competition and Schumpeterian eﬀects of PMC on innovation incentives.
We also see that innovation intensities are higher and also increase more rapidly
with α in the case of neck-and-neck firms. Thus, there is complementarity between

PMC and the degree of neck-and-neckness as measured by how small m is. The
relationship between PMC and innovation becomes increasingly steeper as m goes
down, i.e. as the industry becomes more neck-and-neck.

4.2. Industry structure and steady-state innovation/growth rates

In the equilibrium we define µm to be the steady state fraction of time the industry

spends with technological gap m. We obviously have:

                                   X
                                        µm = 1.
                                    m

In addition, the following equations must also hold in steady-state:

             µm (nm + n−m + h) = µm−1 nm−1 + µm+1 (n−(m+1) + h),

for all m ≥ 2. The LHS of this equation represents the flow probability of exit-
ing technological gap (or “state”) m; the RHS represents the flow probability of

entering state m, both, from state (m − 1) with the leader innovating, and from
state (m + 1) sectors with the follower innovating. For m = 1 we have:

                    µ1 (n1 + n−1 + h) = 2µ0 n0 + µ2 (n−2 + h),

as two firms instead of one can turn a neck-and-neck sector into an unleveled
sector with technological gap m = 1.


                                        22
   And for m = 0, we simply have:

                               2µ0 n0 = µ1 (n−1 + h).

In other words, a neck-and-neck sector becomes unleveled whenever a firm in that

sector innovates, and only state-1 sectors can become neck-and-neck whenever the
laggard in that sector innovates. Figure 4 depicts µ as a function of m and α.
We see that on average the industry becomes increasingly neck and neck as PMC
decreases.

   Now, we can compute the average rate of productivity growth for the industry.
In the general case where the lead size m can take any integer value, one can show
that the average growth rate of the industry is equal to:
                                           X
                           g = (2µ0 n0 +         µk nk ) ln γ.                  (G)
                                           k≥1

   Equation (G) states that the growth rate equals the product of the frequency of

“frontier innovations” (innovations by the industry leader or a neck-and-neck firm,
which advance the industry’s frontier technology) and the (log) size of innovations.
Figure 5 depicts g as a function of α. We again obtain an inverted U-shape.

4.3. The key theoretical predictions

We conclude the theoretical part of the paper by stating four main predictions
that came out of our analysis in the previous sections, and which we test in the
empirical part of the paper:

  1. The relationship between product market competition and the average in-
     novation rate is an inverted-U shape.

                                        23
  2. The expected technological gap in an industry increases as product mar-
     ket competition increases, that is the distribution shifts towards a lower
     probability of being neck-and-neck.

  3. There is a complementarity between product market competition and the
     degree of neck-and-neckness of an industry. The closer firms are in technol-
     ogy space (the more neck-and-neck firms are in that industry) the steeper
     the positive eﬀect of product market competition on innovation and the

     larger the average number of innovations.

  4. Firms with higher debt/cash-flow ratios may innovate more for any level of
     PMC.


5. Data and Measurement Issues

The empirical investigation is based on a panel of individual UK companies cov-
ering the period 1968-1997. The UK over this period provides an extremely rich
environment within which to study the impact of product market competition on
innovation behavior. Not only is there a long panel of detailed company data,

but this period also saw a number of significant, and largely exogenous, changes
in product market competition. These changes, which altered the structure of
product market competition across industries, included the implementation of the
European Single Market Program, a series of structural and behavioral reforms

imposed on diﬀerent industries as a result of investigations by the Monopolies and
Mergers Commission (MMC) under the Fair Trading Act and large scale privati-

                                       24
zations. We document these in more detail below and argue that they provide a
powerful set of instrumental variables for our measure of competitiveness.
       There are two main data sources used in this study - firm level accounting data

and administrative data from the US patents oﬃce.15 These allow us to combine
information on technological performance, revenues, labor costs and capital costs.
The accounting data come from Datastream and include all firms quoted on the
London Stock Exchange between 1968 and 1997.16 The patenting information on

each firm is drawn from the US Patent Oﬃce. This dataset in turn was matched
to a subset of the firms for which accounting data is available. We have patents
data for all firms with a name beginning A-L (plus all large R&D firms) that were
listed on the London Stock Exchange any time between 1983 and 1985. These

have been matched to all of their subsidiaries in 1985.17 This data runs from
1968-1997 and contains 461 firms with 236 firms that patent. We do not use the
first three years or the last three years of data in estimation, although we do use
them to construct the citation weighting.

       In order to test the predictions detailed in section 4 we need measures of firms’
innovative output, the degree of product market competition in an industry, the
size of the technology gap between firms within an industry (how “neck-and-neck”
  15
     This data was developed with funding from the Leverhulme Trust. See Bloom and Van
Reenen (2000) for a more detailed description of the data.
  16
     We removed firms with missing values on sales, capital or employment, firms with less than
three consecutive observations, observations for firms with abnormal length accounting periods
(we drop firms whose accounting period falls outside 300 to 450 days due to changes in accounting
year ends) and exclude observations for firms where there was a jump of greater than 150% in
any of the key variables (capital, labour, sales).
  17
     This matching has been done by hand in order to achieve a higher match rate than with
computer matching.


                                               25
firms are) and the extent of bankruptcy threat facing each firm. We discuss each
of these in turn.

5.1. Measuring innovation

There is a large literature on measuring innovation intensity. The most commonly

used measures at the firm level are research and development spending, patenting
activity, innovation counts and total factor productivity. Although R&D expen-
diture is available in the UK, and we use it to check the robustness of our results,
it is not mandatory for firms to report it, and prior to 1990 it is frequently not

reported. We do not use total factor productivity (TFP) as a measure of innov-
ative activity because of the well known problem that commonly used measures
of TFP are themselves biased in the presence of imperfectly competitive product
markets.18 For these reasons our main measure of innovation is based on informa-

tion on patents taken out by UK firms in the US patent oﬃce. Our data includes
information on all patents taken out by the 461 UK stock market listed firms.19
       The US patenting oﬃce is where innovations are patented internationally.
These patents can be based on research conducted anywhere in the world. In

our dataset about 54% of the patents take out by UK firms in the US were in-
vented by someone working outside of the US. We also have information on cita-
tions to and from these patents. One concern that is often expressed about using
patent counts is that patents may not be comparable across firms or industries
  18
    See, inter alia, Hall (1988), Klette and Griliches (1996) and Klette (1999).
  19
    As we highlight below, the complete set of UK stock market firms is used to construct the
other industry measures we require.



                                             26
because their value can vary significantly. Therefore, we use the number of times
a patent has been cited in other patents to weight the patent, and thus provide
a measure that is more indicative of the value of the patent.20 We can extend

the interpretation of our results for patents to productivity growth, as patents
are well known to have a strong eﬀect on productivity growth.21 This has been
demonstrated directly for our dataset by Bloom and Van Reenen (2000) who find
a highly significant response of productivity to both patents and patent citations.

Figure 6 presents a frequency histogram of annual firms level patent count. This
picture excludes the 37% of observations with zero patents. It also truncates the
distribution at 50 patents per year per firm. As we note below, there are a few
very large patenting firms in our data.

5.2. Measuring the degree of product market competition

As discussed in section 2.4, our main indicator of product market competition
is the Lerner Index or price cost margin. This measure has several advantages
over indicators such as market shares or a Herfindahl or concentration index.
In order to measure any of those it is necessary to have a definition of both the

geographic and product boundaries of the market in which the firm operates. This
is particularly important in our application as many innovative UK firms operate
in international markets, so that traditional market concentration measures could
  20
     Hall, Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg et al. (2001) use the US Patent Oﬃce patenting data set to
examine the eﬀects of patenting on the market value of US firms.
  21
     See for example the survey of the patenting literature in Griliches (1990).




                                           27
be extremely misleading.22
       We use information reported in Datastream, which we have for all UK stock
market listed firms. Accounting data is used to construct a firm level measure

similar to Nickell (1996)’s measure of rents over value-added. The Lerner Index
is price minus marginal cost over price. One diﬃculty we face is that we do
not observe marginal cost. For the numerator we use operating profits net of
depreciation and provisions. We deduct an estimate of the financial cost of capital

(cost of capital*capital stock) from our measure of profits.23 This is more like price
minus average cost. We divided this by sales.

                                  operating profit - financial cost
                         liit =                                     .
                                               sales

At the firm level the Lerner Index varies from 0 to 0.38, has a mean of 0.09 and
a median value of 0.08.24
       In our econometric analysis below we present results with this individual firm
level index. However, we also find that our results are robust to using the in-

dustry level aggregate. This robustness to the use of the industry level product
  22
     One example of the diﬃculties in using concentration indexes is provided by the pharma-
ceutical industry, which account for about 10% of global R&D. In the UK the pharmaceutical
industry is dominated by two large players, GlaxoSmithKline and AstraZeneca, whose sales ac-
counts for about 65% and 30% of the market. But these firms are global players, competing with
other US and European firms. In global terms they have market shares of 7% and 4%; these
low market shares in turn reflect the fierce competition in the industry. In this case, without
global market sales, concentration measures would be extremely misleading.
  23
     Where the cost of capital is assumed to be 0.085 for all firms and time periods and capital
stock is measured using the perpetual inventory method.
  24
     In UK accounts capital depreciation, R&D expenditure and advertising have been deducted.
In theory we would like to deduct R&D depreciation (rather than expenditure), but this is
not available and we note that in steady state investment in the R&D stock should equal
depreciation.


                                              28
competition measure is important since it is the industry level variation in the
policy instruments which we exploit to purge the endogeneity in the competition
measure. Consequently for our central specification we relate firm level innova-

tion activity to the industry level competition index. Identification will come from
variation across industries over time. The industry level index, denoted cjt , is an
unweighted average across all firms in the industry,

                                                1 X
                                   cjt = 1 −           liit ,                            (5.1)
                                               Njt i∈j

where i indexes firms, j indexes industry, t indexes time and Njt is the number
of firms in industry j in year t. A value of 1 indicates perfect competition (price
equals marginal cost) while values below 1 indicate some degree of market power.
In computing this index we use the entire sample of Datastream firms, not just

those in the patenting sub-sample. Firms in our data can operate in many indus-
tries. We classify firms by the 2-digit SIC code in which the firm had the largest
proportion of its sales in 1995. For 33% of the firms this represented all of their
sales. The median share of sales accounted for by the largest industry is 90%.25
    As an alternative competition measure we derive an estimate of the industry
substitution parameter α as described in (2.9). First we remove the eﬀect of
market share on a firm’s profit-margin,

                                              1 − liit
                                   Ait =                   .
                                           1 − msit ∗ liit
  25
     For firms operating in more than one market the Lerner Index will represent a weighted
average of the degree of product market competition across these markets. This could lead to
measurement error and attenuation bias. We discuss this further in the empirical section below.


                                               29
The market share is measured as the firm’s share of output produced by firms in
the same 2-digit industry on the London Stock Market. As above, an unweighted
average across firms within a 2-digit industry is taken

                                              1 X
                                 αjt = 1 −           Ait .                            (5.2)
                                             Njt i∈j

This alternative measure inherits the concerns about measuring market shares of
firms operating in international markets, as discussed above (footnote 22). But
it provides one way to assess the robustness of our empirical results. Figure 7
presents the time path of the Lerner index and our estimate of αjt for six of the
manufacturing industries used in the study.26 This shows a wide variation in the
index over time that diﬀers systematically across industries.

5.3. The Policy Instruments

One of our main concerns is that the competition measure may be endogenous to
the patenting decision. We address this problem in a sequence of steps. First, we

allow for industry eﬀects thus removing bias that results from correlation between
permanent levels of innovative activity and product market competition. Second,
we use a set of ‘policy’ instruments that provide exogenous variation in the degree
of industry wide competition. Since we are including industry and time eﬀects

this approach identifies the competition eﬀect through diﬀerential changes across
industries in the policy instruments.
       We use three types of policy instruments - the EU Single Market Programme,
  26
    Extraction of other minerals (23), Chemical industry (25), Manufacture of oﬃce machinery
(33), Electrical and electronic (34), Motor vehicles and parts (35), Food (41).

                                             30
Monopoly and Merger Commission investigations that resulted in structural or
behavior remedies being imposed on the industry, and major privatizations. The
table below lists the SIC codes and also the years in which the various policies

were implemented:

    Policy instruments
                            SIC                   Years
    SMP high                see appendix          1988
    SMP medium              see appendix          1988
    Cars                    351                   1984, 1987, 1988
    Car Parts               353                   1982, 1987
    Periodicals             475                   1987
    Brewing                 427                   1986
    Telecoms                344                   1981, 1984, 1989
    Textiles                430                   1989
    Razors and Razor blades 316                   1990
    Steel                   220                   1987
    Ordnance                329                   1987

   Appendix B provides more detail on the policies and the industries that were
aﬀected.

5.4. Technology gap

To assess the second and third theoretical predictions a measure of the size of the

technology gap between firms within an industry is required. We capture this gap
by the proportional distance a firm is from the technological frontier, as measured
by total factor productivity. More formally, we let:

                                     T F PF t − T F Pit
                             mit =                      ,                     (5.3)
                                          T F PF t



                                         31
where F denotes the frontier firm (with the highest TFP) and i denotes non-
frontier firms. For the frontier firm our measure is

                                     T F PF t − T F PF −1t
                            mF t =                         ,                   (5.4)
                                           T F PF t

where F − 1 denotes the firm just behind the frontier. In the empirical application
below we use an industry level measure that is the average across firms in the
industry
                                           1 X
                                mtf p
                                 jt =             mit
                                          Njt i∈j

where Njt is the number firms in industry j at time t. We measure this using data
on all UK stock market listed firms. A lower value of mj indicates that firms in
industry j are technologically closer to the frontier (and therefore more like the
neck and neck firms in our theoretical section) while a high value of mj indicated

a large technological gap with the frontier (so that firms in that industry are more
like laggard firms in an unleveled industry).

5.5. Summary Statistics

Table 1 shows the number and proportion of observations where we have both ac-
counting and patents data and where we have only accounting data. On average

patents data are observed for 34% of the complete Datastream sample. Indus-
tries are excluded where we have fewer than three firms or where there were no
patents throughout the period 1968-1997. Our sample contains 330 firms with

4,500 observations over the period 1971-1994 in seventeen 2-digit industries. Of
these there are 236 patenting firms, with around 60,000 patents in total which

                                          32
account for around 200,000 citations.
   Table 2 shows the average of the firm level Lerner Index for the sample of
firms where we have only accounting data and for the sample where we have

both accounting and patents data. The table shows that the firms we have in our
sample are similar in terms of their Lerner Index to those not in our sample - both
are used to construct our industry measure of the Lerner. At the industry level
the Lerner averages 4% and ranges from 13% in Oﬃce & Computing Machinery

in 1973 to less than 1% in Motor Vehicles in 1982.
   Table 3 presents the descriptive statistics on our sample of 330 firms. From this
we can see that the patent count is highly skewed, with most firms taking out no
patent in any given year, but one firm (ICI in 1974) taking out 409 patents. The

employment figures reflect firm size, with about 1,500 employees in the median
firm.
   The measure of the technology gap also has a large spread, ranging from
industries in which leader and follower firms all have very similar levels of TFP

(those with measures close to 0), to industries in which the leader is far ahead of
the rest of the industry (those with measures close to 1).
   The financial pressure variable is debt payments over operating profits plus
depreciation. This also shows a similarly large spread between firms in which

debt repayments consume all their cash flow (a pressure measure of 1) to those
with little or no debt (a pressure variable of 0).




                                         33
6. Empirical Support for the Inverted U

Earlier analysis using UK company data27 established that indicators of the level
of competition, both at the firm and industry level, had significant and largely pos-
itive impacts on innovation intensity at the firm level. The aim here is to take this
research forward by assessing the four key predictions derived in our theoretical

discussion: (i) an inverted U-shaped relationship between product market compe-
tition and the average innovation rate; (ii) an increase in the average technological
gap as product market competition increases; (iii) complementarity between prod-
uct market competition and the degree of neck-and-neckness of an industry; (iv) a

higher rate of innovation for firms with higher debt/cash-flow ratios for any level
of PMC.

6.1. A Method of Moments Estimator

The central relationship we estimate is that between product market competition

and the innovation rate. Denoting n as the hazard rate and c as the measure of
competition, we express this as
                                            n = eg(c) .                                      (6.1)

Suppose the patent process has a Poisson distribution with hazard rate (6.1). The

resulting count of patents in any time interval has the probability distribution

                                                           g(c)
                                 Pr[p = k|c] = eg(c)k e−e         /k!,                       (6.2)
 27
      See, inter alia, Nickell (1996), Geroski (1995), Blundell, Griﬃth and Van Reenen (1995,1999).




                                                 34
and the expected number of patents satisfies

                                         E[p|c] = eg(c) .                         (6.3)

       Parametric models that study count data processes typically base their speci-

fication on this Poisson model with a parametric (linear) form for g(c), but they
relax the strong assumptions on higher moments implicit in (6.2).28 We base our
estimator on the first moment (6.3). The Poisson MLE is a consistent estimator
in this case but overdispersion, common in innovation and patent data sets, im-

plies that the estimated variance covariance matrix is incorrect. We follow this
approach in our empirical analysis but, because we are particularly interested in
allowing the data to determine the shape of the relationship between innovation
and product market competition, we adopt a flexible specification for g(c).

       In our data firms i = 1, ....Nt are grouped into J mutually exclusive industries
with i ∈ Ij with j = 1, ..., J . We observe firms for t = 1, ...., Ti periods. Our prin-
ciple competition measure (5.1) is aggregated to the industry level while patents
are measured for each firm. Following from the specification of the conditional

mean (6.3) we write
                                      E[pit |cjt] = eg(cjt ) ,                    (6.4)

where g(c) is nonparametric. This directly identifies the innovation hazard (6.1).

Note also that (6.4) is fully nonparametric but will be extended into a semipara-
metric specification as we introduce more conditioning variables into the mean
specification.
  28
       See Hausman, Hall and Griliches (1984), for example.

                                                35
      It is very likely that firms in diﬀerent industries will have observed levels of
patenting activity that have no direct causal relationship with product market
competition but reflect other institutional features of the industry. Consequently

industry fixed eﬀects are essential to remove any spurious correlation or ‘endogene-
ity’ of this type. Time eﬀects are also included to remove common macroeconomic
shocks. Conditional on industry and time, average patent behavior is related to
industry competition according to

                                                                 0
                                E[pit |cjt , xjt ] = e{g(cjt )+xit β} ,          (6.5)

where xit represent a complete set of time and industry dummy variables. We
use moment condition (6.5) to define a semiparametric moment estimator and

approximate g(c) with a polynomial spline function.29

6.2. The Basic Inverted U Relationship

The estimated exponential spline is presented in Figure 8. It shows a strong in-
verted U relationship between innovation, as measured by the citation weighted
patent count, and product market competition. The smoother curve in Figure

8 replaces the exponential spline function with an exponential quadratic. The
dotted lines are 95% confidence bands. The estimated coeﬃcients for the expo-
nential quadratic model are presented in the first column of results in Table 4a.
It is interesting to note that the exponential quadratic specification provides a

very reasonable approximation and retains the clear inverted U. The underlying
 29
      See Ai and Chen (2001).



                                                 36
distribution of the data is shown by the intensity of the points on the estimated
curves. These indicate that the peak of the inverted U lies near the median of the
distribution (the median is 0.95). We can also see that a simple linear relationship

would yield a positive slope; this confirms the results presented in Nickell (1996)
which documents the positive (linear) impact of industry level competition on
innovation in a model using firm level UK data. Finally one can show that the
inclusion of industry and time eﬀects makes the competition eﬀect on innovation

more pronounced than when they are not included.30
      One immediate question relates to aggregation of the competition measure
to the 2-digit level. Our main argument for working at the industry level for
the competition measure is that we observe instruments that have industry level

variation in competition policy and thus which allow us to purge the product
market variable of endogeneity. The results using these instruments are presented
below. Before doing this we show that the relationship also holds at the most
disaggregated level. Figure 9 presents the exponential quadratic level model es-

timated using firm level competition measures. The similarity with Figure 8 is
striking. The inverted U relationship appears to be robust to the 2-digit indus-
try level aggregation of the competition measure. This inverted U relationship is
also preserved when we consider firms in diﬀerent industries separately. Figure

10 presents the relationship fitted separately for each of the top four innovating
industries in our sample. In each case there is an inverted U shape.
      Before moving to the results using the policy instruments we perform two
 30
      The corresponding results are available from the authors.


                                               37
further robustness checks. The first considers the alternative product market
competition measure α as defined in (5.2). The results are presented in Figure 11
and again the overall inverted U relationship remains in place.31 The second uses

R&D expenditure as an alternative innovation measure. Above we noted that in
the UK R&D expenditure was not widely reported in firms’ accounts before 1990.
Nonetheless we use it as a robustness check. We have 1,162 observations from
1980 - 1994 where R&D is reported. In 1980 only six firms in our data reported

R&D. From 1990 over 150 firms report R&D. We estimate a model of the form

                                                        0
                              ln(R&D)it = g(cjt) + xit β + uit .                         (6.6)

Figure 12 plots the g (cjt ) function as above, and shows that the inverted U result

is preserved.

6.3. Endogeneity

The inclusion of industry and time dummies may not be suﬃcient to remove all
spurious correlation between the competition measure and the patent count. In
particular, relative changes in the competition measure across industries in the

UK may be indirectly caused to some extent by shocks to UK patents. Now,
recall that our main measure of product market competition was constructed as
an average of the firm level measure using data from firms both within our sample
and outside our sample. This already alleviates the endogeneity problems that

arise due to time varying, firm specific shocks or measurement errors. However,
 31
      Using lagged Lerner indexes to measure PMC, turns out to generate a very similar picture.



                                               38
our main approach to remove such temporal correlations is to use the policy
instruments described in section 5.3. We adopt a control function approach.32
This diﬀers from standard IV (and GMM) in nonlinear models. The idea is to

use functions of the residuals from the regression of the competition index on the
instruments as controls in an extended version of the moment condition (6.5).
      Without loss of generality we write our underlying stochastic model for patents
as
                                                       0
                                    pit = e{g(cjt )+xit β+uit } .               (6.7)

Exogeneity of c and x implies

                                     E[euit |cjt , xjt ] = 1,                   (6.8)

resulting in the moment condition (6.5). Under endogeneity of c this moment con-
dition on uit no longer holds. However, let us assume the existence of instruments
zit that obey the reduced form equations:

                                  cjt = π(zjt ) + x0it γ + vjt,                 (6.9)

with
                                       E[vit |zit , xjt] = 0                   (6.10)

      The control function assumption can then be expressed as:

                                   E[euit |cjt , xjt , vit ] = 1,              (6.11)
 32
      See Newey, Powell and Vella (1999).




                                                39
so that controlling for vit in the conditional moment condition is suﬃcient to
retrieve the conditional moment assumption. In estimation we use the extended
moment condition (6.4)
                                                            0
                      E[pit |cjt , xjt, vjt ] = e{g(cjt )+xit β+ρ(vjt )} .   (6.12)

To recover the parameters of interest we can integrate over the distribution of v
and recover the ‘average structural function’ (see Blundell and Powell (2001)
                                        Z
                                                    0
                     E[pit |cjt, xjt ] = e{g(cjt )+xit β+ρvjt } dFv .      (6.13)

This is achieved using the empirical distribution for v.
   The second column in Table 4a presents the estimates for our exponential
quadratic specification that control for endogeneity using our set of instruments.

The coeﬃcient estimates are similar to the first column. In the bottom part of
the table we present some diagnostic statistics. They show that the instruments
are significant in the reduced form, that the policy instruments in particular are
significant, and that they have explanatory power. Figure 13 plots the relation-
ship between innovation and product market competition and displays a similar
inverted U relationship to that found in our baseline specification. This provides
strong evidence in support of our first key prediction.

6.4. Technological Gap and Product Market Competition.

The empirical analysis presented so far has studied the impact of product market
competition at the industry level on the level of patenting activity. We now look
at the importance of similarities in technology across firms in the same industry -

                                              40
defined by the size of the technology gap or the degree of neck-and-neckness. The
second key prediction derived from the theoretical discussion is that in equilibrium
the average technology gap between leaders and followers should be an increasing

function of the overall level of industry wide competition (so that average neck-
and-neckness should be a decreasing function of competition).
       Measuring average technological distance from the frontier by the variable m
specified in section 5.4, Figure 14 presents a kernel smoothed plot of m for each

industry time observation against the industry competition index. This shows
a strongly positive relationship as predicted by the theory. In particular, more
competitive industries display a lower degree of neck-and-neckness.
       A third theoretical prediction is that the inverted U shaped relationship be-

tween competition and growth should be steeper for more neck and neck industries.
To assess this prediction, we consider a subsample of our data - firms in industries
with below median technological gap - these are more neck and neck industries.
Figure 15 presents a picture of the baseline exponential quadratic specification, as

well as the same specification estimated on the sample of firms in high neck and
neck industries. Two features stand out clearly. First, more neck and neck in-
dustries show a higher level of innovation activity for any level of product market
competition.33 Second, the inverted U curve is steeper for the more neck and neck

industries. This accords well with the theoretical simulations presented in section
4. The estimated exponential quadratic specification for the high neck and neck
  33
   The unconditional mean of citation weighted patents for high neck and neck firms is 8.58,
compared to 6.68 for the entire sample.



                                            41
firms are shown in the first column of Table 4b.
       As a check on these results, and in addition to the full set of time and industry
eﬀects, we allow for endogeneity in the neck and neck split, as well as in the

degree of competition. The instruments34 work well as evidenced by the high R2
shown in Table 4b and the significance of both the policy instruments and the
other instruments. The impact of controlling for the endogeneity of the sample
separation between high and low neck and neck industries in the exponential

quadratic specification is presented in Table 4b. The strong quadratic pattern
remains, and one can also show that the impact of controlling for endogeneity is
to reinforce the escape-competition eﬀect for more neck and neck firms.35

6.5. Financial pressure

Our fourth and final key prediction is that higher debt pressure should reinforce

the escape-competition eﬀect of PMC and thereby enhance innovation incentives
especially at lower levels of product market competition. We measure financial
pressure using the ratio between firms’ debt and firms’ cash flow, as described
in section 5.5. We identify the 40% of firms with the highest debt payments

to cash flow ratio as those facing a higher threat of bankruptcy and allow the
coeﬃcients on the competition index to vary for these firms. In Figure 16 we
show the relationship between product market competition and innovation for
  34
     We use additional instruments that vary at the industry-year level for the same industries in
France and US. The instruments include: imports penetration; output minus costs over output;
estimate of markup from Martins et al (1996) interacted with a time trend; TFP; R&D intensity.
All instruments vary over industry and time and are included in levels and squared terms.
  35
     The results are available from the authors.



                                               42
                              36
each of these two groups           (as before the solid line is the baseline exponential
quadratic specification for all firms).
       Figure 16 and the numerical results presented in Table 4c show, first that

firms with higher financial pressure innovate more on average than those with
lower financial pressure, as predicted by the theory; and second, that the escape-
competition eﬀect dominates over a larger range of values for the competition
index for high financial pressure firms.


7. Conclusions

This paper has investigated the relationship between product market competition
and innovation. A Schumpeterian growth model was developed in which firms
innovate ‘step-by-step’, and where both technological leaders and their followers

engage in R&D activities. In this model, competition may increase the incremental
profit from innovating; on the other hand, competition may also reduce innovation
incentives for laggards. This model generates four main predictions which we test
empirically. First, the relationship between product market competition (PMC)

and innovation is an inverted U-shape: the escape-competition eﬀect dominates
for low initial levels of competition, whereas the Schumpeterian eﬀect dominates
at higher levels of competition. Second, the equilibrium degree of technological
‘neck-and-neckness’ among firms should decrease with PMC. Third, the higher

the average degree of ‘neck-and-neckness’ in an industry, the steeper the inverted-
  36
    We have allowed the intercept and the coeﬃcients on the competition measure and its square
to vary across the groups.



                                              43
U relationship between PMC and innovation in that industry. Fourth, firms may
innovate more if subject to higher debt-pressure, especially at lower levels of PMC.
   Our empirical results confirm the existence of an inverted U-shaped relation-

ship between product market competition and innovations, which in turn indicates
that some kind of an escape-competition eﬀect should dominate at lower levels of
PMC as measured by the Lerner index, whereas the Schumpeterian eﬀect pointed
out in earlier endogenous growth models and before that in the IO literature,

should dominate at high initial levels of PMC. Our results also indicate a similar
inverted U-shaped relationship at the industry level, and that it tends to be steeper
for firms that are in more neck-and-neck industries. Finally, we find that firms
facing a higher threat of bankruptcy are subject to a stronger escape-competition

eﬀect and innovate more on average, especially at lower levels of competition.
   An important extension would be to introduce entry and entry threat as alter-
native (or complementary) measures of competition. This again would be done
using an extension of the above model with entry and exit in any industry. Prelim-

inary simulations performed on this extended model suggest an inverted U-shaped
relationship between potential entry and the innovation rate.

A. Appendix
Here we provide the details of two reasons for believing that the average Lerner
index of a random sample of firms in an industry should be a decreasing function
of the α measure of competition.
    The first reason is that for the special case when γ is close to 1 then the average
of the 2 Lerner indexes in an industry with any lead size m is well approximated
     1−α
by 1−α/2 , which is the Lerner of a neck-and-neck firm and is strictly decreasing in
α. The proof of this proposition goes as follows.

                                          44
   As asserted in the text, the Lerner index of a firm with lead size m is:
                                   1−α              ¡        ¢
                       Lm =                     ≡ e γ −m , α
                                                  L
                              1 − αλ (γ −m , α)

where λ (z, α) is the market share of a firm with relative cost z, defined implicitly
by equations (2.5) and (2.6) of the text. When m = 0 the proposition holds
exactly:
                                           1−α
                                  L0 =
                                         1 − α/2
because λ (1, α) = 1/2. So suppose m ≶ 0. Taking a Taylor expansion around
γ = 1 and defining ε ≡ γ − 1, we have:
                                                ¯
                                    ∂ L (z, α) ¯¯
                                      e              ¡ ¢
                     Lm = L0 − εm               ¯ + O ε2
                                        ∂z ¯
                                                 z=1

Therefore the average of the two firms’ Lerner indexes is:
                                      ¡ ¢    1−α       ¡ ¢
               (Lm + L−m ) /2 = L0 + O ε2 =         + O ε2 .
                                            1 − α/2
    So, when gamma is small, whatever the distribution of m, the expected Lerner
of a randomly selected firm is approximately the same decreasing function of
alpha.
    The second reason is that even when γ is not small, when you sample firms
whose lead sizes are distributed according to the steady state distribution µ of
the theory, numerically the expected value of the randomly selected firm’s Lerner
is a decreasing function of α. This is illustrated below in Figure A1, which plots
the expected value of a firm’s Lerner index under the distribution µ against the
industry’s α. The parameter values are the same as those underlying Figures 2 ∼
                                                              1−α
5 in the text. Figure A1 also plots the approximate value 1−α/2    analyzed in the
preceding paragraphs, which continues to be the actual Lerner index of a neck-
and-neck firm, and which continues to approximate the theoretical prediction of
the average Lerner fairly closely when α is small.

B. Policy instruments
B.1. Single Market Program
The EU Single Market Programme (SMP) is used as an exogenous policy in-
strument that aﬀected the degree of product market competition. The aims of

                                         45
the SMP were to bring down internal barriers to the free movement of goods,
services, capital and labor. The European Commission’s White Paper (1985)
outlined around three hundred specific measures which were designed to achieve
this.
    The measures that were aimed at promoting competition include instituting
common rules on regulation, takeovers, state assistance to industry, patents and
copyrights, company accounting and disclosure of information, opening up of pub-
lic procurement to competitive tender and reducing intervention in agriculture.
This wide range of measures impacted upon diﬀerent industries diﬀerentially. The
Cecchini report attempted to quantify the size of non-tariﬀ barriers in existence
before the SMP was implemented. They use a series of surveys and technical
papers to assign numerical values to the size of non-tariﬀ barriers in each industry
before the SMP. Industries are divided into three categories by the Cecchini report
(the classification used here is from Mayes and Hart (1994, p53) of 3-digit indus-
tries that were likely to be aﬀected by the SMP): (i) barriers were low pre-SMP
so the impact of the SMP was expected to be low; (ii) an intermediate level of
barriers pre-SMP and where the measures undertaken as part of the SMP were
expected to significantly reduce them: 247 Glass, 248 Refractory and ceram, 251
Basic industrial chemicals, 321 Agricultural machine, 322 Metal-worked machine,
323 Textile machinery, 324 Processing machinery, 327 Machinery for wood, 346
Domestic electric appliances, 347 Electric lamps, 351 Motor vehicles, 352 Mo-
tor vehicle bodies, 353 Motor vehicle parts, 427 Brewing and malting, 428 Soft
drinks, 431 Woollen, 432 Cotton and silk, 438 Carpets, 451 Footwear, 453 Cloth-
ing, 455 Household textiles, 481 Rubber; (iii) those where there were high level
of barriers pre-SMP and the SMP was expected to significantly reduce them: 256
Specialized chemicals, 257 Pharmaceutical products, 325 Mining and construct,
326 Power transmission equipment, 328 Other machinery, 330 Oﬃce machinery,
330 Manufacture of oﬃce, 341 Insulated wires, 342 Basic electrical equipment,
344 Telecomm equipment, 345 Other electronic equipment, 361 Shipbuilding, 362
Railway and tramway, 371 Precision instrument, 372 Medical equipment, 373 Op-
tical instruments, 421 Ice cream chocolate, 491 Jewellery, 494 Toys and games.
    The initial SMP programme was announced in 1986 and implementation was
scheduled to take place starting in 1988 and be completed by 1992 (although not
all proposals had been implemented by 1992). Thus three time periods are consid-
ered: 1980-1987, pre-SMP; 1988-1992, during implementation of SMP; 1993-1997,
after SMP implemented.
    Griﬃth (2001) uses plant level data in the UK to show that the impact of the
SMP was to increase product market competition (bring down the Lerner Index)
in those industries that were expected ex ante to be aﬀected. Markups in the
intermediate industries came down by around 5% and in the industries with high
barriers they came down by over 10%.




                                        46
B.2. Cars
MMC (1982) reported on the possible existence of a complex monopoly in the
wholesale supply of car parts. The report concluded that car manufacturers and
importers restricted competition by requiring persons to whom they supplied car
parts to acquire them exclusively from them or from sources approved by them.
This limited the extent to which component manufacturers could compete with
each other and with car manufacturers and importers, restricted price competi-
tion, imposed some limitation on the level of services from which the franchised
sector could benefit, and restricted competition among factors. An Order37 was
subsequently approved making it unlawful for car manufacturers and importers
to insist on their franchised dealers buying car parts exclusively from them.
    There were four major privatizations in the car industry. Jaguar, a luxury
car maker, was sold in 1984 (fixed price oﬀer of 100% of shares). Unipart, a
supplier of parts and accessories to Rover, was sold in a management buyout
in 1987. Leyland, a manufacturer of buses, trucks and vans, was sold in 1987
(combination of a management buyout and sale to existing firms). Rover, a vehicle
manufacturer, was sold to British Aerospace in 1988.

B.3. Periodicals
MMC (1988) found that publishers of specialist magazines intended for campers
climbers and walkers refused to accept advertisements containing prices and that
this constituted a complex monopoly. The adverse eﬀects were thought to be: (a)
hindering or preventing readers’ informed choice, (b) restriction of competition
between specialist retailers and mail order companies, (c) narrowing of price ranges
and increase of average price level. An Order38 prohibiting such actions was
implemented.

B.4. Brewing
MMC (1989) found a complex monopoly in the brewing industry. The adverse
eﬀects were identified as: a) inhibition of new entry; b) reduced competition; c)
higher or discriminatory prices; d) reduced consumer choice; e) restrictions on
the independence of tenants of pubs; f) pricing structure which adversely aﬀected
wholesalers.
   Action taken39 requiring national brewers to free half of their premises in
excess of 2000 from ties. This meant that pubs were able to choose a guest beer.
This applied to all brewers ensuring easy exit from loan ties, requiring brewers to
  37
     HC Hansard 24, 26-May-82, c 314-315 ORDERS SI 1982 : 1146 The Restriction On Agree-
ments (Manufacturers And Importers Of Motor Cars) Order
  38
     ORDERS SI 1988 : 1017 The Restriction on Conduct (Specialist Advertising Services) Order
  39
     ORDERS SI 1989 : 2258 The Supply of Beer (Loan Ties, Licensed Premises and Wholesale
Prices) Order; SI 1989 : 2390 The Supply of Beer (Tied Estate) Order.


                                             47
supply beer at maximum published wholesale prices, and stopped brewers selling
premises with conditions that prevented them from being used as a pub in the
future. There was a review of the licensing system to see whether magistrates
should in future only take account of whether applicants are ”fit and proper.
Following consultation with the EC two Orders were passed. The Tied Estate
Order was concerned with measures applying to national brewers, in particular
national brewers were required to free half of their premises in excess of 2,000
from ties by 1.11.92, also, all those tied by national brewers, whether through
loan ties or tenancies, were to be free to choose a guest beer, low alcohol beer, soft
drinks and some other drinks from any source by 1.5.90. The Loan Ties, Licensed
Premises and Wholesale Prices Order applied to all brewers and ensured easy exit
from loan ties, required brewers to supply beer at maximum published wholesale
prices and stopped brewers selling premises with conditions that prevented them
from being used as pubs in the future. The impact of these orders on firms pricing
behavior has subsequently been studied by Slade (2001).

B.5. Telecoms
Cable and Wireless, a major international telecommunications company, was pri-
vatized in 1981. This happened through a fixed price oﬀering of 49.4% of its shares
in 1981, a tender oﬀer of an additional 22.3% in 1983 and a further fixed price
oﬀer of 22.7% in 1985.
    MMC (1989) investigated the proposed acquisition of The Plessey Company
plc by a company jointly owned by The General Electric Company. plc (GEC)
and Siemens AG. The MMC allowed the merger but found adverse eﬀects in the
form of a reduction of competition. The MMC recommended that GEC not be
allowed to acquire control of some parts of Plessey’s activities which should pass
to Siemens only.
    GEC and Siemens undertook40 a) that GEC would not acquire any control over
Plessey’s radar and military communications business and traﬃc control activi-
ties; b) that arrangements for the ownership and management of Plessey’s defence,
R&D, and semiconductor businesses would be made to comply with national se-
curity requirements; c) that access to technology and licences for production of
JTDIS equipment would be available to any competitor nominated by the Min-
istry of Defence.

B.6. Textiles
MMC (1989) investigated two merger situations involving Coats Viyella plc (Coats)
and the Tootal Group Plc (Tootal). The first involved Coat’s further acquisition
of Tootal equity which raised its holding to 29.9 per cent, the second involved an
oﬀer for all Tootal’s issued share capital. The impact of these proposed mergers
 40
      ORDERS SI 1989 : 27 The Merger Reference (GEC, Siemens and Plessey) Order.


                                           48
was found to have adverse eﬀects through: a) reduction in competition; b) higher
prices; c) reduced consumer choice. The merger was allowed but Coats under-
took41 to dispose of its interest in the UK supply of domestic sewing thread and
in Gutermann & Co. Until these disposals Coats undertook to exercise no more
than 9.9 percent of its voting rights in Tootal.

B.7. Razors
MMC (1991a,b) relate to concurrent references to the Commission concerning the
situation arising from a leveraged buy-out of the Consumer Products (CP) division
of Stora, which included the Wilkinson Sword business, using a shelf company to
be called Swedish Match. Finance for the transaction was to be provided by a
number of Swedish investor institutions together with the Gillette company and its
subsidiaries. The reports concluded that a monopoly situation existed in favour
of Gillette UK and that the aﬀect of Gillette’s involvement in the transaction,
specifically the giving of assistance to and the provision of finance for Swedish
Match in connection with a buy-out, was to weaken the competitiveness of its
main competitor in the United Kingdom, to strengthen its competitive position,
and to reduce competition. This would result in prices being higher than they
would otherwise be and a reduction in consumer choice. The reports recommended
that Gillette UK should dispose of its equity interests.42

B.8. Steel
British Steel, the largest UK steel producer, was privatized in 1987 through a
fixed price oﬀer of 100% of its shares.

B.9. Ordnance
Royal Ordnance, manufacturer of artillery, ammunition, explosives, ordnance,
small arms and rocket motors, sold to British Aerospace in 1987.


References

Aghion, P, Dewatripont, M, and P. Rey (1999), “Competition, Financial Disci-
pline, and Growth”, Review of Economic Studies, 66, 825-852.
  41
     ORDERS SI 1989 : 1054 The Merger Reference (Coats Viyella PLC and Tootal Group
PLC) Order.
  42
     ORDERS SI 1991 : 750 The Merger Situation (Stora/Swedish Match/Gillette) (Interim
Provision) Order SI 1993 : 1703 The Merger Situation (Stora/Swedish Match/Gillette) (Interim
Provision) (Revocation) Order.

                                            49
Aghion, P, Harris, C, and J. Vickers (1997), “Competition and Growth with Step-
by-Step Innovation: An Example”, European Economic Review, Papers and Pro-
ceedings, pp. 771-782.
Aghion, P, Harris, C, Howitt, P and J. Vickers (2001), “Competition, Imitation
and Growth with Step-by-Step Innovation”, Review of Economic Studies, vol 68,
pp. 467-492.
Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (1992) “A Model of Growth through Creative Destruc-
tion.” Econometrica 60, 323-51.
Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (1998) Endogenous Growth Theory. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.
Aghion, P., and P. Howitt (2001), “Institutional Complementarity and the Design
of Competition Policy”, Unpublished, December.
Ai, C. and X. Chen (2000),“Eﬃcient Estimation of Models with Conditional Mo-
ment Restrictions Containing Unknown Functions”, LSE Working Paper in Econo-
metrics, June.
Bloom, N. and Van Reenen, J. (2000), “Real Options, Patents, Productivity and
Market Value: Evidence from a Panel of British Firms”, Institute for Fiscal Studies
working paper W00/21.
Blundell, R., Griﬃth, R. and Van Reenen, J. (1995), “Dynamic Count Data Mod-
els of Technological Innovation”, Economic Journal, Vol. 105, March 1995, 333-
344.
Blundell, R., Griﬃth, R. and Van Reenen, J. (1999), “Market Share, Market Value
and Innovation in a Panel of British Manufacturing Firms”, Review of Economic
Studies, vol. 66, 529-554.
Blundell, R., and J. Powell (2001), “Endogeneity in Nonparametric and Semi-
parametric Regression Models”, forthcoming in L. Hansen (ed), Advances in
Econometrics, vol. Econometric Monograph Series, Cambridge University Press.
http://cemmap.ifs.org.uk/docs/cwp0901.pdf.
Boone, J. (12000): “Measuring Product Market Competition”, CEPR Working
Paper 2636.
Caballero, R and A. Jaﬀe (1993), “How High are the Giants’ Shoulders? An Em-
pirical Assessment of Knowledge Spillovers and Creative Destruction in a Model
of Economic Growth”, NBER Macroeconomic Annual, pp. 15-74.

                                        50
Cohen, W., and R. Levin, 1989 “Empirical studies of innovation and market
structure”, Chapter 18 of R. Schmalensee and R. Willig, Handbook of Industrial
Organization, Elsevier.
Dasgupta, P. and Stiglitz, J. (1980) “Industrial Structure and the Nature of In-
novative Activity”, Economic Journal, 90, 266-293.
Gale, D. and M. Hellwig (1985) “Incentive-Compatible Debt Contracts: The One-
Period Problem”, Review of Economic Studies, 52, 647-663.
Geroski, P. (1995) Market Structure, Corporate Performance and Innovative Ac-
tivity, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Griﬃth, R (2001) “Product market competition, eﬃciency and agency costs: an
empirical analysis”, IFS Working Paper W02/04.
Griliches, Z (1990) “Patent Statistics as Economic Indicators: A Survey”, Journal
of Economic Literature 28, 1661-1707.
Hall, R (1988) “The relationship between price and marginal cost in U.S. industry”
Journal of Political Economy, vol. 96, 921-47
Hall, B., Jaﬀe, A. and Trajtenberg, M. (2001), “Market Value and Patent Cita-
tions: A First Look”, mimeo UC Berkeley.
Hausman, J., B. Hall, and Z. Griliches (1984) “Econometric Models for Count
Data and an Application to the Patents-R&D Relationship.” Econometrica, 52,
909-938.
Klette, T and Griliches, Z (1996) “The inconsistency of common scale estimators
when output prices are unobserved and endogenous” Journal of Applied Econo-
metrics 11(4), 343-361
Klette, T.J. (1999) “Market power, scale economies and productivity: Estimates
from a panel of establishment data” Journal of Industrial Economics, Vol. XLVII,
No. 4
Levin, R., Cohen, W. and D. Mowery (1985) “R&D appropriability, opportu-
nity, and market structure: new evidence on some Schumpeterian hypotheses”,
American Economic Review Proceedings, (75) 20-24.
Martins, J, Scarpetta, S and Pilat, D (1996) “Markup-up ratios in manufacturing
industries: estimates for 14 OECD countries”, OECD Working Paper No. 162
MMC (1982) “Car parts: a report on the matter of the existence or the possible

                                       51
existence of a complex monopoly situation in relation to the wholesale supply of
motor car parts in the UK” (HC 318 1981-82)
MMC (1988) “Specialised advertising services: a report on the matter of the
existence or possible existence of a monopoly situation in relation to the supply in
the UK of the services of accepting advertisements for publication in specialised
magazines intended for campers, climbers and walkers” (Cm 280)
MMC (1989) “The supply of beer: a report on the supply of beer for retail sale
in the UK” (Cm 651)
MMC (1989) “The General Electric Co PLC, Siemens AG and the Plessey Co
PLC: a report on the proposed mergers” (Cm 676)
MMC (1989) “Coats Viyella PLC and Tootal Group PLC: a report on the merger
situation” (Cm 833)
Mayes, D. and P. Hart (1994) The Single Market Programme as a Stimulus to
change: comparisons between Britain and Germany, Cambridge University Press:
Cambridge
Newey, W. Powell, J. and Vella, F. (1999), “Nonparametric Estimation of Trian-
gular Simultaneous Equations Models”, Econometrica, 67, 565-604.
Nickell, S. (1996) “Competition and Corporate Performance”, Journal of Political
Economy, 104, 724-746.
Scherer, F (1967) “Market structure and the employment of scientists and engi-
neers”, American Economic Review, 57 (3), 524-531.
Slade, M. (2001) “Assessing Market Power in UK Brewing” mimeo UBC
Townsend, R. (1979) “Optimal Contracts and Competitive Markets with Costly
State Verification” Journal of Economic Theory, 21, 269-293.




                                        52
                          3.5



                          3.4
Average innovation rate




                          3.3



                          3.2



                          3.1



                           3



                          2.9
                                0            2              4            6             8        10
                                                 Profit-level of neck-and-neck firms



                                    As competition decreases, the equilibrium profit level
                                    π0 of neck-and-neck firms increases, resulting
                                    eventually in a fall in the economy-wide innovation rate.




                                                   Figure 1
20


       lead                                                           0

                                                       alpha
                      -20        1

     Figure 2: How a firm's value depends on its technogical lead and on the
     degree of product market competition
  0

      gap
                                                                     1
                 8        0                  alpha




Figure 3: Total Industry R&D as a function of the technological gap between leader
and follower and of the degree of product market competition.
                                                                       1

0                                                              alpha

        gap
                              10         0



    Figure 4: The cross-industry distribution of technological gaps
    for different degrees of product market competition
              0.04




              0.03
growth rate




              0.02




              0.01




                0
                     0                       0.5                          1
                                           alpha




                         Figure 5: The effects of competition on growth
               n = 0




                  1




                0.8




                0.6
Lerner Index




                0.4




                0.2




                  0
                       0   0.1   0.2     0.3    0.4      0.5   0.6     0.7    0.8     0.9
                                                       alpha

                  FIGURE A1. The theoretical relationship between alpha and the average firm's
                  Lerner. The solid line shows the expected average Lerner of the two firms under
                  the steady-state distribution implied by the theory. The dashed line shows the
                  Lerner of a neck-and-neck firm.
Figure 6: Distribution of Patents (0 < p < 50)



                            .2




                          .15
  Fraction




                            .1




                          .05




                                 0
                                            0                                                                         25                                                                             50
                                                                                                           Citation weighted patents


                                                                                                                           Notes: Excluding zeros (37%) and counts over 50 per year.




Figure 7: Measures of competition, c compared to alpha




                     Alpha(jt)                                   C(jt)                               Alpha(jt)                        C(jt)                 Alpha(jt)                        C(jt)

             .96                                                                               1                                                      1




             .94
                                                                                                                                                     .95


                                                                                              .95
             .92



                                                                                                                                                      .9
              .9



                                                                                               .9
             .88                                                                                                                                     .85
                    1975                    1980                         1985          1990         1975         1980          1985           1990         1975         1980          1985            1990
                                                   year                                                                 year                                                   year

                     Alpha(jt)                                   C(jt)                               Alpha(jt)                        C(jt)                 Alpha(jt)                        C(jt)

                                                                                               1                                                     .98
             .96




             .94
                                                                                              .98                                                    .96



             .92


                                                                                              .96                                                    .94

              .9




             .88                                                                              .94                                                    .92
                   1975              1980                 1985                  1990                1975         1980          1985           1990         1975         1980          1985            1990
                                                   year                                                                 year                                                   year




                                                                                                                                                                                                             1
Figure 8: Innovation and Product Market Competition:
          Exponential quadratic and the semiparametric specifications: with year and industry effects


                                                         Exponential quadratic                        Spline


                                           8
          Citation weighted patents




                                           6




                                           4




                                           2
                                                .85                           .9                          .95       1
                                                                                        C(jt)
                                               Exponential quadratic with year and industry effects




   Figure 9: Innovation and Product Market Competition: Firm Level Competition Measure




                                                      Exponential quadratic


                                      10




                                      5




                                      0
                                           .6                                           .8                      1
                                                                         C(it): using firm level Lerner




                                                                                                                        2
Figure 10: Innovation and Product Market Competition: Four highest patenting industries


                                                    25                                                                                            28
                        Citation weighted patents




                                                                                                                      Citation weighted patents
                                                    20                                                                                            26




                                                    15                                                                                            24




                                                                                                                                                  22
                                                    10
                                                          .85                   .9                     .95        1                                    .85          .9                     .95       1
                                                                                          C(jt)                                                                              C(jt)
                                                                               Motor vehicles                                                                        Chemicals

                                                     9
                                                                                                                                                  20




                                                    8.5
                        Citation weighted patents




                                                                                                                      Citation weighted patents
                                                                                                                                                  15


                                                     8



                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                    7.5




                                                     7                                                                                            5
                                                          .85                   .9                     .95        1                                    .85          .9                     .95       1
                                                                                          C(jt)                                                                              C(jt)
                                                                          Electrical and electronics                                                         Food, beverages and tobacco




Figure 11: Innovation and Product Market Competition: Using alpha rather than 1-Lerner



                                                                                     Exponential quadratic


                                                                8
    Citation weighted patents




                                                                7




                                                                6




                                                                5




                                                                4
                                                                    .85                                      .9                                              .95                                 1
                                                                                                                      Alpha(jt)
                                                                    Exponential quadratic with year and industry effects




                                                                                                                                                                                                         3
Figure 12: Innovation and Product Market Competition: Using R&D
          (1980-1994; main sample 1990-1994)




                                       16
                 R&D expenditure




                                       14




                                       12
                                              .85               .9                         .95       1
                                                                             C(jt)
                                                    R&D with year and industry effects




Figure 13: Innovation and Product Market Competition: Controlling for Endogeneity




                                   7
 Citation weighted patents




                                   6




                                   5




                                   4




                                   3
                                        .85                .9                        .95         1
                                                                     C(jt)
                                                    Control function (Lerner)




                                                                                                         4
Figure 14: Technology Gap and Competition: The Composition effect


                                                          Kernel regression, bw = .05, k = 6

                                                   .57
   technology gap(m)




                                                   .56




                                                   .55




                                                   .54
                                                              .85                      .9                           .95                          1
                                                                                               Grid points
                                                                             Kernel with Gaussian weights                                    C(jt)


                                                                                                             Notes: Kernel regression, bw = .05, k = 6




Figure 15: Innovation and Product Market Competition: The neck and neck split



                                                                      All firms                              More neck and neck industries



                                                         10
                       Citation weighted patents




                                                          5




                                                          0
                                                                .85                   .9                      .95                         1
                                                                                                C(jt)
                                                                Neck and neck split with year and industry effects




                                                                                                                                                         5
Figure 16: Innovation and Product Market Competition: The financial pressure split


                          All firms                                       High debt to profit ratio
                          Low debt to profit ratio

         10



           8



           6



           4



           2

               .85                             .9                            .95                      1
                                                             C(jt)
                                              Financial split




                                                                                                          6
Table 1: Distribution of observations with patents data by industry
Industry                           Accounting data         Accounting and   Total
                                        only                 patent data
22 Metal manufacturing                   155                     123          278
                                        55.76                   44.24       100.00
23 Extraction of other                   17                       34          51
                                        33.33                   66.67       100.00
24 Non-Metallic Mineral                  320                     200          520
                                        61.54                   38.46       100.00
25 Chemicals                             222                     348          570
                                        38.95                   61.05       100.00
31 Manufacture of metal                  210                     273          483
                                        43.48                   56.52       100.00
32 Mechanical engineering                917                     783         1700
                                        53.94                   46.06       100.00
33 Office & Computing                    72                       31          103
                                        69.90                   30.10       100.00
34 Electrical and electronic             554                     484         1038
                                        53.37                   46.63       100.00
35 Motor vehicles                        318                     210          528
                                        60.23                   39.77       100.00
36 Manufacture of other                  133                     117          250
                                        53.20                   46.80       100.00
37 Instrument engineering                45                       48          93
                                        48.39                   51.61       100.00
41 Food manufacture                      209                     112          321
                                        65.11                   34.89       100.00
42 Sugar Beverages &                     329                     259          588
                                        55.95                   44.05       100.00
43 Textiles                              458                     310          768
                                        59.64                   40.36       100.00
45 Footwear and cloth                    397                       0          397
                                       100.00                    0.00       100.00
46 Wood Products & Furniture             300                       0          300
                                       100.00                    0.00       100.00
47 Paper and Paper Products              564                     241          805
                                        70.06                   29.94       100.00
48 Rubber & Plastic                      146                     117          263
                                        55.51                   44.49       100.00
49 Other manufacturing                   227                      51          278
                                        81.65                   18.35       100.00
Total                                   9418                    4523        13941
                                        67.56                   32.44       100.00
Table 2: Lerner index and patent counts by industry
                                          Average firm level Lerner Index
Industry                               Accounting data         Sample with       Average number of
                                            only              accounting and       annual patents
                                                                patent data
14 Mineral oil processing                  0.074                                        0
22 Metal manufacturing                     0.060                  0.053                 13
23 Extraction of other minerals            0.153                  0.183                 9
24 Non-Metallic Mineral Products           0.077                  0.114                 40
25 Chemicals                               0.092                  0.100                330
31 Manufacture of metal goods              0.082                  0.068                 2
32 Mechanical engineering                  0.074                  0.076                 55
33 Office & Computing Machinery            0.133                  0.111                 8
34 Electrical and electronic               0.090                  0.093                145
engineering
35 Motor vehicles                           0.045                 0.061                167
36 Manufacture of other                     0.071                 0.095                 36
37 Instrument engineering                   0.106                 0.077                 4
41 Food manufacture                         0.060                 0.068                 15
42 Sugar Beverages & Tobacco                0.104                 0.091                113
43 Textiles                                 0.062                 0.075                 3
45 Footwear and clothing                    0.078                                       0
46 Wood Products & Furniture                0.077                                       0
47 Paper Paper Products & Printing          0.092                 0.085                 3
48 Rubber & Plastic Products                0.104                 0.066                 4
49 Other manufacturing                      0.080                 0.088                 14
Total                                       0.077                 0.079


Table 3: Descriptive Statistics

                                   Mean             Median                Min           Max
                                    (s.d)
Patents                             6.65               0                   0             409
                                  (27.02)
Cite weighted patents               6.68               0                   0             403
                                  (26.53)
C(jt)                               0.95              0.95                0.87          0.99
                                  (0.020)
Employment (1000s)                   11               1.2                 0.04           312
                                   (31.3)
Observations per firm               17.2              19                   5             22
                                   (5.06)
Technology gap (m)                  0.56              0.59            0.085             0.82
                                  (0.127)
Financial pressure                 0.169            0.118                  0              1
                                  (0.199)
Table 4a: Exponential Quadratic: Basic specification
                         Year and Industry Effects            Controls for Endogeneity
Observations                        3065                                3047

Constant                                  -113.8                        -109.4
                                         (12.41)                       (12.53)
c jt                                      245.5                          236.1
                                         (26.52)                       (26.69)
c 2jt                                     -130.2                       -125.1
                                         (14.17)                        (14.2)

Significance of:
c jt , c 2jt                             94.14                          79.75
                                         (0.00)                         (0.00)
year effects                              yes                            yes
industry effects                          yes                            yes
significant of policy                       -                           12.17
instruments in reduced                                                  (0.00)
form, LR statistic (P-
value)
significant of other                        -                           24.91
instruments in reduced                                                  (0.00)
form, LR statistic (P-
value)
control functions in                        -                           -5.99
regression                                                              (2.69)

R2 of reduced form                          -                            0.84

Notes: Numbers in () are standard errors except for significance tests where they are P-
value for test of joint significance. The significance tests show the likelihood ratio test
statistic.
Table 4b: Exponential Quadratic: Neck and Neck specification

                                  Year and Industry Effects          Controlling for
                                                                      Endogeneity
Observations                                1197                         1184

Constant                                    -137.3                        -73.65
                                           (18.57)                       (19.65)
c jt                                        292.8                          156.0
                                            (39.8)                        (42.0)
c 2jt                                       -153.5                       -80.46
                                            (21.3)                       (22.49)

Significance of:
c jt , c 2jt                                83.95                        22.77
                                            (0.00)                       (0.00)

year effects                                 yes                          yes
industry effects                             yes                          yes
significant of policy                         -                          12.17
instruments in reduced form                                              (0.00)
significant of other                           -                         24.91
instruments in reduced form                                              (0.00)
control functions in regression                -                         -5.99
                                                                         (2.69)

R2 of reduced form                            -                           0.84

Notes: Significance test show test statistic and P-value from F test of joint significance.
Excluded variables are: policy instruments, imports over value-added in same industry-
year in USA and France, TFP in same industry-year in USA and France, output minus
variable costs over output in same industry-year in USA and France, estimate of markup
from industry-country regression for USA and France (Martins et al 1996) interacted with
time trend.
Table 4c: Exponential Quadratic: Financial Pressure Results
Observations                                                         2899

Constant                                                             -323.1
                                                                    (20.83)
c jt                                                                 695.6
                                                                    (44.56)
c 2jt                                                                -372.1
                                                                    (50.00)
c jt *(financial pressure)                                           -637.2
                                                                    (50.00)
c 2jt *(financial pressure)                                          341.9
                                                                    (26.59)
Financial pressure                                                   297.0
                                                                    (23.51)

Significance of:
c jt , c 2jt                                                          243.88
                                                                      (0.00)
                              2
c jt *(financial pressure), c jt *(financial pressure)                228.90
                                                                      (0.00)
year effects                                                           yes
industry effects                                                       yes
Notes: Significance test shows P-value from χ test of joint significance. Excluded
                                                    2

variables are: policy instruments, imports over value-added in same industry-year in USA
and France, TFP in same industry-year in USA and France, output minus variable costs
over output in same industry-year in USA and France, estimate of markup from industry-
country regression for USA and France (Martins et al 1996) interacted with time trend.
