NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE STABILITY AND GROWTH PACT AS AN
IMPEDIMENT TO PRIVATIZING SOCIAL SECURITY
Assaf Razin
Efraim Sadka
Working Paper 9278
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9278
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002

Some of the work on this paper was done while the second author was visiting the economics department
atCornell University. We wish to acknowledge the sponsoring RTN project, The Analysis of International
Capital Markets: Understanding Europe’s Role in the Global Economy. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

The Stability and Growth Pact as an Impediment to Privatizing Social Security
Assaf Razin and Efraim Sadka
NBER Working Paper No. 9278
October 2002
JEL No. H0
ABSTRACT
The aging of the population shakes the confidence in the economic viability of pay-as-you-go
social security systems. We demonstrate how in a political-economy framework the shaken
cofidence leads to the downsizing of the social security-system, and to the emergence of
supplemental individual retirement programs. Lifting the Stability-Pact type ceiling on fiscal deficits
is shown to facilitate the transition from a national to a private pension system, through an
endogenously determined shift in the median voter.

Assaf Razin
Mario Henrique Simonsen Professor of Public Economics
Tel-Aviv University
Tel-Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
and Friedman Professor of International Economics, Cornell University
and NBER
razin@post.tau.ac.il.
Efraim Sadka
Henry Kaufman Professor of International Capital Markets
Tel-Aviv University
Tel-Aviv 69978
ISRAEL
sadka@post.tau.ac.il.

1

Introduction

The economic viability of national old-age security systems has been increasingly deteriorating.
Though the recent 2000 population census in the United States reveals some encouraging signs
that the ageing process there is checked through increasing fertility rates and migration of young
people, the demographic picture for Europe is cloudy. As the Economist puts it:
“As its people grow grayer, Europe’s state pensions systems will go deeper into the red.
Germany and Italy are trying to push the private-sector alternative. It is not easy...”(August
3rd, 2002, p. 23).
More concretely, for Germany,
“Seven-tenths of German pensions come from a state scheme with roots is Bismarck’s day.
It is …nanced mainly by a levy on wages, 19:1% this year, half paid by workers and half by
employers. But, as all over Europe, the demographics are grim. Today, there are 2:8 Germans
aged 20 ¡ 59 to support each pensioneer. By 2030 there could be half as many. And the state
can’t just fork out money to …ll the gap” (op.cit p. 23).
And similarly, in Italy,
“The government’s strategy is to get private pension schemes and funds, now embryonic,
working properly …rst. Then, it hopes, it will be politically able to tackle the …nancing of the
pay-as-you-go state system. But Italy cannot a¤ord to wait. Its state’s spending on pensions is
more than 14% of GDP, almost double the European Union average. Every year, payouts far
exceed contributions by workers and employers” (op.cit. p.24).
Indeed, the aging of the population raises the burden of …nancing the existing pay-as-yougo national pension (old-age security) systems, because there is a relatively falling number of

2

workers that have to bear the cost of paying pensions to a relatively rising number of retirees.
Against this backdrop, there arose proposals to privatize social security, as a solution to the
economic sustainability of the existing systems.

This, by and large, means a shift from the

current pay-as-you-go systems to individual retirement accounts (or fully-funded systems). A
supposedly added bene…t to such a shift is the better return on the contributions to individual
accounts than to a pay-as-you-go national pension systems. However, a careful scrutiny of the
argument reveals that it is ‡awed, as neatly demonstrated by Paul Krugman (2002).
Nevertheless, the increased fragility of national pay-as-you-go pension. caused by the ageing of
the population, raises doubts among the young about whether the next generations will continue
to honor the implicit intergenerational social contract, or the political norm, according to which,
“I pay now for the pension bene…ts of the old, and the next young generation pays for my pension
bene…ts, when I get old”. These doubts are, after all, not unfounded, for there will indeed be
more pensioneers per each young worker of the next generation, and hence each one of the young
workers will have to pay more in order to honor the implicit social contract. With such doubts,
the political power balance may indeed shift towards scaling down the pay-as-you-go system,
encouraging the establishment of supplemental individual retirement accounts. Such accounts
are, by their very nature, fully funded, so that they are not directly a¤ected by the ageing of the
population

1

Naturally, the existing old generation opposes any scaling down of the pay-as-you-go system,
because it stands to lose pension bene…ts (without enjoying the reduction in the social security contributions). This opposition can, however, be softened, or altogether removed, if the
1

Naturally , the aging of the population has some bearing on individual retirement accounts too through its
general-equilibrium e¤ects on the return to capital (stemming from the change in the capital-labor ratio).

3

government creates a budget de…cit in order to support the social security system and allow it
not to scale down the pension bene…ts to the current old, so as to fully o¤set the reduction in
social security contributions, or even allow it to maintain these bene…ts intact. (Of course, this
de…cit will be carried over to the future, with its debt service smoothed over the next several
generations.)
But, here stand in the way the restrictions self-imposed by the European Union in the Stability and Growth Pact which put a ceiling on the current …scal de…cit.2

As Guido Tabellini

(forthcoming) puts it:
“the current formulation of the Stability and Growth Pact is problematic.

The Pact now

emphasizes the budget de…cit, but neglects the longer term generational imbalances.

For in-

stance, consider a pension reform that gradually but permanently reduces pension outlays in the
future, but immediately cuts social security contributions, so as to relax political constraints. A
transition from a pay-as-you-go towards a fully-funded private pension system could have this
e¤ect. Such a reform could run against the Stability Pact as currently formulated, no matter
how desirable from an economic point of view.”
In this paper we develop an analytical model in which a pay-as-you-go, old-age security system
is designed as a political-economy equilibrium. The aging of the population shakes the con…dence
of the young generation in the viability of the pay-as-you-go system. That is, the aging of the
population casts doubts, in the mind of the young generation, whether the national system will be
able to continue to pay the same current pension bene…ts ,when they retire. We investigate how
2

The idea of the Stability and Growth Pact is to prevent governments from running loose …scal policies at
the expense of the other euro-area countries. This could happen through either higher interest rates, if the ECB
o¤set the …scal laxity with tight monetary policy, or by higher risk premium on euro-area government bonds.
But, to the extent that the Pact in its current version, is an impediment to social security reform, it can cause
the deterioration of the …scal stance in the future and the social security system will move into de…cits.

4

the fragile viability of the pay-as-you-go system (brought about by aging of the population) can
shift the equilibrium towards scaling down this …scal system (thereby encouraging the emergence
of individual retirement accounts). We further examine how lifting the ceiling on …scal de…cits
can politically facilitate such a scaling down of pay-as-you-go systems.3
The organization of the paper is as follows.

Section 2 develops an analytical model of

a political-economy design of an old-age social security system.

Section 3 explores how the

con…dence of the young generation a¤ects the size of this system. Section 4 studies how …scal
de…cit constraints a¤ect the privatization of social security. Section 5 concludes with empirical
implications.

2

A Political-Economy Design Of Social Security

Consider a standard overlapping generations model in which each generation lives for two periods:
a working period and a retirement period. Following Saint-Paul (1994) and Razin and Sadka
(1995), we assume a stylized economy in which there are two types of workers: skilled workers
who have high productivity and provide one e¢ciency unit of labor per unit of labor time, and
unskilled workers who provide only q < 1 e¢ciency units of labor per unit of labor time. Workers
have one unit of labor time during their …rst period of life, but are born without skills and thus
with low productivity.

Each worker chooses whether to acquire an education and become a

skilled worker, or else remain unskilled. After the working period, individuals retire, with their
consumption funded by private savings and social security pension, discussed below.
There is a continuum of individuals, characterized by an innate ability parameter, e which
3

Razin ,Sadka and Swagel (2002) deal with a di¤erent issue related to ageing populations. They analyze how
the willingless of a falling number of young workers to support an increasing number of retirees is a¤ected.

5

is the time needed to acquire an education. By investing e units of labor time in education, a
worker becomes skilled, after which the remaining (1 ¡ e) units of labor time provide an equal
amount of e¤ective labor in the balance of the …rst period. Less capable individuals require more
time to become skilled and thus …nd education more costly in terms of lost income (education is
a full-time activity). We assume positive pecuniary costs of acquiring skills, °, which is not tax
deductible. The cummulative distribution function of innate ability is denoted by G(:) with the
support being the interval [0; 1]. The density function is denoted by g = G0 .
If an individual with an innate ability level e (henceforth an e individual) acquires skill, then
her income is (1 ¡¿ )w(1 ¡c) ¡ °, whereas if she remains unskilled her income is (1 ¡¿)qw, where
w is the wage rate per e¢ciency unit of labor and ¿ is the social security contribution (tax) rate.
Therefore, there exists a cuto¤ level, e¤, such that those with education cost parameter below e¤
will invest in education and become skilled, whereas everyone else remains unskilled. The cuto¤
level is determined by the equality between the return to education and the cost of education
(including lost income):
(1 ¡ ¿)w(1 ¡ e¤ ) ¡ ° = (1 ¡ ¿)qw:
Rearranging terms gives the cuto¤ level in the education decision:

e¤ = 1 ¡ q ¡ °=(1 ¡ ¿ )w:

(1)

To obtain analytical results, we use a speci…cation in which factor prices are not variable.
Thus we assume a linear production function in which output, Y, is produced using labor, L,
and capital, K:
Y = wL + (1 + r)K:
6

(2)

The wage rate, w and the gross (before depreciation) rental price of capital, 1+ r, are determined
by the marginal productivity conditions for factor prices:

w = @Y =@L and 1 + r = @Y=@K:

These conditions are already substituted into the production function. For simplicity, we assume
that capital fully depreciates at the end of the production process. The linearity of the production
function can arise as an equilibrium outcome through either international capital mobility or
factor price equalization in the presence of goods trade. The two types of labor are assumed to
be perfect substitutes in production in terms of e¢ciency units of labor input.
We assume that the population grows at a rate of n.

Each individual’s labor supply is

assumed to be …xed, so that the social security tax does not distort individual labor supply
decisions at the margin. The total labor supply does, however, depend on the income tax rate,
as this a¤ects the cut-o¤ ability, e¤ , and thus the mix of skilled and unskilled individuals in the
economy. In period t, the total labor supply is given by:

Lt =

½Z

e¤t
0

(1 ¡ e)dG + q[1 ¡

= ¶(e¤t )N0(1 + n)t ;

G(e ¤t )]]

¾

No(1 + n)t
(3)

where No(1 + n) t is the size of the working population in period t (with No being the number
of young individuals in period 0), and ¶(e ¤t ) =

R e¤t
0

(1 ¡ e)dG + q(1 ¡ G(e ¤t )) is the average (per

worker) labor supply in period t. This speci…cation implies that for each e and t, the number of
individuals in period t with an innate ability parameter less than or equal to e is (1 + n)t times

7

the number of such individuals in period 0.
There is a pay-as-you-go, old age social security system by which the taxes collected from
the young (working) population are earmarked to …nance a pension-bene…t to the old (retired)
population. Thus, the bene…t, bt, paid to each individual in period t, must satisfy the following
pay-as-you-go budget constraint:

btNo(1 + n)t¡1 = ¿ t wLt = ¿ t w¶(e ¤t )No (1 + n)t ;

where ¿ t is the social security tax in period t. Dividing through by No(1+n)t¡1 yields an explicit
formula for the pension bene…t:
bt = ¿ twl(e¤t )(1 + n)

(4)

In each period, the bene…t of the social-security system accrues only to the old, whereas the
burden (the social- security taxes) are borne by the young. Then, one may wonder why would
not the young, who outnumber the old in a growing economy, drive the tax and the bene…t down
to zero in a political-economy equilibrium. We appeal to a sort of an implicit intergenerational
social contract which goes like this: “I, the young, pay now for the pension bene…ts of the old;
and you, the young of the next generation, will pay for my pension bene…t, when I grow old and
retire”. With such a contract in place, the young in period t are willing to politically support
a social security tax, ¿ t , which is earmarked to pay the old in period t, a pension bene…t of
bt , because they expect the next young generation in period t + 1 to honor the implicit social
contract and pay them a bene…t bt+1 which is equal to bt , the pension bene…t that they actually
paid to the old.

8

Because factor prices are constant over time, the economy is always at a steady state. We
henceforth drop the time subscript t. For any social security tax rate, ¿ , equations (1) and (4)
determine the functions e¤ = e ¤(¿ ) and b = b(¿).

Denote by W (e; ¿ ; p) the expected lifetime

income of a young e-individual:

W (e; ¿ ; p) =

8
>
>
< (1 ¡ ¿)w(1 ¡ e) ¡ ° + pb(¿)=1 + r
>
>
:

(1 ¡ ¿)wq + pb(¿ )=(1 + r)

for e · e¤(¿ )

(5)

¤

f or e ¸ e (¿):

The parameter p is the probability assigned by a young individual to the possibility that the
next young generation will indeed honor the implicit intergenerational social contract and pay
the pension bene…t, b, that is paid now to the current old.4
In each period, the political economy equilibrium for the social security tax, ¿ (and the ensuing
pension bene…t, b), is determined by majority voting among the young and old individuals alive
in this period. The objective of the old is quite clear: so long as raising the social security tax
rate, ¿ generates more revenues, and consequently, a higher pension bene…t, b they are all for it.
The voting of the young is less clearcut. Because a young individual pays a tax bill of ¿w(1 ¡ e)
or ¿ wq, depending on her skill level, and receives an expected bene…t of pb=(1 + r), in present
value terms, she must weigh her tax bill against her expected bene…t. She votes for raising the
tax rate, if @W=@¿ > 0, and for lowering it, if @W=@¿ < 0. Note that:

@ 2W (e; ¿ ; p)=@ e@¿ =

8
>
>
< w for e < e¤(¿ )

4

>
>
: 0 f or e > e¤(¿ ):

(6)

We assume for simplicity that the indirect utility function (with …rst and second period consumptions as its
arguments are linearly homogenous. Therefore ,the indirect utility function is linear in life-time income, implying
risk-neutrality. Hence the expected life-time income of a young individual is a relevant indicator of welfare.

9

Therefore, if @W=@¿ > 0 for some e o, then @W=@¿ > 0 for all e > e o; and, similarly, if @W=@¿ < 0
for some eo, then @W=@¿ < 0 for all e<e0 . This implies that if an increase in the social security
tax rate bene…ts a particular young (working) individual (because the increased expected pension
bene…t outweigh the increase in the tax bill) then all young individuals who are less able than
her (that is, those who have a higher cost-of-education parameter, e), must also gain from this
tax increase. Similarly, if a social security tax increase hurts a certain young individual (because
the increased expected pension bene…t does not fully compensate for the tax hike), then it must
also hurt all young individuals who are more able than her.
As was already pointed out, the old always opt for a higher social security tax. But as long
as n > 0, the old are outnumbered by the young. To reach an equilibrium, the bottom end of
the skill distribution of the young population joins forces with the old to form a pro-tax coalition
of 50% of the population,whereas the top end of the skill distribution of the young population
forms a counter anti-tax coalition of equal size. In determining the outcome of majority voting
the pivot is a young individual, with an education-cost index denoted by eM , such that the young
who have an education-cost index below eM (namely, the anti-tax coaliton) form 50% of the total
population. The political-economy equilibrium tax rate maximizes the expected lifetime income
of this median voter.
Formally, eM is de…ned as follows. There are No(1 + n)t G(e M ) young individuals with costof-education parameter e · eM (more able than the median voter), and No(1 + n)t [1 ¡ G(eM )]
young individuals with cost-of-education parameter e ¸ eM (less able than the median voter).
There are also No (1 + n)t¡1 retired individuals in period t who always join the pro-tax coalition.

10

Hence, e M is de…ned implicitly by:

N0(1 + n)t G(eM ) = No(1 + n)t [1 ¡ G(em )] + No(1 + n)t¡1

(7)

Dividing this equation by No(1 + n)t¡1 and rearranging terms yield the cost-of-education parameter for the median voter:
eM = G¡1[(2 + n)=2(1 + n)]:

(8)

As noted, the political equilibrium tax rate, ¿; denoted by ¿ o (eM ; p), maximizes the expected
lifetime income of the median voter:

¿ o(e M ; p) = arg max W [eM ; ¿; p]
¿

(9)

The political-economy equilibrium tax rate, ¿ o(eM ; p), is implicitly de…ned by the …rst-order
condition:
@W [e M ; ¿ o(eM ; p); p]=@¿ = B[e M ; ¿ o(eM ; p); p] = 0;

(10)

and the second-order condition is:

@ 2W [eM ; ¿ o(eM ; p); p]=@¿ 2 = B¿ [eM ; ¿ o(eM ; p); p] · 0;

where B¿
is the partial derivative of B with respect to its second derivative.

11

(11)

3

The Social Security under Strain: Aging Population

The aging population puts the pay-as-you-go, old-age social security systems under strain. The
burden of …nancing the pension bene…ts to the old falls on fewer young shoulders, when population ages, as we have already pointed out. Consequently, the con…dence of the young, who
currently pay the social security taxes which …nance the pension bene…ts to the old, in the future
sustainability of the implicit social contract begins to falter. We capture this drop in con…dence
by assuming that p, the probability, assigned by the young to the possibility that they will receive
a pension bene…t will remain equal to the pension bene…t that they pay now to the old, declines.
In order to …nd the e¤ect of the survivial probability of the social contract, p, on the equilibrium social security tax rate, ¿ o(e M ; p); di¤erentiate equation (10) totally with respect to p to
conclude that
@¿ o(eM ; p)=@p = ¡Bp[e M ; ¿ o(eM ; p); p]=B¿ [eM ; ¿ o(eM ; p); p];

(12)

where Bp is the partial derivative of B with respect to its third argument.

Because -B¿ is

nonnegative [see the second-order condition, equation (10)], it follows that the sign of @¿ o=@p is
the same as the sign of Bp: It also follows from equation (10) that Bp = @ 2W=@p@¿ . Employing
equation (5) we …nd that:

Bp [eM ; ¿ o(e M ; p); p] = @ 2 W[eM ; ¿ o(e M ; p); p]=@p@¿
= [db[¿ o(eM ; p)]=d¿ ]=(1 + r):

(13)

Naturally, no one will vote for raising the social security tax if db=dt < 0, because in such a
case when the social security tax is raised the pension-bene…t falls. Put it di¤erently, a political12

economy equilibrium will never be located on the “wrong” side of the La¤er curve, where a tax
rate hike lowers revenue. This can also be seen formally. From equation (5), we conclude that

B(e; ¿ ; p) = @W (e; ¿ ; p)=@¿ =

8
>
>
< ¡w(1 ¡ e) + [p=(1 + r)]db(¿ )=d¿] f or e · e¤(¿ )
>
>
:

:

(14)

¡wq + fp=(1 + r)][db(¿ )=d¿] f or e = e (¿ )
¤

Hence, when the lifetime income of the median voter is maximized that is, when B = 0 [see
equation 10], we have

db[(¿ 0 (eM ; p)]=d¿ =

8
>
>
< w(1 ¡ eM )(1 + r)=p if eM 5 e¤(¿ )
>
>
:

:

(15)

¤

wq(1 + r)=p if e M ¸ e (¿ )

Thus, it follows from equations (13) and (15), that Bp [eM ; ¿ o (eM ; p); p] ¸ 0, and hence, from
equation (12), that

@¿ o (eM ; p)=@p > 0:
We conclude that in the wake of the aging of the population the con…dence of the young
population in the future sustainability of the pay-as-you-go ,old-age social security system is
shaken, (that is, when p falls). Consequently, the public indeed votes for scaling down the social
security system (that is, for lowering ¿ and b). As a result, the young resort to supplemental
old-age savings, such as individual retirement accounts. Naturally, the old are worse-o¤ as a
result of reducing b. But, they are outvoted by the young, whose attitude for lowering ¿ has
turned intensely stronger, following the reduction in their con…dence that they will get the same
b that they vote to pay for the current old, when they themselves retire.
13

4

Lifting the Ceiling on Fiscal De…cit

The old naturally continue to oppose the (partial) transition from a pay-as-you-go, old age
social security system to individual retirement accounts, because they lose some of their pension
bene…ts.

They also have a strong moral claim that they contributed their fair share to the

social security sysytem, when they were young, with the implicit social understanding that they
would be entitled to receive pension bene…ts upon retirement. Their morally justi…ed opposition
may be accomodated, in part or in full, if the government can make a debt-…nanced transfer to
the social security sysytem, so as to allow the system to pay pension bene…ts in excess of the
social security tax revenues. This de…cit is carried forward to the future, and its debt-service
is smoothed over the next few generations, so that its future tax implications for the current
young generation is negligible. This, of course, requires some relaxation of any restrictions of
the sorts imposed by the Stabilization and Growth Pact in the EU. For simplicity, suppose that
the government makes a transfer to the social security system at the amount that is required to
keep the pension bene…ts for the current old intact, despite the reduction in the social security
tax rate.
Speci…cally when ¿ falls, then the b in equation (4), that is …nanced by this ¿ , falls as well.
But, we assume that the government compensates the old generation, so as to maintain the total
pension bene…ts intact. Therefore, despite the fall in b, the old are indi¤erent to the reduction in
¿ (and, consequently in b). Thus, the outcome of the majority voting is e¤ectively determined
by the young only. The median voter is now median among the young population only. This
median voter has a lower cost-of education index than before, that is, eM falls.
In order to …nd the e¤ect of a fall in eM on the political-economy equlibrium social security

14

tax rate, ¿ o(e M ; p), we follow the same procedure as in the preceeding section, and conclude that:

@ ¿=@eM = ¡BeM [eM ; ¿ o(eM ; p); p]=B¿ [eM ; ¿ o(eM ; p); p];

(16)

where, as before, the sign of @¿ =@ eM is the same as the sign of Be M , because B¿ · 0: Note that
Be M = @ 2 W(e; ¿; p)=@eM @¿ , [see equation (10). Therefore, it follows from equation (5) that

Be M [e M ; ¿ 0(eM ; p); p] =

8
>
>
< w for e M < e¤ (¿)

>
>
: 0 for eM > e¤ (¿)

:

(17)

Thus, we conclude that @¿=@eM is nonnegative: it is positive when the median voter is a skilled
individual (that is, when e M < e¤), and zero when the median voter is an unskilled individual
(that is, when eM > e¤). Hence, a decline in eM decreases (or leaves intact) the social security
tax ¿ o (eM ; p) .
The rationale for this result is starightforward. All unskilled people have the same expected
lifetime income, regardless of their cost-of-education parameter, e.

Therefore, their attitude

towards the (¿; b) pair is the same for all of them. Hence, the change in the median voter has
no consequences on the outcomes of the majority voting when this median voter is an unskilled
individual. For skilled individuals, expected lifetime income increases when the education cost
parameter, e, declines. Because, the social security system is progressive with respect to the cost
of education parameter, the net bene…t from it (that is the present value of the expected pension
bene…t minus the social security tax) declines, as expected lifetime income increases (that is, as
e falls). Therefore, a decline in the cost-of-education parameter of the median voter, eM , lowers
the political-economy equilibrium social security tax and pension bene…t.
15

Thus, relaxing the …scal constraints of the sorts imposed by the stability and Growth Pact in
the European Union may faciliate a (partial) transition from a national pay-as-you-go, old-age
social security system to a fully funded private pension system. Such a transition may enhance
the sustainability of the national system and boost the con…dence in its viability. But this comes
at a cost of a lesser degree of redistribution, which is an inherent feature of a national system.

5

Conclusion

The idea of the Stability and Growth Pact is to prevent governments from running loose …scal
policies at the expense of the other euro-area countries.

This could happen through higher

interest rates if the ECB o¤set the …scal laxity with tight monetary policy, or through higher risk
premium on euro-area government bonds. But the Pact neglects long term …scal considerations
because it creates an impediment to the social-security reforms which can improve the …scal
balance in the future.
We emphasize in the paper that the aging population shakes the con…dence in the economic
viability of pay-as-you-go, old-age social security systems. We demonstrate how in a politicaleconomy framework this shaken con…dence leads to the down-sizing of the social system and the
emergence of supplemental individual retirement accounts. Indeed, a study by Razin, Sadka and
Swagel (2002) …nds a negative correlation between the dependency ratio (which increases with
the aging of the population) and labor tax rates in a 1970s-1990s sample that includes twelve
Western European countries and the United States. Similarly, a negative correlation was found
between the dependency ratio and per capita social tranfers. These …ndings are consistent with
the prediction of the theory that this paper develops, that aging leads to the down-sizing of the
16

pay-as-you-go …scal systems.

6

References
Razin, Assaf, Efraim Sadka and Phillip Swagel (2002), “The Aging Population and the Size

of the Welfare State”, Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), August, pp. 900-918.
Razin, Assaf and Efraim Sadka (1995), “Resisting Migration: Wage Rigidity and Income
Distribution”, American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings, May, 312-316.
Saint-Paul, Gilles(1994), “Unemployment, Wage Rigidity and Returns to Education”, European
Economic Review, 38(3/4), April, 535-544.
Tabellini, Guido (forthcoming), “Principles of Policy Making in the European Union: An
Economic Perspective,” CESifo Economic Studies.
Krugman, Paul(2002), “Notes on Social Security ”, in www.wws.princeton.edu/~pkrugman/.

17

