                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        HOME AND HOST COUNTRY EFFECTS OF FDI


                                            Robert E. Lipsey


                                          Working Paper 9293
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9293


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




This paper was prepared for a conference of the International Seminar on International Trade (ISIT), on
“Challenges to Globalization,” held in Lidingö, Sweden, in May 2002. I am indebted to Li Xu for help in
searching for, assembling, and reviewing the many papers discussed here. Robert E. Baldwin, of the
University of Wisconsin, Andrew Bernard, of Yale University, Vanessa Strauss-Kahn, of INSEAD, and
Birgitta Swedenborg, of the Center for Business and Policy Studies, of Stockholm, made helpful comments
on earlier versions of this paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Robert E. Lipsey. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Home and Host Country Effects of FDI
Robert E. Lipsey
NBER Working Paper No. 9293
October 2002
JEL No. F21, F23, O01, O03, O04
                                           ABSTRACT

       Fears that production abroad would cause home country exports and employment to fall have
not been confirmed by evidence. Multinational operations have led to a shift by parent firms in the
United States toward more capital- intensive and skill- intensive domestic production. However,
that type of reallocation does not appear to have taken place in Japan or Sweden.
       Within host countries, foreign- owned firms almost always pay higher wages than
domestically- owned firms. It is not always the case that they cause wages in locally- owned firms
to rise, but their presence does generally raise wage levels in host countries.
       Foreign firms generally have higher productivity than local firms, but the evidence for
spillovers to local firms’ productivity is mixed. It seems to depend on host country policies and
environments and on the technological levels of industries and of host- country firms. The same
mixture of impacts applies to host- country growth in general.
       The impact of FDI in promoting the growth of host country exports and linkages to the
outside world is clearer. The major role of FDI in the transformation of host economies from being
exporters of raw materials and foods to being exporters of manufactures, and in some cases
relatively high- tech manufactures, is also evident in some cases. Much of the impact is from the
transfer of knowledge of world markets and of ways of fitting into worldwide production networks,
not visible in standard productivity measurements.



Robert E. Lipsey
National Bureau of Economic Research
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor, Suite 5318
New York, NY 10012
(212) 817-7961
rlipsey@gc.cuny.edu
                          Home and Host Country Effects of FDI

I. Introduction

        Protests against “globalization” involve a wide spectrum of discontents with modern life

and market economies. They include the growth of international trade and specialization, and

the disruptions of traditional or established economic practices they entail. They include also the

actions of intergovernmental agencies, such as the ITO, the IMF, the World Bank, and the

regional development banks. And it is rare that multinational firms are not mentioned, as the

presumed leaders and chief beneficiaries of globalization.

        There are also more specific accusations against multinationals. Many evils are alleged.

They depress wages and employment at home by moving production abroad. They depress

wages in their host countries by exploiting helpless workers. They stifle host country growth by

displacing local firms and obstructing their technological progress. Anyone who believes these

fears are a new phenomenon should read the chapter on “The Reactions to Foreign Investment”

in Wilkins (1989), where the author describes how “In the mid-1880s and into the 1890s, a

passionate, hitherto unmatched fury mounted against foreign investment in the United States” (p.

566).

        To the extent that opposition to globalization stems from different values that view as

bads traditional economic goods such as higher consumption or the growth of production and

exchange, I do not attempt to deal with them. Many of the other accusations are framed in vague

terms. I attempt to appraise them by classifying the effects of multinational operations under

several homogeneous headings and reviewing what research has concluded with respect to each

topic. On home country effects, I summarize the findings on home country exports and home




                                                                                                   1
country factor demand. On host country effects, I discuss wages, productivity, exports, and the

introduction of new industries.

       There are two concepts of FDI and two matching ways of measuring it. One is that FDI

is a particular form of the flow of capital across international boundaries from home countries to

host countries. These flows give rise to a particular form of international assets for the home

countries, specifically, the value of holdings in entities, typically corporations, controlled by a

home country resident or in which a home country resident holds a certain share of the voting

rights. The other concept of direct investment is that it is a set of economic activities or

operations carried out in a host country by firms controlled or partly controlled by firms in some

other (home) country. These activities are, for example, production, employment, sales, the

purchase and use of intermediate goods and fixed capital, and the carrying out of research.

       The former of these two concepts is the one reflected in balance of payments accounts.

The measures of it, flows and stocks of direct investment, are the only virtually ubiquitous

quantitative indicators of FDI. However, if the effects of FDI stem from the activity of the

foreign-owned firms in their host countries, the balance of payments measures have many

defects for any examination of these impacts. The activity is frequently not in the same industry

as the stock, or not in the same host country, or has not originated from the same home country

(Lipsey, 2002b, United Nations, 2001). For this reason, wherever possible, I emphasize studies

based on activity, such as production or employment, rather than those based on balance of

payments stocks and flows.

       Production from foreign direct investment, that is, production in enterprises located

outside the country of residence of their owners, reached a little over 10 per cent of total world

output in 2000, by a rough estimate. That compares with about 5 per cent in 1985 and 6 per cent




                                                                                                      2
in 1990. The increase has been relatively rapid in the 1990s, particularly because countries other

than the traditional direct investors have been raising their share of the world’s outward direct

investment.

II. What Happens When a Foreign Direct Investment Is Made?

       Much of the earlier economics literature on foreign direct investment, but not the

business literature, treated it as a part of the general theory of international capital movements,

based on differences among countries in the abundance and cost of capital. If country A makes a

direct investment in country B, there is an addition to the physical capital of country B, and new

production capacity is created there. The investing firm in A will have chosen to use some of its

capital in B instead of in A. If the output is tradable, some production that now takes place in

country B may replace production that formerly took place in country A. The investing firm

may have reduced its production in its home country, A, possibly by shutting down or selling a

plant, and opened up a new plant abroad to serve the same market.

       A different possibility is that a firm in country A makes a direct investment in country B,

but the stock of physical capital and the level of production are unchanged in both countries.

Country A owners and managers in industry X, perhaps using the skills they have acquired in

home production, buy out country B owners with lower skills in that industry and operate the

industry X plants in country B more efficiently than before. Country B owners use their capital,

released by the buyout, in other industries. They might, for instance, lend it to other owners and

managers in country B, skilled in industry Y, to enable them to buy out less competent owners in

that industry in country A. No net movement of physical or financial capital is necessarily

implied, although it could take place.




                                                                                                      3
       This latter picture belongs to what Markusen (1997) and Markusen and Maskus (2001)

have called the “knowledge-capital model” of the multinational enterprise. It is related also to

what Caves (1996, Chapter 1) refers to as the dependence of multinational enterprises on

“proprietary assets,” or “firm-specific” assets. And it also fits with Romer’s distinction (1993a)

and (1993b) between the roles in economic development of what he calls “ideas” in contrast to

“objects”. Caves (1996) traces the decline of the view that multinationals are principally

arbitrageurs of financial or physical capital to Hymer (1960) and to Kindleberger (1969), who

adopted many of Hymer’s ideas. Dunning (1970) summarized their view as being that “… the

modern multi-national company is primarily a vehicle for the transfer of entrepreneurial talent

rather than financial resources.” (p. 321).

        The capital flow story depends on the advantages of countries as locations for

production, and changes in such advantages. The entrepreneurship story, on the other hand,

hinges on characteristics of firms and their managers, rather than those of countries. Capital

flows imply changes in the industrial composition of production and employment in home and

host countries. In industries producing tradables, they imply shifts in the composition of exports

and imports. Entrepreneurship explanations contain implications for the ownership of

production, but not necessarily for the location of production.

       It is desirable to distinguish the location choices within firms from the location choices

for industries in the aggregate. If, for example, because of a decline in communication costs, or

an increase in the severity of currency fluctuations, firms in all countries decided to diversify

their production locations, each firm in each country might shift production from home to

foreign locations through FDI. However, there might be no change in the geographical location

of production as a whole, because in each country, the outward shift of home country firms’




                                                                                                     4
production might be balanced by the inward shift of foreign firms' production. Or there could be

a general shift of production toward markets in each industry.

       If there is a geographical relocation of production, the force behind it might be a change

in factor prices, such as a rise in the home country price of labor, or a rise in the home country

price of a natural resource. In that case, we would expect a shift in the production of labor-

intensive or resource-intensive goods away from the home country, both within firms and in the

aggregate. That might be reflected in a decline in firm and home country exports, but it might

also be the case that it was the decline of home country exports, or the expectation of such a

decline, that precipitated the production shift. It is difficult to distinguish between trade shifts

produced by exogenous production location decisions and location shifts produced by exogenous

shifts, or potential shifts in trade. The difficulty of that distinction has haunted most analyses of

home country impacts.

       There is some indication that the exchange of ownership has become a larger part of FDI

flows over time and particularly during the 1990s. One piece of evidence is that the value of

mergers and acquisitions has risen relative to the value of FDI flows and relative to world output

(United Nations, 2000, Chapter IV). Most of this merger and acquisition activity has taken place

among the developed countries. The rising trend seems to reflect an increase in mergers and

acquisitions in general, rather than one mainly in international, or cross-border ones: the

international share appears to have been relatively constant since the late 1980s (ibid, p. 107).

Much of this activity has taken the form of exchanges of stock, where relatively little capital

flow is involved.

       The idea that what appears to be a movement of production and employment may

represent mainly a substitution of one national ownership for another can be illustrated by the




                                                                                                        5
changes within the U.S. manufacturing sector. Between 1977 and 1997, the share of U.S.

manufacturing parent firms in U.S. manufacturing output fell from 65 to 55 per cent. Almost all

of that share was taken over by U.S. manufacturing affiliates of foreign firms, which produced

3&1/2 per cent of U.S. manufacturing output in 1977, but 12&1/2 per cent in 1997. The U.S.

parent share of U.S. manufacturing employment declined from 60 per cent in 1977 to 46 per cent

in 1997, while the share of U.S. manufacturing affiliates of foreign parents rose from 3&1/2 per

cent to over 12 per cent. Most of the reduction in U.S. parents’ manufacturing output and

employment were offset by an increase in foreign-owned affiliates output and employment. U.S.

and foreign firms were both internationalizing; each group was expanding in the other group’s

home region (Lipsey, 2002a).

       Behind the strong interest in some of the questions about effects of the

internationalization of firms’ production there are important policy issues. Should countries

promote or discourage the internationalization of their home country firms, or should policy be

neutral? Should countries encourage the entrance of foreign producers, or discourage it, leave

the decisions to market forces? Some of the early studies of U.S. direct investment abroad were

motivated by the belief that features of the U.S. taxation of corporations were important

inducements to foreign investment. That question may not have been settled, but the spread of

the practice of internationalization from firms based in the United States to those from many

other countries suggests that there were forces beyond any distortionary U.S. tax policies that

were driving these trends.




                                                                                                   6
III Home Country Effects of Outward FDI

a. Outward FDI and Home Country Exports

   Since the United States was the dominant outward direct investor in the period after World

War II, much of the debate about the home country consequences of FDI took place first there.

The debate over the possible substitution of U.S. firms’ foreign production for U.S. exports was

most intense during the time of worries about the balance of payments during the 1960s.

Curiously, earlier studies of U.S. foreign investment, such as Lewis (1938) and Madden, Nadler,

and Sauvain (1937), did not take up the export substitution issue, despite the high unemployment

levels of the 1930s. In the 1960s, there was a campaign against outward investment, largely

fueled by fears about effects on U.S. exports and, presumably, domestic employment, that was

supported by labor unions and culminated in the unsuccessful attempt to pass the Burke-Hartke

bill. What did ensue was, first, the “Voluntary Program of Capital Restraints,” from 1965 to

1967. That was followed by the compulsory Office of Foreign Direct Investment (OFDI)

regulations, specifically aimed at reducing the outflow of U.S. capital for direct investment in an

effort to “improve” the U.S. balance of payments. The focus of these regulations, which lasted

until 1974, was the outflow of capital, rather than the growth of U.S. firms’ production abroad,

and they therefore did not attempt to discourage the expansion of production abroad financed

from outside the United States (Lipsey, 1995, p. 16).

   The controversies of this period spawned a series of studies relating outward FDI to home

country exports. There are a number of different questions that can be asked, and they have not

always been clearly distinguished, although the implications of the answers to them differ

considerably. One set of questions is about the relationships within the individual investing firm.

One can ask (a) about the relation, for an individual parent firm, between its production in a host




                                                                                                   7
country and its exports to that country. Or one can ask (b) about the relation of a firm’s

production in a country to its exports to the world, taking account of the possibility that affiliate

exports to other countries might affect parent markets there. Or one can ask (c) about the

relation between a firm’s production in all foreign countries and its exports to the world, taking

account of all interrelationships between production abroad and exports.

       All of these are issues of firm strategy: how a firm chooses to serve markets around the

world. There are no necessary inferences to be drawn about effects on the firm’s home country

as a whole, without knowledge about how other firms in the home country or other countries

respond or react to the same stimuli.

       A second set of questions is about the relation of the aggregate of decisions by a

country’s firms about production abroad to home country exports in the same industry or in the

aggregate, or to home country or industry employment or employment of different types of labor.

These aggregate decisions incorporate the reactions of one firm in a country to the actions of

other firms.

       A third set of questions is about the relation between the decisions on the location of

production made by firms from all countries on the worldwide pattern of production, trade, and

employment, or on any particular countries’ position. One reason these questions are rarely

asked is that little is known about the outward FDI activities of about half or more of the world’s

direct investors, because most countries do not inquire into what their firms do outside their

countries’ borders.

       The basic problem with studies of these questions has always been the close connection

between the factors that determine a firm’s exports and those that determine its foreign direct

investment. A country’s most competent and successful firms tend to export and to invest in




                                                                                                        8
production abroad, and the same is generally true of the most successful industries. All the

research indicates an awareness of the problem, and the studies attempt to deal with it, usually in

ways found unsatisfactory by critics.

       The most common type of study was of the first question described above. Exports by a

firm or an aggregate of firms in an industry to a foreign market were related to the firm’s

investment or production or employment in that market. The interrelations between exports and

investment were dealt with by assumption, as in the case of the Reddaway reports that in the

absence of a British-owned plant in a market, the alternative was a foreign-owned plant of the

same size in the same industry (Reddaway et al, 1967 and 1968). That assumption essentially

guaranteed a positive, or complementary relationship between a firm’s exports and its foreign

production. In the other direction, Bergsten, Horst, and Moran (1978) described the assumptions

in Frank and Freeman (1975), and some in Hufbauer and Adler (1968), as assuming “…that

foreign investment can only displace U.S. exports” (p. 98). Their own analysis of questions 1a

and 1b, based on U.S. aggregate data, cautiously summarized, pointed to mainly complementary

relationships (pp. 93-96). The studies by Lipsey and Weiss (1981) and (1984), the first of

exports, by industry, to individual destinations, and second of total exports by individual U.S.

firms, concluded that exports and production abroad by U.S. firms were, for the most part,

complementary. A study using a later U.S. census of direct investment abroad found more

mixed results, mostly no relation, but where there was a significant relation, more frequently

positive than negative (Blomström, Lipsey, and Kulchycky, 1988).

       Two of the few studies based on access to the confidential individual firm data collected

by the U.S. Department of Commerce were Brainard (1997) and Brainard and Riker (1997). The

focus of the Brainard and Riker study was on employment, rather than exports, but it is relevant




                                                                                                   9
here because employment issues lie behind much of the interest in exports. A feature of these

studies, in contrast to many earlier ones of the United States and Sweden, is a more standard

definition of complementarity and substitution, relating employment changes to wage changes in

various locations. The limitation of this definition of complementarity is that it excludes home

country responses to variables other than the price of labor. These might include income

growth, trade restrictions, policies toward direct investment, or changes in non- labor costs of

producing outside the home country. Brainard and Riker concluded that while there is some

competition between a manufacturing firm’s employment at home and that abroad, the degree of

substitution is low. Mostly, competition takes place among workers in affiliates in different

developing countries, “…particularly in low value added industries” (p. 17). Brainard (1997),

testing the importance of factor price differences as an explanation for the location of foreign

operations, dismisses it in favor of explanations based on the advantages of proximity to markets,

among other factors. She suggests that “the overall complementarity between trade and affiliate

sales” is attributable to the fact that both “…are increasing in market size and intellectual

property advantages…” (p. 539).

       A study along similar lines for Swedish firms, based on individual firm data, (Braconier

and Ekholm (2000) produced different results. There was evidence of “…a substitutionary

relationship between parent employment in Sweden and affiliate employment in other high-

income locations…” but no “… evidence of a relationship in either direction between parent

firm employment and affiliate employment in low- income locations” (p. 459).

       Concerns in Sweden about home country effects of FDI led to a series of studies by

Swedenborg (1973), (1979), (1982), (1985), and (2001), and by Swedenborg et al. (1988),

examining this question, among others. A important and innovative feature of Swedenborg




                                                                                                   10
(1979) was the use of 2SLS to attempt to deal with the endogeneity of exports and the mutual

determination with investment. That procedure was carried into her later work as well. The

latest of her papers (Swedenborg, 2001), in addition, takes advantage of the longitudinal aspect

of the Swedish data to examine the effects on firm exports of changes in a firm’s foreign

production over time. She concludes that “…the enormous growth of foreign production by

Swedish firms in the thirty-year period, 1965-94 has not, in itself, had a negative effect on

parent-company exports” (p. 121). These studies examine parent company exports to individual

countries as well as total parent exports. Blomström, Lipsey, and Kulchycky (1988) used total

Swedish exports and changes in them, rather than parent exports as the dependent variables, and

found mainly positive relationships with production abroad and its growth, although there was

one major industry, metal manufacturing, in which a negative relationship was evident (pp. 268-

269).

        As data on Japanese multinationals have become available for research in recent years,

similar calculations have been carried out, with both parent exports (Lipsey, Ramstetter, and

Blomström (1999) and Japanese industry exports (Lipsey, Ramstetter, and Blomström (2000a) as

dependent variables. In the minority of industries where any relationship between exports and

overseas production can be discerned, the relation was positive, as in the United States and

Sweden. The relationships for the three countries are compared and summarized in Lipsey,

Ramstetter, and Blomström (2000b).

        With the rise in unemployment levels in Europe and the increase in outward FDI by

European firms, the possible connection between the two has become a popular subject for study

in Europe. In a study of bilateral trade and direct investment relationships for France, Fontagné

and Pajot (2002) found complementarity between investment flows and net exports both for




                                                                                                 11
countries as a whole and for individual industries, and concluded that much of the

complementarity between countries came from spillovers among industries. Studies by Chédor

and Mucchielli(1998) and by Chédor, Mucchielli, and Soubaya (2002), the latter based on panel

data for individual French firms, and the former concerned with effects of developed countries’

direct investment in developing countries, both produced conclusions that investment and home-

country exports were complementary.

       A recent survey of Australian firms’ investment overseas concluded that “…outward

direct investment by Australian firms is mainly tapping into new growth and market

opportunities for firms, rather than substituting for, or displacing, operations in Australia”

(Australia, Productivity Commission, 2002, p. 24). The questions about effects on employment

and production in Australia both produced more than 70 per cent “no change” answers, but of

those who reported changes increases were more common than decreases. The question on

effects on exports from Australia also yielded a majority of “no change,” but of those who

reported an effect, the overwhelming majority reported an increase (ibid, p. 25).

       There have been many studies for other countries, mostly examining the relation of firms’

or industries’ foreign production to firm or industry exports. While there are some examples of

negative associations, they are not frequent, and positive associations are more common. What

is noticeable in a review of past studies, but is not commented on so often, is the frequency of

results indicating no association in either direction. The elements of gravity equations are

consistently significant in the expected direction, while the influence of FDI production is spotty,

varies among host countries, industries, and types of parent company exports. Bergsten, Horst,

and Moran (1978) refer to the relationship as “haphazard” (p. 97) and to “…the presence of

complementary and substitutional relations” (p. 98). Lipsey and Weiss (1984) found mostly




                                                                                                   12
complementarity, but in half the industries there were no significant relationships at all.

Blomström, Lipsey, and Kulchycky (1988) reported that “The predominant relationship between

production in a country by affiliates of Swedish and U.S. firms and exports to that country from

Sweden and the United States is something between neutrality and complementarity” (p. 275).

Swedenborg, in her latest paper, concludes that “…the net effect of foreign production is

probably close to zero” (Swedenborg, 2001, p. 117).

       One way of interpreting these findings is that there are no universal relationships between

production abroad by a firm or a country’s firms and exports by the investing firms, their

industries, and the country as a whole. There are circumstances in which foreign production

tends to add to exports and circumstances in which it tends to reduce exports. The effect may

depend on whether the foreign operations’ relation to home operations is “horizontal” or

“vertical,” a distinction stressed by Markusen and Maskus (2001). It may also depend on

whether the foreign operations are in goods industries or in service industries, are in developed

or developing countries, or are in industries with plant level or firm level economies of scale.

       It seems plausible that horizontal FDI should tend to substitute for parent exports, at least

in manufacturing, if not in services, and that vertical FDI might tend to add to parent exports.

But there is not much evidence for this conjecture. It is difficult to classify actual foreign

operations into these theoretically neat categories. A firm’s foreign operations usually include

some activities similar to those of the parent, but the industry identifications in most data do not

distinguish among segments of an industry. The foreign operation may omit some parent

activities, because they are performed for the affiliate by the parent. And the foreign operation

may include some activities that are not performed by the parent, because they are provided by

the home country’s infrastructure or by a network of outside suppliers that does not exist in the




                                                                                                   13
host country. This distinction between horizontal and vertical FDI is more useful for thinking

about multinational behavior or constructing models of it than for empirical research.

       A problem with most studies of effects of FDI on home country exports is that the terms,

“substitution” and “complementarity” are not clearly defined. That is partly because no policy

measures are specified as determining the changes in investment or production. It is rare to find

a clear counterfactual to which the existing situation is being compared.

       The problem is illustrated by the example of a host-country tariff on imports that leads to

both a reduction or cessation of imports and the establishment of host- country production owned

by the former exporters. Higher local production is accompanied by reduced exports, an

apparent case of substitution. The implied counterfactual is the original level of exports. In fact,

the alternative to the establishment or expansion of host- country production may have been no

exports and no sales by the parent firm or its country. That counterfactual would lead to the

conclusion that the production and trade were either not related or were complementary, instead

of the apparent substitution that appears in the data.

       A possible interpretation of these studies is that foreign production by a firm or industry

has very little influence on exports from the parent firm or its home country. Mainly, trade is

determined by other factors, such as countries’ changing comparative advantages in production.

Direct investment is mainly about the ownership of production, not its location. What moves

from country to country when a direct investment takes place is not primarily physical capital or

production capacity, but rather intellectual capital, or techniques of production, unobserved and

unmeasured. There may be movements of physical or financial capital accompanying the

intellectual capital, but there need not be, and they are not the essence of the investment.




                                                                                                  14
b. FDI and Home Country Factor Demand

       Even if direct investment did not affect the location of production and had no effect on a

home country’s exports, it could influence home country factor demand and factor prices through

changes in the allocation of types of production within the firm. For example, multinationals

based in rich countries might allocate their more labor-intensive production to their affiliates in

poor countries, while concentrating their more capital-intensive or skill-intensive operations at

home. Large differences in capital intensity between U.S. (home) operations and affiliates in

developing countries were noted in Lipsey, Kravis and Roldan (1982), but the response of capital

intensity to labor costs was tested only among affiliates. If multinationals tended to allocate their

production in this way, their labor input per unit of home production should be lower than that of

non-multinational firms. Among multinational firms in an industry, larger affiliate output

relative to parent output should be associated with lower labor intensity and higher skill intensity

in home production. In a study based on 1982 data, that relationship for labor intensity,

measured by numbers of workers per unit of output, was found fairly consistently among

industries in Kravis and Lipsey (1988), and less consistently for skill intensity, as measured by

hourly wages. A similar calculation based on 1988 data (Lipsey, 1995), found the same negative

relation between affiliate net sales and parent employment, given the level of parent output.

When affiliate activity was divided between manufacturing and non-manufacturing operations, it

was the manufacturing operations that accounted for the negative relation to parent employment;

higher net sales by non-manufacturing affiliates were associated with higher parent employment,

given the level of parent output. In a later study covering the United States and Sweden,

Blomström, Fors, and Lipsey (1997) found that larger production in developing countries by a

U.S. firm was associated with lower labor intensity at home. In a further analysis of these data,




                                                                                                    15
Lipsey (2002a) found that the effects on parent factor use across all types of countries were

concentrated in the machinery and transport equipment industries. There were positive effects

on parent employment per unit of output in the machinery sectors and negative effects in

Transport Equipment.

        Swedish firms tended to use more labor per unit of output at home if they produced more

abroad. That might be because production abroad required supervisory and other auxiliary

employment at home. Or it might be that only the existence of foreign production enabled firms

in a small market such as Sweden to develop and support extensive headquarters and research

services. One explanation offered for the difference between Swedish and U.S. firms was that

the Swedish investments in developing countries were concentrated in import substitution

activities, and the affiliates exported little of their output, much less than U.S. affiliates. The

Swedish affiliates could not, therefore, be woven into a worldwide division of labor that took

account of factor price differences.

       A later paper added Japanese firms to these comparisons (Lipsey, Ramstetter, and

Blomström, 2000b). As in Swedish firms, higher levels of foreign output, given the level of

home output, led to higher employment at home per unit of home output, presumably for

supervision. It was suggested that Japanese firms could not easily shed redundant home-country

workers even if they had wished to do so.

       No explicit home country production functions were fitted in these studies. Therefore,

the variable for affiliate output incorporated the influence of any home country firm

characteristics that were associated with the size of affiliate production. Furthermore, most of

these results are from cross-sections. A different approach is taken by Slaughter (2000),

examining what he refers to as “MNE transfer,” the shift, in percentage terms, of activities from




                                                                                                      16
parents to their foreign affiliates. He asks whether such “transfer” causes “skill upgrading,”

increases in the share of non-production worker wages in industry total wage bills, in the

corresponding domestic U.S. industries.

       Slaughter fits translog cost functions to data on the share of non-production worker

wages in the total wage bills of 32 U.S. manufacturing industries, taking account of relative wage

rates for production and non-production workers, capital/labor ratios, and output. Various

measures of MNE transfer are added to these equations. All the transfer measures are based on

ratios of affiliate activity in U.S. MNEs to total activity in the United States in the industries of

the affiliates. The expectation of an effect on total industry skill levels is based on the fact that

the parents of the affiliates account for most of their respective industries.

       While higher investment in plant and equipment and higher industry output both led to

skill upgrading, increases in affiliate activity in host countries had no significant impact.

Slaughter concludes that his finding “…is inconsistent with models of MNEs in which affiliate

activities substitute for parent unskilled- labor- intensive activities” (p. 467). That conclusion is

reached despite the fact that there are no data for parent, rather than industry, skill levels, and

that the MNE transfer measure is not specific to transfers to low- wage countries.

       A different conclusion is reached by Head and Ries (2002) for the foreign operations of

Japanese firms. Their calculations on an industry basis, similar to those of Slaughter (2000) for

the United States, match his findings. The ratio of affiliate employment to the total of home and

affiliate employment in an industry does not significantly affect the share of non- production

worker wages in the total wage bill in the home country. However, once they move to a firm-

level analysis, they do find that a higher affiliate employment share in the multinational firm

produces a higher non-production worker wage share in the parent firm. That positive effect is




                                                                                                      17
associated with affiliate employment in low-wage countries; more employment in the United

States appears to have the opposite effect. Thus, overseas production in low-wage countries

seems to raise the parent firm’s demand for skilled workers at home relative to the demand for

unskilled workers.

       The contrast between industry and firm-level results suggests the possibility that

substitution among types of activities may take place not only between home and foreign

operations of a firm, but also between parent firms and non-multinational firms in the same

industry at home. That is a subject that has received very little attention, but deserves

investigation.



c. Home Country Exports and Home Country Multinationals’ Exports

       The idea that firms have comparative advantages separate from those of their home

countries has been illustrated by several episodes. One is the contrast between the export shares

of the United States and of US-based multinational firms. During the period from 1966 to 1987,

the US share of world exports of manufactured goods fell from 17 per cent to about 11 per cent,

a decline of a third. Over that same period, US- based multinational firms’ share of these

exports, from the parent companies and their overseas affiliates, was quite stable, ranging from

15&1/2 per cent to 18 percent, but ending up in 1987 about where it began in 1966. The way

this stability was achieved was that, as the world share of exports by the parent firms fell from 11

to 7&1/2 per cent, the share of the overseas affiliates of these companies, exporting from their

host countries, grew from under 5 to over 8 per cent. The US multinationals retained their shares

of world exports, while the United States as a country was losing a large part of its share,

because the multinationals’ share depended on their firm-specific advantages, and the




                                                                                                   18
multinationals could exploit their firm-specific advantages by producing in other countries

(Lipsey, 1995, pp. 12-13).

        The divergence between home countries and home country firms was not confined to the

United States. For example, as Japanese export shares fell after the currency revaluations in

1985, Japanese affiliate export shares increased enough to approximately offset the decline in the

country’s share. Swedish shares in world manufactured exports fell by almost a third between

1965 and 1990, but Swedish multinationals’ shares of world exports remained stable, or even

increased a little (ibid., pp. 14-15).

        For all these countries’ multinationals, foreign production was apparently not only a way

of exploiting their firm-specific assets in foreign markets, but also a way of protecting these

market shares against unfavorable home country developments. These might be exchange rate

appreciations, increases in home country wage levels, increases in taxes, or other changes that

reduced the geographical advantages of their home countries as locations for production.



IV. Host Country Effects of Inward FDI

a. Host Country Wages

        There are several ways in which the entrance or existence of foreign firms might affect

wages in the host countries where they operate. One is if these firms offer higher wages than are

paid by domestic firms. That possibility raises the question, dealt with in subsection 1, of

whether they do pay higher wages. Even if they did pay higher wages, there might be no overall

impact on wage levels if the higher wages simply reflected the selection by foreign firms among

workers, plants, or locations. They might select superior workers who would command high

wages from any employer, or acquire higher wage plants or firms, or concentrate their activities




                                                                                                  19
in high-wage industries or regions of a country. Thus, the second question, discussed in

subsection 2, is whether the payment of higher wages by foreign- owned firms, when it occurs,

results in higher wages in domestically- owned firms, or “wage spillovers.” The third question,

discussed in subsection 3, which I think is the most important from a policy point of view, is

whether the activities of foreign- owned firms cause wages in general to be higher, on average,

where they operate. That could be the result of the combination of higher wages in the foreign-

owned plants and wage spillovers to domestically- owned plants, but it could result from higher

wages paid by foreign- owned firms even if there were no wage spillovers, or negative

spillovers, to domestically- owned plants. It could also occur without any wage differential

between foreign – owned and domestically- owned operations if labor markets were sufficiently

competitive and the rise in demand for labor from foreign- owned operations forced all firms to

raise their wage levels equally.

       The measurement of wage levels is in some ways simpler than the measurement of

productivity levels, taken up in Section b. It has its own problems, however. Most of the data

are calculated as compensation/number of workers. Very few take account of hours of work,

probably most important outside manufacturing, but a possible source of mismeasurement in all

industries. Probably more important is that there are few sources of data that contain information

on the characteristics of workers, so that is impossible in most cases to distinguish between

differences in wage rates for identical workers and differences in labor quality.



        1. Wage comparisons

       It is rare to find a study of FDI and wages in any host country that does not find that

foreign-owned firms pay higher wages, on average, than at least privately-owned local firms.




                                                                                                 20
That is the case not only in developing countries, where most of the research has taken place, but

also in developed, high-wage countries. To some extent, the differential can be explained by the

industry composition of FDI, weighted toward relatively high-wage industry sectors. However,

the differential exists within industries, in most industries, and in most countries.

       There are two broad types of questions that can be asked about this phenomenon. One is

about how labor markets operate in these host countries, particularly whether foreign firms pay

higher prices for labor, in the sense of paying higher wages for workers of the same quality. The

other is about how inward foreign direct investment affects labor markets, whether or not the

effects can be accounted for by firm size, industry, capital intensity, R&D intensity, or other

characteristics associated with foreign firms, that could belong to domestic firms as well as to

foreign firms.

       Why would a foreign-owned firm pay a higher price than a domestic firm for labor of a

given quality? It presumably could pay more than a domestically- owned firm of the same size

if its superior technology produced higher marginal labor productivity, but the expected response

would be to expand output rather than to raise wages. Several reasons have been suggested.

One is that it may be forced to do so by host-country regulations or home-country pressures. The

Findlay model assumes that foreign firms pay a higher wage for labor of the same quality “…for

purposes of good public relations” (1978, p. 9). It might be that workers prefer locally- owned

firms, and must be compensated to overcome this preference. A third possibility is that foreign-

owned firms pay a premium to reduce worker turnover, because they have brought some

proprietary technology and wish to reduce the speed with which it leaks out to domestic rivals as

employees change jobs. A fourth is that foreign firms, because of their limited understanding of




                                                                                                   21
local labor markets, pay higher wages to attract better workers, while more knowledgable local

firms can identify and attract better workers without paying them higher wages.

       Studies attempting to measure the pure effect of foreignness are akin to successive

distillations to remove impurities. The impurities in this case are explanations for differentials

that are not necessarily intrinsic to foreignness, although they may be associated with it in

practice. What may be more relevant to judging the optimum policies toward inward direct

investment are studies with not quite as many controls. A state or a region or a country that

wishes to estimate the effect of allowing inward FDI where it had been prohibited, or reducing

obstacles to it, may not care why the foreign firm will pay higher wages. It is not relevant

whether it is because the firm is foreign, or because it is large, because it brings more capital-

intensive or skill- intensive production methods, or better access to world markets. A domestic

firm with the same attributes might have the same impact, but there may not be any such

domestic firm, or if there is one, it may not be willing to make this particular investment.

       If foreign firms are found to pay higher wages than local firms, for whatever reason, there

are still several questions to be asked about the impact. If foreign firms hired high-wage workers

away from local firms, or acquired local firms with skilled labor forces, we might find that

foreign ownership was associated with higher wages in the foreign-owned firms and lower

wages in domestic firms, but no difference in average industry wage levels. If foreign firms paid

more, but did not differentially poach the best workers from local firms, one should find a larger

presence of foreign ownership associated with higher wages in the industry, but not in locally-

owned firms in the industry. Or finally, we might find examples of “spillover”, where higher

foreign presence was associated with higher wages in domestically- owned establishments.




                                                                                                     22
       Data on wage differences come in several different forms. Some are simple comparisons

of average wages, or average wages by industry, where wage differences reflect any effects of

firm or plant characteristics, such as size or capital intensity, and of worker characteristics, such

as age and education. Others adjust for differences in plant characteristics, asking whether

foreign- owned plants pay wages different from those in otherwise identical domestically- owned

plants. A third type, less common, adjusts for differences in worker characteristics, asking

whether foreign- owned plants pay different wages from those in domestically- owned plants for

identical workers. And a fourth type, still more rare, adjusts for both plant and worker

characteristics, asking whether foreign- owned plants pay different wages from those in identical

domestically- owned plants for identical workers.

       Observations of higher wages in foreign-owned firms in developing countries go back a

long time, although the earliest ones were not the result of careful statistical studies. One of

these was an early study of American firms in Colombia. It concluded that “… Colombian labor,

whenever it is paid a stipulated wage, is better remunerated and granted more sanitary living

quarters by foreigners than by natives, but the foreigners probably exact more systematic and

strenuous effort” (Rippy, 1931,p. 190). Another partial explanation for the higher wages was

that “…the American companies are eager to attract the most efficient labor…” (ibid, p. 191).

       A study by Blomström (1983) of Mexican manufacturing industries in 1970 found that

foreign-owned firms paid wages about 25, per cent above those in domestically- owned firms in

manufacturing as a whole. Foreign firm wage levels were also higher in each of four major

groups of manufacturing industries, by 25 to 30 per cent, except in capital goods industries,

where the difference was much smaller (pp. 18-19).




                                                                                                   23
       Many of the recent studies of wages in foreign plants in developing countries have been

based on manufacturing sector data on individual establishments collected in national surveys

and assembled by the World Bank. A number of them were carried out by Ann Harrison, in

collaboration with several others, and wage data for three of these studies are summarized in

Harrison (1996).

   There were statistically significant differences between wages in foreign- owned and

domestically- owned plants in 3 out of 12 industries in Côte d’Ivoire, 12 out of 18 in Morocco,

and 8 out of 9 in Venezuela. Ratios of foreign/domestic plant wages, where the differences were

significant, ranged from 1.1 to 1.9 in Côte d’Ivoire, 1.3 to 2.6 in Morocco, and 1.2 to 2.0 in

Venezuela. These are simple differences without adjustment for plant or worker characteristics.

One problem with cross-sectional analyses of wage differences is the unknown role of

unmeasured aspects of plant heterogeneity. For Venezuela, that problem could be dealt with by

examining wages in individual plants over time. While the relationship between wages and

foreign ownership of a plant was weaker, and the differential smaller than in aggregated data,

foreign ownership of a plant, controlling for plant size, industry, and capital intensity, resulted in

higher wages by 16-18 per cent (Aitken, Harrison, and Lipsey, 1996, p. 368).

       A paper on Morocco by Haddad and Harrison (1993) found that wages were 70 per cent

higher, on average, in foreign firms (p. 58). The difference partly reflected the greater size of the

foreign- owned firms; in weighted means, calculated to eliminate the size effect, the difference

was reduced to 30 per cent. The weighted average mean real wages were significantly higher in

foreign- owned firms in 16 out of 18 individual industries. All the industries in which the wage

differences were statistically significant showed higher wages in the foreign- owned plants.




                                                                                                   24
         Something of an oddity, which casts some suspicion on the productivity measures, is

that these higher wages in foreign- owned plants were accompanied by lower output per worker,

at least in the weighted averages, and lower total factor productivity.

       Several studies of Indonesia, such as Hill (1990) and Manning (1998) found that foreign

firms paid higher wages than domestic firms. A recent paper using establishment data for

Indonesia, (Lipsey and Sjöholm, 2001), found that in 1996, foreign- owned firms paid about 50

per cent higher wages than private domestically- owned firms in manufacturing as a whole, for

both blue collar and white collar workers. When account was taken of the education levels of the

workers, and of the industry and location of plants, foreign ownership was associated with wages

about 25 per cent higher for blue-collar workers and 50 per cent higher for white- collar workers.

Much of the differential was associated with the larger size of foreign- owned plants and greater

inputs of energy and other intermediate product. The authors concluded that there was strong

evidence that foreign firms “…paid a higher price for labor than domestically-owned plants.”

(p.13). They paid a higher price, by a large margin, for workers of a given educational level

(something most studies do not have information on, because business censuses rarely include

labor force characteristics). Even with the effects of all these plant characteristics removed, and

education as well, blue collar workers in foreign- owned plants earned about 12 per cent more

than in domestic plants and white collar workers about 20 per cent more (ibid).

       In four East Asian countries for which Ramstetter (1999, Table 2) reported wages in

foreign and domestic plants or firms, averaged over 14-23 year periods, wages were higher in the

foreign- owned ones, although in Singapore and Taiwan, the differences were not significant.

       Similar questions can be asked about wages in foreign- owned plants in developed

countries. The increasing availability of individual firm and establishment microdata sets has




                                                                                                 25
encouraged such studies. In the United States, the linking of Economic Census establishment

data with BEA surveys of inward foreign direct investment was a catalyst. Using the BEA-

Census data for 1987, the first such match, Lipsey (1994) found that workers in foreign-owned

establishments earned 10 –12 per cent more than those in domestically- owned establishments in

the same 2-digit SIC industries and states. They earned 6-7 percent more in manufacturing and

12-15 per cent more in other industries. Howenstine and Zeile (1994), using access to more

detailed information by industry and location not available outside the Department of

Commerce, found similar differentials in manufacturing, all of which they could explain by

differences in establishment size. Using individual manufacturing plant data, Doms and Jensen

(1998) found that even controlling for 4-digit industry, state, plant size, and plant age, foreign-

owned plants paid higher wages. They attributed the higher wage in foreign plants to the fact

that they were parts of multinational firms, a theory they felt was confirmed by the fact that the

highest wages of all were paid by domestic plants that were parts of U.S. multinational firms.

One question about this comparison is whether foreign subsidiaries in the United States were

comparable to the establishments of U.S. multinationals, since the latter could include firm

headquarters operations, a high-paid category probably not part of the U.S. operations of foreign

multinationals.

       A recent paper used both the 1987 and 1992 Census-BEA matches for establishments,

combined into state by detailed industry cells for foreign- owned and domestically- owned

establishments (Feliciano and Lipsey, 1999). It was unusual in that it covered the whole

economy, rather than only manufacturing.      Foreign- owned establishments in the United States

paid higher wages than domestically- owned ones in all industries taken together, by 23 per cent

in 1987 and 15 per cent in 1992 (Table 2). Once average establishment size, education levels in




                                                                                                      26
the state and industry, state unionization levels, and per cent female in the state labor force were

accounted for, and industry dummies were included, there was no significant difference in

manufacturing. However, foreign- owned establishments paid higher wages in non-

manufacturing, by 8&1/2 to 9&1/2 percent (Tables 3A and 3B).

       While the United States has been the subject of the largest number of studies, there have

been some for other developed countries as well. An early study of American direct investment

in Australia (Brash, 1966) concluded, from a survey, that “…it… appears beyond a doubt that

even within each industry American-affiliated firms on average pay higher total incomes to their

employees than do firms without American connections” (p. 129). Globerman, Ries, and

Vertinsky (1994) reported higher wages in foreign- owned plants in Canada.

       In recent years, establishment microdata have become available for the United Kingdom,

and these have been used for wage and other comparisons. Griffith and Simpson (2001) report

that foreign- owned establishments in the United Kingdom paid higher wages than domestically-

owned establishments for both operatives and administrative and technical employees, in both

1980 and 1995. The margin was larger for the lower-skill employees, and widened considerably

over the period. An earlier published paper (Griffith, 1999) compared wages in foreign- owned

plants of companies based in France, Germany, Japan, and the United States with those in

domestically- owned plants. It found no significant differences for 1980, except in U.S.- owned

plants, but higher wages in foreign- owned plants in 1992, by margins ranging from 8 to 25 per

cent (p. 428). In the Motor Vehicle and Engines Industry, examined in more detail in the article,

there were only small margins for operatives, 2 to 4 per cent, but foreign- owned plants paid

around 25 per cent more to administrative, technical, and clerical workers (p. 431).




                                                                                                  27
       A set of “survivors”, establishments present in the UK Annual Census of Production, or

ARD, throughout the period 1973-1993, was assembled by Oulton (2001). He reports that

foreign- owned establishments paid average wages for operatives that were above the average for

UK- owned establishments by 17 per cent for non- US establishments and 26 per cent for US-

owned establishments. The margins for Administrative, Technical, and Clerical (ATC)

employees were 12 and 24 per cent. The plants differed in other respects as well: foreign-

owned plants, and especially US- owned plants, were characterized by higher capital per worker,

much higher intermediate input per worker, and higher proportions of ATC employees (p. 129).

Although there is no evidence on worker quality, Oulton attributes the wage differential to higher

human capital per worker in the foreign plants, because “…companies do not pay higher wages

out of the goodness of their hearts….” (p. 130). A set of regressions including industry dummy

variables indicates that industry composition accounts for little of the differential. Within

industries, US- owned establishments paid 14 to 15 per cent more than domestic establishments

and other foreign establishments paid 10 per cent more to operatives and 8 per cent more to ATC

workers (p. 132).

       Using a large sample of UK firms from 1991 to 1996 Girma et al. (2001) reported an

overall wage differential of 14 per cent in favor of workers in foreign- owned firms, and a

differential of almost 10 per cent when industry and scale of operations are taken into account.

In addition, wage growth was higher by 0.4 per cent per year in the foreign- owned firms (Tables

1 and 2). They summarized their reading of earlier literature as showing “…considerable

evidence to support a wage differential in favour of foreign owned firms” (p. 121).




                                                                                                   28
       Driffield and Girma (2002) reported that foreign- owned establishments in the UK

electronics industry in 1980 to 1992 paid wages higher by 7.6 and 6.0 per cent for skilled and

unskilled workers respectively, and also employed a higher proportion of skilled workers (p. 14).

       Since there is always a problem of the effect of unknown firm characteristics on these

comparisons, a tempting solution is to observe firms that are acquired by foreign owners. That

solution is rare because of the lack of accessible data, but Conyon, Girma, Thompson, and

Wright (1999) were able to construct panels of firms in the United Kingdom taken over by

domestic and foreign acquirers and matching data for over 600 firms that did not change

ownership. At the time of acquisition, the firms acquired by foreigners paid wages about the

same as those of firms acquired by domestic owners. However, in the first, second, and third

years after acquisition, firms acquired by foreigners raised their wages faster than did firms

acquired by domestic owners (Table 5). Controlling for fixed firm and industry effects and

aggregate time shocks, the authors found that wages rose by 3.4 per cent in firms acquired by

foreigners and fell by 2.1 per cent in firms acquired by domestic owners. Controlling also for

firm size and industry wages hardly changes the results. Adding productivity change as a control

variable eliminated the differential in favor of foreign firms (p. 9 and Table 6), but if one is

interested in measuring wage differentials, rather than explaining them, productivity change is

not an appropriate control.

       The evidence seems to me overwhelming that foreign- owned firms in all kinds of

economies pay higher wages than domestically- owned firms. It is harder to say whether they

also pay a higher price for labor; that is a higher wage for workers of a given quality, although

one of the few studies that incorporates quality measures finds that they do. Much of the

differential, all of it in some studies, can be associated with the larger size of the foreign-owned




                                                                                                    29
operations. However, higher capital intensity and higher inputs of intermediate products, leading

to higher productivity, are also important. If regions or countries encouraging inward investment

are interested in encouraging high-wage plants, foreign investors seem to meet that desire.



       2. Wage spillovers

       Whether or not foreign- owned firms in a country pay higher wages than domestic firms,

their presence might still affect the level of wages in domestically- owned plants. Such effects

are referred to as wage spillovers to domestically- owned plants. They would not take place in

the world envisioned in the Findlay (1978) model. There, “The economy is considered able to

draw on a reservoir of labor in a ‘peasant hinterland’ as in the famous model of Arthur Lewis

(1954) and also on a substantial ‘industrial reserve army’ of urban unemployed” (p.8). However,

domestic firm wage effects from inward investment could take place in any world where the

supply curve for labor was not horizontal.

       Calculations of wage spillovers in two developing countries, Mexico and Venezuela, are

included in Aitken, Harrison, and Lipsey (1996). Impacts of shares of employment in foreign-

owned plants in an industry and region on wages in domestically- owned establishments were

measured. In Mexico, wages in domestically- owned plants appeared to be lower where foreign

ownership was high, but the coefficients were not statistically significant. However, in

Venezuela, there seemed to be a significant negative influence of foreign presence on wages in

domestically- owned plants. To some extent, this result could reflect a reallocation of the labor

force to foreign plants, through the “poaching” of better workers or the acquisition of higher-

paying plants by foreigners. However, if this had been the whole story, there would not have

been a positive effect of higher foreign ownership on total industry wages.




                                                                                                   30
       Lipsey and Sjöholm (2001) made a variety of calculations of spillovers from foreign

presence to wages in domestically- owned establishments in Indonesia, calculating foreign

presence at various levels of industry and geographical detail. In every variant, there were

significant spillovers to domestically- owned establishments. The coefficients on foreign shares

in wage equations were larger than the observed wage differentials, suggesting some impact

through increases in the demand for labor. The coefficients were generally higher for white-

collar than for blue-collar workers (pp. 26-27).

       In their study of South Carolina counties described below, Figlio and Blonigen (2000) did

not have the data needed for testing for spillovers from inward investment. However, they

concluded that the effect of the investment on aggregate wage levels was so large that it could

not have been confined to the foreign plants themselves, and must have involved some spillovers

to domestically- owned plants (p. 352, f.n. 12).

       In Feliciano and Lipsey (1999), the existence of two years of data permitted the authors

to examine the effects of changes in the extent of foreign ownership in a state by industry cell on

wages in domestically- owned establishments. In manufacturing, there were no significant

effects (Table 4a). In non-manufacturing industries, there were large and statistically significant

effects on domestic firm wages, although the significance became marginal when state by

industry education levels were added.

       Girma et al. (2001) test for wage spillovers to domestic firms in their UK company data

set for 1991-96 and find no overall spillover effect on wage levels and a small negative effect on

wage growth (p. 128). The only firm characteristic that appears to influence the extent of wage

spillovers is the gap in productivity between the firm and the firm in the industry at the 90th

percentile in productivity. The larger the productivity gap, the smaller the wage spillover. The




                                                                                                  31
only industry characteristic that affects wage spillovers is the degree of import penetration. The

higher it is, the larger the wage spillover.

        Some of the literature on wage spillovers from foreign-owned to domestically- owned

firms has recently been reviewed by Görg and Greenaway (2001). They summarize the results

of panel data studies as showing mostly negative spillovers and cross-section studies as showing

positive spillovers. There is no overlap in the countries studied, but the authors are skeptical

about all findings from cross-section studies on the ground that they cannot take account of

unknown firm characteristics. My own judgment is that there are enough indications of positive

wage spillovers, even in panel data studies, to preclude any conclusion that they are typically

negative. What is needed most is more consideration of the different circumstances and policies

of countries, industries, and firms that promote or obstruct spillovers.



        3. Effects on average wages

        Whether or not wages are higher in foreign- owned plants than in domestically- owned

plants, and whether or not, where there are higher wages, they spill over to domestically- owned

plants, a higher degree of foreign ownership could affect the average level of wages in a country

or industry. It might do so either by raising the demand for labor or through the higher wages

paid by the foreign plants themselves.

        Aitken, Harrison, and Lipsey report (1996, p. 352) that even though there were no

spillovers or negative spillovers, to domestically- owned plants in Mexico and Venezuela, there

was a significant effect of foreign ownership shares in raising average industry wages. The

effect was larger for skilled workers than for unskilled, and larger in Venezuela than in Mexico.




                                                                                                   32
       Feenstra and Hanson (1997), defining skilled workers simply as non-production workers,

found that a higher level of maquiladora activity in a Mexican industry within a state led to a

higher share of total wages going to skilled workers. They interpreted this increase in the non-

production wage share as implying a rise in the demand for skilled labor relative to unskilled

labor resulting from the growth in maquiladora production by foreign, mainly U.S. firms. The

increase in the wage share of non-production workers could be a combination of relative wage

increases for them or relative increases in their numbers. However, there is some evidence of

particularly large relative wage growth for non-production workers in the border region, where

most of the maquiladoras are located, in the periods after investment rules were liberalized.

       The effect of changes in foreign ownership from 1987 to 1992 on average wages in state

by industry cells in the United States were found to be insignificant in manufacturing by

Feliciano and Lipsey (1999, Tables 5a and 5b). However, outside of the manufacturing sector,

increases in foreign ownership were associated with increases in average wages.

       One avenue of relative wage increases that might be associated with increases in foreign

ownership is skill upgrading, shifting the demand for labor in an industry toward higher skill.

Blonigen and Slaughter (2001), measuring skill upgrading by the share of skilled wages in the

total wage bill, find no evidence of such an effect from increases in foreign presence in U.S.

manufacturing industries, a result that matches Feliciano and Lipsey (1999). They find some

negative effect from Japanese investment in U.S. manufacturing, but other studies have shown

that Japanese investments are not typical.

       In a more local study, Figlio and Blonigen (2000) reported that, in South Carolina, the

addition of foreign- owned manufacturing plants was associated with increases in real wages for




                                                                                                   33
all workers in the same industry and county. The gain was much larger than that from the

addition of new domestically- owned plants.

         I would summarize the sparse evidence on overall wage levels as pointing to positive

effects of FDI activity. When there are no spillovers, the effect might be wholly from the higher

wages offered by the foreign firms, or it might reflect the impact of foreign firms on the

aggregate demand for labor. When there are positive spillovers, they add to the impact of the

foreign firms. Even when there are negative spillovers, they do not seem to be large enough to

offset the positive effect of the foreign firms’ high wages or the effects of increased demand for

labor.



b. Host Country Productivity

         The issues that arise with respect to measuring effects on wages in host countries are also

involved in judging effects on productivity. The benefits to the host countries, if they exist, stem

mainly from the superior efficiency of the foreign- owned operations. The first question, then, is

whether foreign- owned firms or establishments are more efficient. If they are, the second

question is whether their superior productivity spills over to locally- owned firms in their

industries, or their industries within their regions, or related industries. Locally- owned firms

might increase their efficiency by copying the operations of the foreign- owned firms, or be

forced by competition from foreign- owned firms to raise their efficiency to survive. On the

negative side, it is conceivable that foreign- owned operations are more efficient only because

foreigners have taken over the more efficient local firms, leaving the less efficient in local

ownership. Or by taking markets from local firms, foreign- owned firms might force the locally-

owned firms into less efficient scales of production. The third, and broadest question is whether




                                                                                                    34
as a result of the operations of foreign- owned firms, there are improvements in aggregate

industry efficiency. Those could arise from spillovers, but they could come simply from the

higher efficiency of foreign firms, even if the higher efficiency is confined to the foreign firms.

There could also be increases in aggregate productivity without any visible productivity

differentials between foreign- owned and domestically- owned firms, if the industry were

sufficiently competitive that the entry of foreign- owned firms forced their domestically- owned

competitors to match them quickly to survive. These possibilities point to the importance of

examining not only firms that remain in an industry over the period of observation, but also firms

that enter or exit, because they may account for many of the changes in productivity for an

industry or country.

       For any of these questions, efficiency must be defined. The choices range from value

added per unit of labor input, the simplest, to value added per unit of labor and capital input and

value of output per unit of labor, capital, and intermediate product input. Some studies fit

production functions that also incorporate scale economies. Most authors seem to prefer the

efficiency measures including capital input. The result is to ignore any host country benefit from

the acquisition of physical capital, or from any advance in technology that consists of the

adoption of more capital intensive methods of production or larger scale production.

       Most theoretical discussions of the possible role of inward investment refer to the

transmission of superior technology. The examination of productivity is an attempt to measure

technology gaps and changes in technology. That is a narrow view of multinationals’ technology

advantages, which may consist more of their knowledge of world markets or methods of

coordinating production over many countries. Almost all the measurement is confined to

manufacturing, a large part of multinational activity, but far from the whole of it.




                                                                                                  35
       Many of the problems in studying productivity involve the measurement of capital input.

Most sources of establishment data either do not report capital stocks, or report nominal values.

These are likely to bear a small resemblance to market values, especially in countries that have

undergone major inflation. Where even nominal capital values are missing, they are often

calculated from past expenditures using the perpetual inventory method. Such calculations, if

done properly, should be based not on general deflators but on capital goods price indexes,

scarce and subject to serious doubts even in the best of statistical systems. The complications do

not mean that the calculations should not be carried out, but they suggest caution in drawing

conclusions and the advisability of comparing total factor productivity measures with labor

productivity and wages to see whether the relations among them are logical.

       1. Productivity comparisons

       Comparisons of productivity between foreign- owned and domestically- owned firms

have been far more common than comparisons of wage levels. Much of the productivity

literature has been directed at the question of whether there were spillovers to domestic firms,

but that question itself implies the expectation that foreign firms are more efficient, and thus that

there is some productivity advantage that might spill over to domestic firms. The comparisons

themselves range from simple overall productivity comparisons to attempts to explain

differences between foreign and domestic firms. The explanatory variables, aside from

nationality of ownership, include capital intensity, skill intensity, and the scale of operations.

These comparisons ask, in effect, whether foreign firms that differ from domestic firms differ

because they operate on different production functions or because they operate at different points

on the same functions.




                                                                                                     36
       Most of the productivity comparisons have been for the manufacturing sectors in

developing countries. Blomström and Wolff (1994), examining Mexican manufacturing data for

1970, found both value added and gross output per employee to have been more than twice as

high in MNC- owned plants overall as in private domestic plants, and higher in each of 20

individual manufacturing industries (p. 266). Capital intensities in MNC plants were also much

higher, and as a result, the TFP margins were smaller. They were about a third overall, and

three industries showed higher TFP in the domestic plants (pp. 267 and 268). Sjöholm (1999)

examined Indonesian establishment data for 1980 and 1991, calculating differences in

“technology” between foreign- owned and domestically- owned establishments. Technology

differences were measured as the coefficients on foreign ownership dummies in equations

relating value added per worker in 1980 and 1991 to scale, 1980 investment expenditure per

worker, as a proxy for capital intensity, and dummy variables for 1991 observations and foreign

ownership. The estimated technology differences were found to be in favor of the foreign –

owned establishments in 26 out of 28 industries. Kokko, Zejan, and Tansini (2001) reported that

in Uruguay, in 1988, productivity, as measured by value added per worker, was about twice as

high on average in foreign firms as in domestic firms. Haddad and Harrison (1993) found, for

Morocco, in 1985-89, that output per worker was higher, and deviations from best-practice

frontiers were smaller, in foreign-owned firms than in domestically-owned firms in 12 out of 18

industries, and in all eight of the industries in which the differences were statistically significant.

       Okamoto and Sjöholm (1999), examining Indonesian manufacturing microdata from

1990 to 1995 reported higher foreign shares of gross output than of employment in almost every

industry. An implication of this finding is that labor productivity was higher in the foreign-

owned plants.




                                                                                                     37
       Kathuria (2000) studied Indian firms in 26 manufacturing industries over the 14 years

from 1975-76 to 1988-89, in a “pre-liberalization period when Indian industry was highly

regulated in terms of industrial and technology policy” (p. 346). The main productivity

measurement used was distance from its industry technological frontier, for a firm rather than an

establishment. In 13 of the 26 industries, a foreign firm was the technological leader, and in 15

industries, foreign firms were, on average, more efficient. In two of the industries, the reported

efficiency of the foreign firms was so low as to arouse a reader’s suspicions about the data, but

no comment was made by the author. Another unusual feature of the data is that because

employment is not reported, it is estimated from compensation, assuming that local and foreign

firms pay the same wages. That assumption, if we can judge from the wage studies, almost

certainly overstates employment in foreign firms and understates their productivity.

       Chuang and Lin (1999) report that among a random sample of manufacturing firms in

Taiwan in 1991, foreign- owned firms had considerably higher labor productivity than

domestically- owned firms, but only very slightly higher total factor productivity. The foreign-

owned firms were much larger and much more capital- intensive.

       Comparing foreign- owned with domestically- owned firms or plants in five East Asian

countries over 15-20 year periods, Ramstetter (1999) reported that value added per employee

was higher in the foreign- owned plants in all the countries. However, Malaysian data confined

to large firms showed higher productivity in the local firms in the later part of the period.

       Foreign- owned Turkish plants in 1993-1995 had higher productivity than domestically-

owned plants even when various elements of the production function are taken account of

(Erdilek, 2002). That higher level of productivity persisted through a variety of statistical tests

of the regressions.




                                                                                                    38
       There have been fewer examinations of the productivity of foreign- owned and

domestically- owned firms within developed countries, despite their large share of direct

investment. Notable studies of the United States include Howenstine and Zeile (1994), and

Doms and Jensen (1998), mentioned earlier. Howenstine and Zeile, using the combined BEA

and Census establishment data for manufacturing, found foreign- owned plants to have higher

labor productivity than domestically- owned ones. They attributed the difference largely to

“…the tendency for foreign- owned establishments to be concentrated in industries in which

productivity is high…” and the within- industry differences to “…plant size, capital intensity,

and employee skill level—rather than foreign ownership per se.” Doms and Jensen concluded

that foreign- owned plants were superior to U.S.- owned plants of non- multinational firms, even

large firms, in both labor productivity and TFP, but that they were behind plants owned by U.S.

multinationals. Thus they find multinationality of the firm to be strongly associated with

productivity levels, beyond the association with size and other plant characteristics. A similar

hierarchy characterized the ranking with respect to the “number of technologies” used in each

type of plant (pp. 246-250).

        Comparisons within the United Kingdom go back for many years, at least to Dunning

(1958) and Dunning and Rowan (1970). Some recent studies, such as Griffith and Simpson

(2001), Conyon et al. (1999), and Girma et al. (2001), are based on individual establishment data

from the Annual Business Inquiry Respondents Database (ARD).

       Dunning (1958) compared output per man-year in a sample of U.S. affiliates with that in

the average U.K. firm (including the affiliates) in 10 industrial groups in 1950 and 1954. He

found that the U.S. affiliates’ productivity was higher in every one (Table 16). Dunning and

Rowan (1970) applied a number of different tests of efficiency to U.S. and U.K. –owned firms in




                                                                                                   39
the United Kingdom. Although each test seemed subject to one bias or another, the

preponderance of evidence pointed to greater efficiency in the U.S.- owned firms. Girma et al.

(2001) found in their data set for 1991-96 that among firms with no change in ownership,

foreign- owned firms in the United Kingdom had labor productivity about 10 per cent above that

for domestically- owned firms and total factor productivity about 5 per cent higher. Labor and

total factor productivity growth rates in foreign- owned plants were higher by about 1&1/2 per

cent per year. Conyon et al. (1999) found that acquisitions of UK firms by foreigners led to

increases in their profitability. A study by Harris and Robinson (2002) of the selection of

establishments for foreign acquisition, also based on the ARD, confirmed the suspicion that

foreign firms selected relatively high productivity plants to acquire. Each group of plants was

compared to a reference group of plants belonging to UK multiplant firms that did not sell any

plants to foreign firms during 1982-1992. Plants that were foreign- owned during the whole

period were more productive than those in the control group. Plants that were sold by UK firms

to foreign firms in 1982-86 or 1987-92 were still more productive, as were plants sold by one

UK firm to another. Thus, plant turnover in general seemed to involve relatively productive

plants. In addition, the plants that changed from domestic to foreign ownership in the second

period had much higher capital/labor ratios than those changing domestic owners, and in this

respect resembled those acquired by foreign owners in the first period.

       The evidence on productivity, whatever the measure, is close to unanimous on the higher

productivity of foreign- owned plants in both developed and developing countries. Some of that

higher productivity, but not all in most comparisons, can be attributed to higher capital intensity

or larger scale of production in the foreign- owned plants.




                                                                                                  40
       2. Productivity and knowledge spillovers to domestic firms

       Theories of the effect of direct investment on host countries have generally taken it for

granted that foreign- owned firms possessed superior technology and that some of that

technological knowledge spills over to the host country economy. Findlay (1978) assumed that

“…the rate of change of technical efficiency in the backward is an increasing function of the

relative extent to which the activities of foreign firms with their superior technology pervade the

local economy” (p. 5). He also combined with that assumption the idea that the larger the gap in

technology, the faster the transmission, provided that “…the disparity must not be too wide for

the thesis to hold” (p. 2). Wang and Blomström (1992) added, as explanations for the speed of

transmission, the characteristics of the host country environment and host country firms. The

transmission of technology would be accelerated by a more competitive business environment

and greater investment in learning and imitation by competing host country firms (p. 153).

       Most studies of productivity spillovers from foreign investment assume that they occur

mainly in the industry in which the foreign firm operates. Blomström and Kokko (1998) refer to

the literature on backward linkages as examples of spillovers outside those industries, to

supplying industries. These arise partly from efforts by multinational firms to improve the

quality of the intermediate products they buy locally, sometimes under duress. However, they

may arise without explicit help, from the competition among local firms to become the suppliers

to the multinationals. The only statistical examination of this issue they report is from an

unpublished paper on Venezuela by Aitken and Harrison (1991), which reported negative effects

of foreign direct investment in an industry on productivity in upstream industries. The reason

offered was that foreign firms shift the demand for intermediate inputs from domestic to foreign

producers, reducing the scale of output, and therefore productivity, in domestic production. The




                                                                                                   41
paper did, however, report positive effects of FDI on downstream industries. These calculations

do not appear in the later, published, version of the paper. On the whole, however, the

interindustry effects of foreign participation have received a great deal of speculation, but little

statistical testing.

          A more recent study for Venezuela, Aitken and Harrison (1999), found that

“…increases in foreign equity participation were correlated with increases in productivity…” for

small plants, but that increases in foreign ownership in an industry negatively affected

productivity in domestically- owned plants in the same industry. The positive effects within the

foreign plants exceeded the negative effects, but only slightly. The positive relationships found

by others, they argued, were due to the tendency of foreign firms to invest in high productivity

sectors and firms (pp. 616 and 617). The authors report similar findings for Indonesia, except

that there the positive effects are larger than in Venezuela and the negative effects smaller (p.

617).

        Using data for 215 industries from the Mexican Industrial Census for 1970, Blomström

(1983) found that the labor productivity in domestically- owned plants was positively related to

the extent of foreign presence in the industry. That was the case with differences in capital

intensity and in the quality of labor employed accounted for. In a study based on the same

Mexican census, Kokko (1994) confirmed the existence of productivity spillovers to locally-

owned firms and found some evidence that high capital intensity in an industry and a high level

of technology might inhibit spillovers. A stronger conclusion was that the combination of large

technology gaps between foreign and domestic firms and large foreign market shares, which the

author describes as “enclave” situations, discourages spillovers.




                                                                                                    42
       Blomström and Wolff (1994), on the basis of Mexican Census data, concluded that

higher foreign shares in an industry in 1970 led to higher rates of productivity growth in locally-

owned firms over the next five years. Local firm productivity growth was higher in industries in

which the local firms’ productivity levels were initially closer to those of the foreign- owned

firms (p. 270). Higher foreign shares in an industry were also associated with faster convergence

of Mexican industry productivity toward U.S. industry productivity levels, again more strongly

in industries in which the initial gap was smaller (p. 275).

       Kathuria (2000), in a study of spillovers to Indian manufacturing firms, found that a

division of the manufacturing sectors into “scientific” and “non-scientific” subgroups showed

important differences. He found positive spillovers in the “scientific” sectors, but none in the

“non-scientific” ones. One conclusion was that “…spillovers are not found to be automatic

consequences of foreign firms’ presence, but they depend to a large extent on the efforts of local

firms to invest in learning or R&D activities so as to decodify the spilled knowledge” (p. 364).

He thus supports the theoretical model proposed by Wang and Blomström (1992).

       In Turkey, Erdilek finds some evidence for spillovers, although controlling for sector

effects seems to eliminate them. However, it is not clear whether the sector effects are, to some

extent, swallowing up the sector foreign ownership effects.

       A pioneering attempt to measure impacts on domestic firms in developed countries was

Caves (1974), on Canada and Australia. He found some evidence that higher shares in an

industry for foreign subsidiaries were weakly, and negatively, related to the profitability of

Canadian firms, a possible indication that foreign firms raised the level of competition and

reduced the excess profits that had been earned by their local rivals. However, he was not

certain that the relation was not due entirely to differences in the attainment of economies of




                                                                                                   43
scale. In Australian manufacturing, he found that “…higher subsidiary shares do apparently

coincide with higher productivity in competing domestic firms.” However no such relationship

could be found between changes in foreign shares and changes in the productivity of domestic

firms, a fact that reduced his confidence in the significance of the finding for levels (pp. 190-

191).

        A later study by Globerman (1979) for a sample of manufacturing industries in 1972,

concluded that differences across Canadian industries in labor productivity “…derive, in part,

from spillover efficiency benefits associated with foreign direct investment,” (p. 53).

        Haskel, Pereira and Slaughter (2002) use British panel data to relate changes in TFP of

domestically- owned British establishments to changes in foreign presence in the establishment’s

industry, region, or industry in the region. Foreign presence is measured by shares in

employment. Significant evidence is found for positive spillovers within industries, but regional

variables were not important. Positive spillovers are found to come from U.S. and French

presence, but Japanese presence produces negative spillovers. The authors conclude that, of the

aggregate increase of 11 per cent in British TFP from 1972 to 1992, 5 per cent could be ascribed

to spillovers from foreign- owned plants (p. 17).

        Girma et al. (2001) find no significant effect of foreign presence, measured by shares of

employment or output, on the labor productivity or total factor productivity of UK firms in

general during 1991-96. When they relate the extent of spillovers to firm and industry

characteristics, they find strong effects. The higher the skill level of the industry, as measured by

the ratio of skilled to unskilled employment, the greater the productivity spillover. The greater

the degree of foreign competition in the industry, the larger the spillover. And the larger the

individual firm’s distance from the productivity leader in its industry (the firm at the 90th




                                                                                                    44
percentile in TFP), the smaller the spillover (p. 129). Thus they point to the importance of firm

and industry characteristics in determining the extent of spillovers, as well as, possibly, trade

policy, as represented by import penetration levels.

       Examining changes in productivity in domestically- owned UK firms between 1989 and

1992, Driffield (2001) finds no spillovers related to the amount of sales by foreign- owned firms

or their R&D stock. However, the growth of labor productivity among foreign- owned firms in

the previous period, from 1986 to 1989, did lead to productivity growth among domestically-

owned firms in the same industry. He concluded that “…the foreign productivity advantage was

responsible for an average increase in domestic productivity of 0.75 per cent a year (p. 113).

Girma and Wakelin (2000), also using UK microdata for manufacturing establishments, found

evidence of positive spillovers to domestic firms in the same region as the foreign firms, but

some evidence of negative spillovers outside the regions. They also concluded that low

technology gaps between domestic and foreign firms and location in more technologically

advanced regions promoted spillovers.

       Blomström and Kokko (1998) end a review of productivity spillovers to host countries by

concluding that “…such effects exist and…they may be substantial both within and between

industries, but there is no strong evidence on their exact nature and magnitude.” Furthermore,

“…the positive effects of FDI are likely to increase with the level of local capability and

competition.” (p. 24). The same authors, and Steven Globerman, in a later review of this

literature (2001), summarize the “limited evidence” for developed countries as pointing to a

dependence of productivity spillovers on the absorptive capacity of domestically- owned firms.

They conclude that small productivity gaps encourage spillovers, while large gaps inhibit them.

They report similar findings among developing countries, and they attribute the more mixed




                                                                                                    45
results on spillovers in studies of such countries to the greater frequency of wide technology gaps

between foreign and local firms ( pp. 42-43). They also report that spillovers are encouraged by

vertical linkages between MNCs and local firms, a characteristic that would also depend partly

on local firm capabilities.

       Görg and Greenaway (2001) summarize the results of the productivity studies with

respect to spillovers from foreign- owned to domestically- owned by saying that “…only limited

evidence in support of positive spillovers has been reported. Most work fails to find positive

spillovers, with some even reporting negative spillovers, at the aggregate level” (p. 23). In

contrast, Görg and Strobl (2000) take spillovers for granted in their study of firm survival in

Ireland, and find that foreign presence reduces exit by domestically- owned firms, at least in

high-tech industries, an effect they attribute to spillovers. Görg and Strobl (2002) find also that

foreign presence encourages entry by domestically- owned firms.

       Görg and Greenaway are inclined to attribute the variety of findings on spillovers mainly

to the difference between cross-section and panel data studies. However, there is evidence that

differences among firms in their capabilities, differences among industries in their

characteristics, and differences among countries in both capabilities and policies may be

important explanations for this diversity of results. A more formal “meta-analysis” of spillover

findings from 21 studies by Görg and Strobl (2001), using the t-statistic in spillover equations as

the dependent variable, concluded that the use of cross-section data was a strong positive

influence. Of the eight studies that used panel data, four found significant negative spillovers,

confirming the importance of the distinction between panel data and cross-section results.

       Since quite a few studies report that spillovers are discouraged by very large gaps

between foreign and domestic firms, by restrictive trade regimes, or by other institutional factors,




                                                                                                    46
the composition of the sample of countries covered by the small collection of panel data may be

important. Of the four developing countries with panel data included by Görg and Strobl (2001),

Colombia, India, Morocco, and Venezuela, none are listed as “outward- oriented” during the

period covered by the panel data in World Bank (1987). India is called “strongly inward-

oriented”, Colombia, “moderately inward- oriented”, and Morocco and Venezuela are not rated.

Of 42 countries ranked by Wheeler and Mody (1992), Venezuela, is ranked in the next to lowest

category with respect to openness. In World Economic Forum (2002), Colombia, India, and

Venezuela are in the lower half of developing countries with respect to “Technology” and

“Growth Competitiveness.” Perhaps these are not a random sample of developing countries and

not the most likely ones in which to find spillovers.

       The studies of productivity comparisons between foreign- owned and domestically-

owned firms and establishments have generally found that foreign- owned entities had higher

productivity. Almost all the studies showed that some of the higher labor productivity in the

foreign- owned entities could be explained by their greater capital intensity, their larger size, and

their greater use if purchased inputs. The same variables, except for the capital intensity, and

sometimes the purchased inputs, accounted for the differences in total factor productivity. Even

after these factors are removed from the comparison, it is frequently, but not always, found that

there is a residual productivity advantage for the foreign- owned firms. There is more logic to

removing the influence of these other factors in comparisons within developed countries than in

comparisons within developing countries. In developed countries it can more easily be assumed

that there are domestic firms capable of producing with the same capital intensity and managing

plants of the same size. In developing countries, there may be a better case for suggesting that

the technological impact of the foreign firms is broader than what is measured by their total




                                                                                                   47
factor productivity. It also involves their knowledge of how to produce on a large scale and

market the output, how to use capital intensive techniques, and how to combine local inputs with

purchased inputs from the multinational itself or other suppliers. If that is the case, one should

study differences and look for spillovers not only in total factor productivity but also in plant

size, capital intensity, and use of other inputs.

        An unusual study of spillovers to the host country that was focussed directly on spillovers

of knowledge and did not depend on TFP measures at all was Branstetter’s (2000) examination

of patent citations. The higher the level of Japanese affiliates sales in the United States, lagged

two years, the larger the number of U.S. citations to Japanese patents in U.S. firm patent

applications. A recent paper by Singh (2002), analyzing citations in U.S. patent filings, finds

evidence of knowledge flows from local firms to multinationals’ foreign affiliates and from the

affiliates to local firms, and summarizes other studies based on patent citations. This line of

research is a promising addition to studies of knowledge diffusion, bypassing the problems of

productivity measurement.

        Another suggestion that common measures of technology transfer miss the point was

made in an analysis of the impact of inward FDI on China (Chen, Chang, and Zhang, 1995). It

refers to “…FDI’s less than satisfactory contribution in high technology transfer to China,”

which it explains by the high proportion of FDI coming from Hong Kong and Taiwan. The

impact of such investment was that it brought “… the modern concept of management and

marketing…” If that is the case, it is a contribution that would be missed by measures of total

factor productivity from establishment data.

        Productivity spillover studies typically assume that the effect on domestic firms should be

linearly or log-linearly dependent on the foreign share of an industry. It is not obvious that this




                                                                                                     48
should be the case, particularly as the foreign share goes to high levels. Spillover is not

obviously maximized at a foreign share of 100 per cent. One way this problem is recognized is

in Kokko (1996), where industries with foreign shares above 50 per cent are dropped, being

categorized as “enclave industries.”

         A broader problem is that there is little basis for assuming any particular form of the

relationship. Some mechanisms might suggest a linear relation to the foreign participation share,

but others might suggest a strong effect from foreign entry, but little effect from changes in

share.

         One of the few to examine productivity growth in general, rather than only spillovers to

domestic firms was a cross-country, cross-industry study covering in nine OECD countries from

1979 to 1991, by Baldwin, Braconier, and Forslid (1999). They examined labor productivity

growth in seven broad industry aggregates. Although the title of the paper refers to spillovers, no

distinction was made between productivity in foreign- owned firms and that in domestically-

owned ones. This does not match the usual definition of spillovers, in which that distinction is

important, but the results are of interest because they measure the total impact on an industry, a

topic rarely studied. The authors reported that higher FDI penetration levels led to more rapid

growth in industry labor productivity.

         A panel data study of aggregate country effects, without industry distinctions (de Mello,

1999), found that FDI inflows raised growth in both developed and developing countries. In

developed countries, FDI inflows raised TFP growth, but not fixed investment, while in

developing countries it raised fixed investment, but not TFP growth (Table 6). An earlier survey

of 11 studies by de Mello (1997) found a majority reporting positive effects of FDI inflows on

growth, and stronger effect associated with greater openness or export promotion policies and




                                                                                                   49
with a higher level of development. The influence on technological change, and particularly

domestic factor productivity was in the same direction, but observed in fewer studies, again

varying with the same set of country characteristics (Table 3).

       As mentioned earlier, a serious problem with total factor productivity measures,

especially in developing countries, is the weakness of the data on capital stocks. Another

problem with productivity comparisons and productivity spillover measures is that it is extremely

rare to find any measure of output other than value added, or even any comparison with

alternative measures. The assumption underlying the measurement of output by value added,

which is an input measure, is that the firm or establishment is operating in a competitive

environment. If a firm paid wages that exceeded worker productivity, for example, output would

not be exaggerated because profits would be correspondingly reduced, and value added would

still represent output. However, if a firm operated in a protected market, because it was

government- owned or because it sold to the government, or because it sold to its parent, or

because competition was limited in other ways, its value added output measure would be

inflated. Similarly, a firm earning monopoly profits would appear to be highly productive even

if wages were not inflated, because value added would be inflated. Thus, for example, if the

entry or growth of foreign- owned firms broke up a local firm monopoly, the decline in local

firm monopoly profits would appear in the data disguised as a decline in their productivity

resulting from foreign entry.

       While the technological superiority of foreign firms seems clear, as is expected on

theoretical grounds, the evidence on spillovers is mixed. No universal relationships are evident,

but there is evidence that inward FDI has been most beneficial to local firms where they are not

extremely far behind the multinationals’ affiliates.




                                                                                               50
c. Exports and the Introduction of New Industries

       One of the main contributions of inward direct investment in some cases has been to

introduce new industries to a country or drastically change the composition of production. Lipsey

(2000) describes the large role of U.S. affiliates in the electronics industry in East Asia,

especially in the early development of the industry. The earliest data available show U.S.

affiliates accounting for three quarters of exports in some cases, with the share declining over

time. Labor intensive industries, such as food textiles, and apparel, declined, while the share of

chemical and machinery industries in exports rose to more than half (p. 163). Some of the

country studies in Dobson and Chia (1997) are summarized as showing that “…Foreign

firms…saw a way to integrate these countries into worldwide networks of production….

Foreign firms supplied the technology and the links to other parts of the production networks that

completed the set of resources necessary for the growth of these industries” ( ibid, p. 163).

       A set of country and industry-specific case studies of “Export Catalysts in Low –Income

Countries,” devoted to success stories in countries where underlying conditions were

unfavorable, was collected in Rhee and Belot (1990). Foreign direct investment was not the

focus of the research, but the development of new industries was. However, they refer in their

summary to “…the critical role of transnational corporations (TNCs) in the transfer of technical,

marketing, managerial know-how to developing countries—a role more important than the

transfer of financial resources associated with DFI by TNCs.” (p. viii). The development of

plywood manufacturing and export in Indonesia in the 1980s was started by firms from Korea

and Taiwan. They had developed their skills when these countries replaced Japan in plywood

manufacturing and transferred “technical, marketing, and managerial know-how through joint

ventures…” after the home countries lost their comparative advantage as their wages rose (pp.




                                                                                                   51
22-29). A military uniform exporter from Zambia grew from a joint venture with a German firm

that originally was aimed at the domestic market but could draw on export experience from the

German parent when selling locally became impractical (pp. 33-34). In Cote d’Ivoire, a joint

venture with a French company, experienced in marketing and technically skilled, brought the

country into the semi-processed cocoa market (pp. 39-40). The ingredients for expansion of

Jamaican exports of garments to the United States were provided by a joint venture with a

Korean company that supplied “…effective management, effective training in advanced

technology, efficiency of operations, and marketing skills and channels (p. 42). Not all the

catalysts described in the report involved FDI, but quite a few of them did, and the contribution

they made seemed to have little to do with supplying capital and much to do with technology and

marketing knowledge.

       Since export data are available in much more detail than production data in many

countries, the development of new industries or sub-industries, or new varieties of products may

be evident most clearly in the growth of exports. Blomström (1990) describes the role of

multinationals in shifting production in developing countries toward tradable goods and among

tradables, away from import substitution and toward export markets. The role of access to the

international networks of parent multinationals in promoting exports by U.S. affiliates in Asia is

assessed in Lipsey (1998).

       Ireland was an unusual example for Western Europe, in that it went from being extremely

hostile to inward investment, until the late 1950s, to welcoming, and even favoring it by tax and

other policies. One could not have predicted the current comparative advantage of Ireland from

its comparative advantage before inward investment was liberalized, which was that of an

agricultural country. The entrance of foreign firms, together with Ireland’s joining the European




                                                                                                52
Union, transformed the economy into one where foreign firms, exporting over 70 per cent of

their output, accounted for two thirds of manufacturing net output and almost half of

manufacturing employment. In relatively high-tech industries, the foreign firms were geared

almost entirely to export markets (Ruane and Görg, 1999, pp. 51-53).

       Most of the studies of the effects of FDI on host country exports examine the behavior of

the affiliates themselves, generally finding that they are more export- oriented than domestically-

owned firms. Sousa, Greenaway, and Wakelin (2000) went beyond this question to investigate

whether the presence and activities of foreign- owned firms affected the exporting of

domestically- owned firms in the United Kingdom. Using a database of individual UK- owned

manufacturing firms from 1992 to 1996, they found that foreign firms’ R&D in the United

Kingdom, their exporting, and their importance in UK production in an industry were all

significantly related to the probability that a domestic firm in that industry would be an exporter.

There were also some indications that foreign firms’ activities raised the export propensities of

domestically- owned firms. The only comparable study the authors cite is Aitken, Hanson, and

Harrison (1997), for over 2,000 manufacturing establishments in Mexico in 1986-1990. That

study found that higher production by foreign – owned firms in a sector, as well as greater export

activity by those firms, increased the likelihood that domestic firms would export.

       A study of China’s aggregate trade and FDI relationships with individual partner

countries (Liu, Wang, and Wei, 2001) found, in causality tests, that China’s imports from a

country tended to precede inward FDI from that country, and that inward FDI then preceded

exports to the investing country. The initial effect of inward FDI from a country on China’s

exports to the source country was negative, but all the subsequent lagged terms were positive and




                                                                                                    53
much larger, so that the net effect of inward FDI was an increase in Chinese exports to the

investing country.

       The positive influence of inward FDI on host- country exports seems well- established,

whatever the mechanism. And the few studies of spillovers of exporting from affiliates to

domestic firms point in the same direction.



d. Host Country Growth

       One of the main reasons for examining productivity spillovers from foreign- owned to

domestically- owned firms is to understand the contribution of inward FDI to host- country

economic growth. If the higher productivity of the foreign firms was at the expense of lower

productivity in domestic firms, there might be no implications for aggregate output or growth.

There could be growth effects without spillovers, just from the operations of the foreign firms

themselves, but that possibility is rarely explored, except by implication in studies of the impact

of the entrance or growth of foreign firms on the output or growth of a country.

         An optimistic appraisal of the impact of inward FDI was that of Romer (1993b), who

suggested that, for a developing country trying to keep up with or gain on more advanced

countries, the main obstacle was the gap in knowledge, or ideas, rather than in physical capital.

Much of that capital was the human or organizational capital of multinational firms. For more

rapid growth in a developing country, “…one of the most important and easily implemented

policies is to give foreign firms an incentive to close the idea gap, to let them make a profit by

doing so…by creating an economic environment that offers an adequate reward to multinational

corporations when they bring ideas from the rest of the world and put them to use with domestic

resources…” (p. 548).




                                                                                                     54
       One way in which the influence of FDI on host country growth has been studied is

through comprehensive cross- country studies in which the rate of growth of real GDP or GDP

per capita is related to the stock or inflow of FDI. In general, the results of these studies indicate

that the size of inward FDI stocks or flows, relative to GDP, is not related in any consistent way

to rates of growth. However, most studies find that among some subsets of the world’s

countries, FDI, or FDI in combination with some other factor or factors, is positively related to

growth. Blomström, Lipsey, and Zejan (1994) did find that, among developing countries, from

1960 to 1985, ratios of FDI inflow to GDP in a five- year period were positively related to

growth in the subsequent five- year period. However, when the developing countries were

divided between higher- and lower- income countries, FDI promoted growth only in the higher

income countries. Borensztein, De Gregorio, and Lee (1995) found, among 69 developing

countries from 1970 to 1989, that FDI inflows, by themselves, only marginally affected growth,

but FDI interacted with the level of education of a country’s labor force, was a significant

positive influence. That relationship was confirmed for FDI inflows in five- year periods and

growth in subsequent periods in Lipsey (2000a).

       A different explanation for the variety of results was offered by Bhagwati (1978), who

suggested that the growth effects of inward FDI could be favorable or unfavorable, depending on

the incentives offered by host- country trade policies. The efficiency of FDI in promoting

growth would be increased by an export promotion policy and decreased by an import

substitution policy. A test of this hypothesis by Balasubramanayam, Salisu, and Sapsford (1996)

persuaded the authors that in 10 to 18 export promotion policy developing countries, higher

inward FDI flows were associated with faster growth. No effect was found in the remaining

developing countries, presumably following import substitution trade policies.




                                                                                                    55
       A different explanation for the variety of experience with FDI is offered by Alfaro,

Chanda, Kalemli-Ozcan, and Sayek (2002). They find, in a regression analysis for the period

1975-1995 as a whole, and using various measures of financial development, that the existence

and extent of local financial markets is an important determinant of the extent to which FDI

affects growth. That idea, which they trace back to Goldsmith (1969), among others, is her

based on the proposition that in the absence or weakness of local financial markets, local firms

are unable to take advantage of the various kinds of knowledge that they gain from the presence

of foreign firms.

        A recent study including developed and developing countries by Carkovic and Levine

(2000) finds no significant effect of FDI inflows over the whole period, 1960- 1995, and only

irregularly significant effects in five- year periods. They find that none of the variables found in

other studies consistently determine the effect of FDI on growth, although some are significant in

some combinations of conditioning variables.

       In a narrower group of countries, 25 Central and Eastern European and former Soviet

transition countries, Campos and Kinoshita (2002) find that FDI “…is a crucially important

explanatory variable for growth…” The finding survives “…correcting for reverse causality,

endogeneity, and omitted variable bias…” (p. 22). They allege that FDI represents more of a

pure transfer of technology in these transition countries than in most developing countries,

because these countries were industrialized and had relatively well educated labor forces.

       As with the studies of wage and productivity spillovers, those of the effects of FDI inflow

on economic growth are inconclusive. Almost all find positive effects in some periods, or

among some groups of countries, in some specifications, but one cannot say from these studies

that there are universal effects. There are periods, industries, and countries where FDI seems to




                                                                                                   56
have little relation to growth, especially when other factors, mostly related to FDI also are

included as explanations.



V. Conclusions

        Among the early fears about the effects of the growth of multinationals on their home

countries, the worry that they would cause exports from the home country and aggregate

employment to fall has mostly dissipated. There are some indications that multinational

operations have led to a shift toward more capital- intensive and skill- intensive production in the

United States, as labor- intensive, and particularly unskilled labor- intensive production has been

allocated to affiliates in developing countries. The alternative to this shift may have been a shift

to non- affiliated firms in those countries. However, even that reallocation does not appear to

have occurred in Sweden or Japan, so it cannot be considered a universal consequence of

multinational operations.

        Within host countries, it has been abundantly shown that foreign- owned firms pay higher

wages than domestically- owned firms. They do so for many reasons. Foreign- owned firms

tend to be in higher wage sectors of the economy. They tend to hire more educated and better-

qualified workers than locally- owned firms in their industries, and they tend to be larger, more

capital- intensive, and more intensive in their use of intermediate products. Beyond that, there is

some evidence that foreign- owned firms pay a higher price for labor, in the sense of paying

more for a worker of given quality, but there are not many studies that include data on worker

characteristics.

        Evidence on wage spillovers, that is, effects of foreign entry or participation in an

industry or region, or industry within a region, on the wages paid by domestically- owned firms,




                                                                                                  57
is sparse, and not conclusive as to direction. However, there is more evidence that, whatever the

extent and direction of spillovers to domestically- owned plants, the effect of foreign firms’

presence is to raise the average level of wages. The effect may come simply from higher wages

in the foreign– owned operations, even without any effect on locally- owned ones. It might

come from positive spillovers to locally- owned plants. Or it may come from the effects of the

increased demand for labor, even if there is no difference in wage levels between foreign- owned

and domestically- owned plants.

       Many wage studies, if they are based on individual firm or establishment data, include

controls for plant size and, where possible, for capital intensity and other plant characteristics.

They attempt in this way to learn whether wage levels reflect these characteristics other than

foreignness itself, since wage levels are, for example, almost always positively associated with

establishment or firm size. From a policy maker’s point of view, this distillation of the effects of

pure foreignness may not be relevant. An expansion of foreign presence may be desirable

because foreign firms bring larger scale, more capital-intensive, or more technically advanced

methods of production. It does not matter that an identical domestic firm would produce the

same results, because there may not be any such firms, or they may not find it profitable to make

these same investments.

       Even if foreign entry and larger foreign shares of production almost always raise wage

levels, there are some host country losers from their participation. Small or inefficient local

firms may be forced to contract or leave the industry altogether. That may be viewed as a

healthy redeployment of capital, but it is an explanation for some host country opposition to

foreign multinationals.




                                                                                                      58
       Much more effort has gone into productivity comparisons than into wage comparisons,

and most of these are based on total factor productivity when capital data are available or can be

estimated in some way. Productivity comparisons between foreign- owned and domestically-

owned firms or establishments almost always find that the foreign- owned firms have higher

productivity levels. As with the wage comparisons, some of the differences can be associated

with the larger scale of production in foreign- owned plants.

       Evidence on spillovers of superior foreign productivity to domestically- owned firms is

mixed. Some observers conclude that there is substantial evidence for positive spillovers and

others see the evidence as inconclusive. However, the mixed story for spillovers, combined with

the strong evidence for superior productivity in foreign- owned firms, suggests that overall

productivity is improved by the presence of foreign- owned operations, although that question is

rarely, if ever, examined.

        In many of these productivity studies there has been a substantial effort to calculate total

factor productivity comparisons, rather than labor productivity comparisons, and to remove the

influence of firm or establishment size. An effort is made, in effect, to learn whether foreign and

domestic firms are on different production functions. It is not always clear why it is so important

to measure the effect of foreignness alone, untainted by differences in capital intensity and size.

Much of the growth of presently developed countries came from increases in the scale of

production and in its capital intensity. Perhaps the contribution of foreign firms comes partly by

introducing larger scale or more capital intensive methods of production, or differences in

technology may be inextricably tied to differences in scale and capital intensity.

       One effect of foreign entry that is widely accepted is the introduction of new industries or

products to the host- country economy and the tighter linking of the host country to the world




                                                                                                  59
trading system. The contribution of the foreign- owned firms is mainly of knowledge,

particularly knowledge of demand in the world market, and knowledge about how the host

country can find a place in the worldwide allocation of intermediate steps in the path of

production that can be geographically separated. Through both productivity effects and the

development of new (to the host country) products, inward direct investment is associated with

faster economic growth.

        One issue that is missing from the discussion of effects of FDI, a strange omission from a

literature dominated by economists, is the impact on consumers. There could be effects on home

country consumers from imports of cheaper goods produced by foreign affiliates. There could

be effects on host country consumers from more efficient production of goods and services sold

locally and from the weakening of local producer monopoly positions. There have been analyses

in the trade literature of consumer gains from imports, but these are not usually associated with

affiliate production abroad. I have seen no studies of host countries that relate consumer prices

to the presence or activities of foreign affiliates.

        The association of FDI with more trade and faster economic growth would not

necessarily please critics of multinationals. Trade links reduce the freedom of action of a

country’s government domestically, if not that of its people. Fast growth involves disruptions

and the destruction of the value of old techniques of production and old skills. Those who value

stability over economic progress will not be convinced of the worth of the gifts brought by

foreign involvement. That is especially true if the gains are captured by small elements of the

population or if no effort is made to soften the impact of the inevitable losses.




                                                                                                  60
References

Aitken, Brian J., Gordon H. Hanson, and Ann E. Harrison (1997), “Spillovers, Foreign

       Investment, and Export Behavior,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 43, pp. 103-

       132.

Aitken, Brian J., and Ann Harrison (1991), “Are there Spillovers from Foreign Direct

       Investment? Evidence from Panel Data for Venezuela,” Processed, MIT and the World

       Bank, November.

_____________ and___________ (1999), “Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Direct Foreign

       Investment? Evidence from Venezuela,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 3,

       June, pp. 605- 618.

Aitken, Brian J., Ann E. Harrison, and Robert E. Lipsey (1996), “Wages and Foreign Ownership:

       A Comparative Study of Mexico, Venezuela, and the United States,” Journal of

       International Economics, Vol. 40, pp. 345-371.

Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, Sebnem Kalemli-Ozcan, and Selin Sayek (2002), “FDI and

       Economic Growth: The Role of Local Financial Markets,” University of Houston,

       processed, April.

Australia, Productivity Commission (2002), Offshore Investment by Australian Firms: Survey

       Evidence, Melbourne.

Balasubramanyam, V.N., M. Salisu, and David Sapsford (1996), “Foreign Direct Investment and

       Growth in EP and IS Countries,” Economic Journal, Vol. 106, January, pp. 92-105.

Baldwin, Richard E., Henrik Braconier, and Rikard Forslid (1999), “Multinationals, Endogenous

       Growth and Technological Spillovers: Theory and Evidence,” CEPR Discussion Paper

       No. 2155, London, Centre for Economic Policy Research, August.




                                                                                             61
Bergsten, C. Fred, Thomas Horst, and Theodore H. Moran (1978), American Multinationals and

      American Interests, Washington, D.C., Brookings.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (1978), Anatomy and Consequences of Exchange Control Regimes,

      Special Conference Series on Foreign Trade Regimes and Economic Development, Vol.

      XI, Cambridge, MA, Ballinger.

Blomström, Magnus (1983), Foreign Investment and Spillovers, Routledge, London and New

      York.

_________________ (1990), Transnational Corporations and Manufacturing Exports from

      Developing Countries, United Nations Centre on Transnational Corporations, New York,

      United Nations.

_________________, Gunnar Fors, and Robert E. Lipsey (1997), “Foreign Direct Investment

      and Employment: Home Country Experience in the United States and Sweden.”

      Economic Journal, Vol. 107, no.445, pp. 1787-1797.

_________________, and Ari Kokko (1998), “Multinational Corporations and Spillovers,”

      Journal of Economic Surveys, Vol. 12, pp. 247-277.

_________________, Ari Kokko, and Steven Globerman (2001), “The determinants of host

      country spillovers from foreign direct investment: a review and synthesis of the

      literature,” in Nigel Pain, Editor (2002), pp. 34-65.

_________________, Robert E. Lipsey, and Ksenia Kulchycky (1988), “U.S. and Swedish

      Direct Investment and Exports,” in Robert E. Baldwin, Editor, Trade Policy Issues and

      Empirical Analysis, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, pp. 259-297.

_________________, Robert E. Lipsey, and Mario Zejan (1994), “What Explains the Growth of

      Developing Countries?” in William J. Baumol, Richard R. Nelson, and Edward N. Wolff,




                                                                                              62
       Editors, Convergence of Productivity: Cross-National Studies and Historical Evidence,

       New York, Oxford University Press, pp. 243-259.

_________________, and Edward N. Wolff (1994), “Multinational Corporations and

       Productivity Convergence in Mexico,” in William Baumol, Richard Nelson, and Edward

       N. Wolff, Editors, Convergence of Productivity: Cross-national Studies and Historical

       Evidence, Oxford, Oxford University Press.

Blonigen, Bruce A., and Matthew J. Slaughter, “Foreign- Affiliate Activity and U.S. Skill

       Upgrading,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 83, No. 2, May, pp. 362-376.

Borensztein, Eduardo, Jose De Gregorio, and Jong-Wha Lee (1998), “How Does Foreign Direct

       Investment Affect Economic Growth?”, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 45,

       No.1, June, pp. 115-135.

Braconier, Henrik, and Karolina Ekholm (2000), “Swedish Multinationals and Competition from

       High- and Low- Wage Locations,” Review of International Economics, Vol. 8, No. 3, pp.

       448-461.

Brainard, S. Lael (1997), “An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity- Concentration Trade-off

       Between Multinational Sales and Trade,” American Economic Review, Vol. 87, Issue 4,

       September, pp. 520-544.

______________, and David A. Riker (1997), “Are U.S. Multinationals Exporting U.S. Jobs?,”

       NBER Working Paper No. 5958, Cambridge, MA, National Bureau of Economic

       Research, March.

Branstetter, Lee (2000), “Is Foreign Direct Investment a Channel of Knowledge Spillovers?

       Evidence from Japan’s FDI in the United States,” NBER Working Paper No. 8015,

       Cambridge, MA, National Bureau of Economic Research, November




                                                                                               63
Brash, Donald T. (1966), American Investment in Australian Industry, Cambridge, MA, Harvard

       University Press.

Campos, Nauro F., and Yuko Kinoshita (2002), “Foreign Direct Investment as Technology

       Transferred: Some Panel Evidence from the Transition Economies,” The Manchester

       School, Vol. 70, No.3, pp. 398-419.

Carkovic, Maria, and Ross Levine (2002), “Does Foreign Direct Investment Accelerate

       Economic Growth?”, University of Minnesota Department of Finance Working Paper,

       June.

Caves, Richard E. (1974), “Multinational Firms, Competition, and Productivity in Host-Country

       Markets,” Economica, Vol. 41, Issue 162, May.

______________ (1996), Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, Second Edition,

       Cambridge Surveys of Economic Literature, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Chédor, Séverine, and Jean-Louis Mucchielli (1998), “Implantation à l’étranger et performance à

       l’exportation: une analyse empirique sur les implantations des firmes francaises dans les

       pays emergents,” Revue Economique, May.

______________, _____________, and Isabel Soubaya (2002) , “Intra-firm Trade and Foreign

       Direct Investment: an Empirical Analysis of French Firms,” in Robert E. Lipsey and

       Jean-Louis Mucchielli, Editors, Multinational Firms and Impacts on Employment, Trade,

       and Technology, pp. 84-100, London and New York, Routledge.

Chen, Chung, Lawrence Chang, and Yimin Zhang (1995), “The Role of Foreign Direct

       Investment in China’s Post- 1978 Economic Development,” World Development, Vol.

       23, No. 4, pp. 691-703.




                                                                                               64
Chuang, Yih-Chyi, and Chi-Mei Lin (1999), “Foreign Direct Investment, R&D, and Spillover

       Efficiency: Evidence from Taiwan’s Manufacturing Firms,” Journal of Development

       Studies, Vol. 35, No. 4, April, pp. 117-134.

Conyon, Martin, Sourafel Girma, Steve Thompson, and Peter Wright (1999), “The Impact of

       Foreign Acquisition on Wages and Productivity in the UK,” Nottingham, Centre for

       Research on Globalisation and Labour Markets, Research Paper 99/8.

De Mello, Luiz R., Jr. (1997), “Foreign Direct Investment in Developing Countries and Growth:

       A Selective Survey,” The Journal of Development Studies, Vol. 34, No. 1, October, pp.

       1-34.

__________________ (1999), “Foreign Direct Investment- led Growth: Evidence from Time

       Series and Panel Data,” Oxford Economic Papers, Vol. 51, pp. 133-151.

Dobson, Wendy, and Chia Siow Yue, Editors (1997), Multinationals and East Asian Integration,

       Ottawa: International Development Research Centre; Singapore: Institute of Southeast

       Asian Studies.

Doms, Mark E., and J.Bradford Jensen (1998), “Comparing Wages, Skills, and Productivity

       between Domestically and Foreign- Owned Manufacturing Establishments in the United

       States,” in Robert E. Baldwin, Robert E. Lipsey, and J. David Richardson, Editors,

       Geography and Ownership as Bases for Economic Accounting, Studies in Income and

       Wealth, Vol. 59, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, pp. 235-258.

Driffield, Nigel (2001), “The Impact on Domestic Productivity of Inward Investment in the UK,”

       The Manchester School, Vol. 69, No. 1, January, pp. 103-119.

____________, and Sourafel Girma (2002), “Regional Foreign Direct Investment and Wage

       Spillovers: Plant Level Evidence from the Electronics Industry,” Research Paper




                                                                                              65
       2002/04, Leverhulme Centre for Research on Globalisation and Economic Policy,

       Nottingham, University of Nottingham.

Dunning, John H. (1958), American Investment in British Manufacturing Industry, London,

       George Allen & Unwin.

Dunning, John H., and D.C. Rowan (1970), “Inter-firm Efficiency Comparisons: US and UK

       Manufacturing Enterprises in Britain,” in John H. Dunning, Editor, Studies in

       International Investment, London, George Allen & Unwin, 1970, pp. 345-400.

Erdilek, Asim (2002), “Productivity and Spillover Effects of Foreign Direct Investment in

       Turkish Manufacturing: A Plant Level Panel Data Analysis,” Case Western Reserve

       University, Processed.

Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson (1997), “Foreign Direct Investment and Relative

       Wages: Evidence from Mexico’s Maquiladoras,” Journal of International Economics,

       Vol. 42, Nos. 3&4, May, pp. 371–394.

Feliciano, Zadia, and Robert E. Lipsey (1999), “Foreign Ownership and Wages in the United

       States, 1987-1992,” Cambridge, MA, NBER Working Paper No. 6923, January.

Figlio, David N., and Bruce A. Blonigen (2000), “The Effects of Foreign Direct Investment on

       Local Communities,” Journal of Urban Economics, Vol. 48, Issue 2, September, pp. 338-

       363.

Findlay, Ronald (1978), “Relative Backwardness, Direct Foreign Investment, and the Transfer of

       Technology: A Simple Dynamic Model,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 92, Issue

       1, February, pp. 1-16.

Fontagné, Lionel, and Michaël Pajot (2002), “Relationships between Trade and FDI Flows

       within Two Panels of US and French Industries,” in Robert E. Lipsey and Jean-Louis




                                                                                               66
       Mucchielli, Editors, Multinational Firms and Impacts on Employment, Trade, and

       Technology, Routledge, London and New York, pp. 43-83.

Frank, Robert F., and Richard T. Freeman (1975), “Multinational Corporations and Domestic

       Employment,” Cornell University, 1975, processed.

Girma, Sourafel, and Katherine Wakelin (2000), “Are There Regional Spillovers from FDI in the

       UK?” Research Paper 2000/16, Centre for Research on Globalisation and Labour

       Markets, School of Economics, Nottingham.

Girma, Sourafel, David Greenaway, and Katherine Wakelin (2001), “Who Benefits from Foreign

       Direct Investment in the UK?,” Scottish Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 48, No. 2,

       May, pp. 119-133.

Globerman, Steven (1979), “Foreign Direct Investment and ‘Spillover’ Efficiency Benefits in

       Canadian Manufacturing Industries,” Canadian Journal of Economics, Vol. XII, No. 1,

       February.

______________, John Ries, and Ilan Vertinsky (1994), “The Economic Performance of Foreign

       Affiliates in Canada”, Canadian Journal of Economics XXVII (1), 1994, pp. 143-156.

Goldsmith, Raymond W. (1969), Financial Structure and Development, New Haven, Yale

       University Press.

Görg, Holger, and David Greenaway (2001), “Foreign Direct Investment and Intra-Industry

       Spillovers: A Review of the Literature,” Research Paper 2001/37, Globalisation and

       Labour Markets Programme, Nottingham, Leverhulme Centre for Research on

       Globalisation and Economic Policy.




                                                                                               67
Görg, Holger, and Eric Strobl (2000), “Multinational Companies, Technology Spillovers, and

       Firm Survival: Evidence from Irish Manufacturing,” Research Paper 2000/12, Centre for

       Research on Globalisation and Labour Markets, University of Nottingham.

__________ and __________ (2001), “Multinational Companies and Productivity Spillovers: a

       Meta-Analysis,” The Economic Journal, Vol. 111, No. 475, pp. F723-F739, November.

__________ and __________ (2002), “Multinational Companies and Indigenous Development:

       An Empirical Analysis,” European Economic Review, Vol. 46, pp. 1305-1322, August.

Griffith, Rachel (1999), “Using the ARD Establishment Level Data to Look at Foreign

       Ownership and Productivity in the United Kingdom,” Economic Journal, Vol. 109,June,

       pp. 416-442.

Griffith, Rachel, and Helen Simpson (2001), “Characteristics of Foreign- Owned Firms in British

       Manufacturing,” London, The Institute for Fiscal Studies WP01/10.

Haddad, Mona, and Ann Harrison (1993), “Are There Positive Spillovers from Direct Foreign

       Investment?”, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 42, pp. 51-74.

Harris, Richard, and Catherine Robinson (2002), “The Effect of Foreign Acquisitions on Total

       Factor Productivity: Plant- Level Evidence from UK Manufacturing, 1987-1992,

       Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 84, No. 3, August, pp. 562-568.

Harrison, Ann (1996), “Determinants and Effects of Direct Foreign Investment in Côte d’Ivoire,

       Morocco, and Venezuela,” in Mark J. Roberts and James R. Tybout, Editors, Industrial

       Evolution in Developing Countries, New York, Oxford University Press for the World

       Bank, pp. 163-186.




                                                                                               68
Haskel, Jonathan E., Sonia C. Pereira, and Matthew J. Slaughter (2002), “Does Inward Foreign

       Direct Investment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?,” Cambridge, MA, NBER

       Working Paper No. 8724, January.

Hill, H. (1990), “Indonesia’s Industrial Transformation Part II,” Bulletin of Indonesian

       Economic Studies, Vol. 26, pp. 75-109.

Howenstine, Ned G., and William J. Zeile (1994), Characteristics of Foreign- Owned U.S.

       Manufacturing Establishments,” Survey of Current Business, Vol. 74, No. 1, January, pp.

       34-59.

Hufbauer, Gary C., and F. M. Adler (1968), Overseas Manufacturing Investment and the Balance

       of Payments, Tax Policy Research Study No. 1, Washington, D.C., Department of the

       Treasury.

Hymer, S.H. (1960), “The International Operations of National Firms: A Study of Direct Foreign

       Investment,” Ph.D. Dissertation, MIT.

Kathuria, Vinish (2000), “Productivity Spillovers from Technology Transfer to Indian

       Manufacturing Firms,” Journal of International Development, Vol. 12, pp. 343-369.

Kindleberger, Charles P. (1969), American Business Abroad: Six Lectures on Direct Investment,

       New Haven, Yale University Press.

Kokko, Ari (1994), “Technology, Market Characteristics, and Spillovers,” Journal of

       Development Economics, Vol. 4, pp. 279-293.

_________ (1996), “Productivity Spillovers from Competition between Local Firms and Foreign

       Affiliates,” Journal of International Development, Vol. 8, pp. 517-530.




                                                                                           69
__________, Mario Zejan, and Ruben Tansini (2001), “Trade Regimes and Spillover Effects of

       FDI: Evidence from Uruguay,” Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, Vol. 137, No.1, pp. 124-

       149.

Kravis, Irving B., and Robert E. Lipsey (1988), “The Effects of Multinational Firms’ Foreign

       Operations on their Domestic Employment,” NBER Working Paper 2760, Cambridge,

       MA.

Lewis, Arthur (1954), “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour,”

       Manchester School, Vol. XXII, May, pp. 139-91.

Lewis, Cleona (1938), America’s Stake in International Investments, Washington, D.C.,

       Brookings.

Lipsey, Robert E. (1994), “Foreign- Owned Firms and U.S. Wages,” NBER Working Paper No.

       4927, Cambridge, MA, National Bureau of Economic Research.

______________ (1995), “Outward Direct Investment and the U.S. Economy,” in Martin

       Feldstein, James R. Hines, Jr., and R. Glenn Hubbard, The Effects of Taxation on

       Multinational Corporations, Chicago, The University of Chicago Press, pp. 7-41.

______________ (1998), “Trade and Production Networks of US MNEs and Exports by their

       Asian Affiliates,” in John H. Dunning, Editor, Globalization, Trade, and Foreign Direct

       Investment, Series in International Business and Economics, Oxford, Elsevier Science,

       Ltd.

______________ (2000), “Affiliates of U.S. and Japanese Multinationals in East Asian

       Production and Trade,” in Takatoshi Ito and Anne O. Krueger, The Role of Foreign

       Direct Investment in East Asian Development and Trade, NBER East Asian Seminar on

       Economics, Vol. 9, Chicago, The University of Chicago Press, pp.147-190.




                                                                                               70
______________ (2002a), “Foreign Production by U.S. Firms and Parent Firm Employment,” in

       Robert E. Lipsey and Jean-Louis Mucchielli, Editors, Multinational Firms and Impacts on

       Employment, Trade, and Technology: New Perspectives for a New Century, London,

       Routledge.

______________ (2002b), “Foreign Direct Investment and the Operations of Multinational

       Firms: Concepts, History, and Data,” in James Harrigan, Editor, Handbook of

       International Economics, Oxford, Blackwell, forthcoming.

_____________, Irving B. Kravis, and Romualdo A.Roldan (1982), “Do Multinational Firms

       Adapt Factor Proportions to Relative Factor Prices?” in Anne O. Krueger, Editor, Trade

       and Employment in Developing Countries, 2: FactorSupply and Substitution, Chicago,

       University of Chicago Press, pp. 215-255.

_____________, Eric Ramstetter, and Magnus Blomström (1999), “Parent Exports and Affiliate

       Activity in Japanese Multinational Companies, 1986, 1989, 1992,” in Japan, Institute for

       International Trade and Investment, Analytical Research Based on Data from the Survey

       of Overseas Business Activities, Survey Research on Harmonizing Globalization Based

       on the 1997 Survey of Overseas Business Activities, Tokyo, Institute for International

       Trade and Investment, pp. 93-146.

_____________, _____________, and ____________ (2000a), “Japan’s Exports and Affiliates

       of Japanese Multinational Corporations, 1986-1995,” in Japan, Institute for International

       Trade and Investment, Analytical Research Based on Data from the Survey of Overseas

       Business Activities, Survey Research on Harmonizing Globalization Based on the 1998

       Survey of Overseas Business Activities, Tokyo, Institute for International Trade and

       Investment, pp. 51-97.




                                                                                                71
_____________, ______________, and ____________ (2000b), “Outward FDI and Parent

       Exports and Employment: Japan, the United States, and Sweden,” Global Economic

       Quarterly, Vol. 1, No. 4, October-December, pp. 285-302.

_____________, and Fredrik Sjöholm (2001), “Foreign Direct Investment and Wages in

       Indonesian Manufacturing,” NBER Working Paper No. 8299, Cambridge, MA, National

       Bureau of Economic Research.

_____________, and Merle Yahr Weiss (1981), “Foreign Production and Exports in

       Manufacturing Industries,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. LXIII, No. 4,

       November, pp. 488-494.

_____________, and _______________ (1984), “Foreign Production and Exports of Individual

       Firms,” Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. LXVI (66), No. 2, May, pp. 304-308.

Liu, Xiaming, Chengang Wang, and Yingqi Wei (2001), “Causal Links Between Foreign Direct

       Investment and Trade in China,” China Economic Review, Vol. 12, pp. 190-202.

Madden, John T., Marcus Nadler, and Harry C. Sauvain (1937), America’s Experience as a

       Creditor Nation, New York, Prentice-Hall.

Manning, Chris (1998), Indonesian Labour in Transition: An East Asian Success Story?,

       Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.

Markusen, James R. (1997), “Trade versus Investment Liberalization,” NBER Working Paper

       No. 6231, Cambridge,MA, NBER.

________________, and Keith E. Maskus (2001), “General-Equilibrium Approaches to the

       Multinational Firm: A Review of Theory and Evidence,” NBER Working Paper No.

       8334, Cambridge, MA, NBER.




                                                                                           72
Mundell, Robert (1957), “International Trade and Factor Mobility,” American Economic

       Review, Vol. 47, Issue 3, June, pp. 321-335.

Okamoto, Yumiko, and Fredrik Sjöholm (1999), “FDI and the Dynamics of Productivity:

       Microeconomic Evidence,” Working Paper Series in Economics and Finance, No. 348,

       Stockholm School of Economics, December.

Oulton, Nicholas (2001), “Why Do Foreign- owned Firms in the UK Have Higher Labour

       Productivity?,” in Nigel Pain, Editor (2001), pp. 122-161.

Pain, Nigel, Editor (2001), Inward Investment, Technological Change, and Growth, Basingstoke,

       Hampshire, and New York, Palgrave, in Association with the NIESR.

Ramstetter, Eric D. (1999), Comparisons of Foreign Multinationals and Local Firms in Asian

       Manufacturing Over Time,” Asian Economic Journal, Vol. 13, No. 2, June, pp. 163-203.

Reddaway, W.B., in collaboration with J.O.N. Perkins, S.J. Potter, and C. T. Taylor (1967),

       Effects of U.K. Direct Investment Overseas: An Interim Report, Cambridge, Cambridge

       University Department of Applied Economics, Occasional Paper 12.

________________________________ S. J. Potter and C. T. Taylor (1968), Effects of U.K.

       Direct Investment Overseas: Final Report, Cambridge, Cambridge University Department

       of Applied Economics, Occasional Paper 15.

Rhee, Yung Whee, and Therese Belot (1990), “Export Catalysts in Low-Income Countries,”

       World Bank Discussion Paper 72, Washington, D.C., The World Bank.

Rippy, J. Fred (1931), The Capitalists and Colombia, Studies in American Imperialism, New

       York, The Vanguard Press.

Romer, Paul M (1993a), “Two Strategies for Economic Development: Using Ideas and

       Producing Ideas,” Proceedings of the World Bank Annual Conference on Development




                                                                                              73
       Economics, 1992,” Supplement to The World Bank Economic Review and The World

       Bank Research Observer, Washington, DC, The World Bank, pp. 63-91.

____________ (1993b) “Idea Gaps and Object Gaps in Economic Development,” Journal of

       Monetary Economics, Vol. 32, No. 3, December, pp. 543- 573.

Ruane, Frances, and Holger Görg (1999), “Irish FDI Policy and Investment from the EU,” in

       Ray Barrell and Nigel Pain, Editors, Innovation, Investment and the Diffusion of

       Technology in Europe, Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, pp. 44-67.

Singh, Jasjit (2002), “Knowledge Diffusion and the Role of Multinational Subsidiaries: Evidence

       Using Patent Citation Data,” Boston, Harvard Business School, Processed, October.

Sjöholm, Fredrik (1999), “Technology Gap, Competition and Spillovers from Foreign Direct

       Investment: Evidence from Establishment Data,” Journal of Development Studies, Vol.

       36, No. 1, October, pp. 53-73.

Slaughter, Matthew J. (2000), “Production Transfer within Multinational Enterprises and

       American Wages,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 50, No.2, April, pp. 449-

       472.

Sousa, Nuno, David Greenaway, and Katherine Wakelin (2000), “Multinationals and Export

       Spillovers,” Research Paper 2000/14, Centre for Research on Globalisation and Labour

       Markets, School of Economics, University of Mottingham.

Swedenborg, Birgitta (1973), Den Svenska Industrins Investeringar I Utlandet, Stockholm,

       Industriens Utredningsinstitut.

_________________ (1979), The Multinational Operations of Swedish Firms: An Analysis of

       Determinants and Effects, Stockholm, Industriens Utredningsinstitut.




                                                                                              74
_________________ (1982), Svensk Industri I Utlandet, En Analys av Drivkrafter och Effekter,

       Stockholm, Industriens Utredningsinstitut.

__________________ (1985), “Sweden,” in John Dunning, Editor, Multinational Enterprises,

       Economic Structure, and International Competitiveness, London, Wiley, pp. 217-248.

__________________ (2001), “Determinants and Effects of Multinational Growth: The Swedish

       Case Revisited,” in Magnus Blomström Linda S. Goldberg, Editors, Topics in Empirical

       International Economics, Chicago, University of Chicago Press, pp. 99-131.

__________________, Goran Johansson-Grahn, and Mats Kinnwall (1988), Den Svenska

       Industrins Utlandsinvesteringar, 1960-1986, Stockholm, Industriens Utredningsinstitut.

United Nations (2000), World Investment Report, 2000: Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions

       and Development, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, New York

       and Geneva, United Nations.

____________ (2001), Measures of the Transnationalization of Economic Activity, United

       Nations Conference on Trade and Development, New York and Geneva.

Wang, J.Y., and Magnus Blomström (1992), “Foreign Investment and Technology Transfer: A

       Simple Model,” European Economic Review, Vol. 36, pp. 137-155.

Wheeler, David, and Ashoka Mody (1992), “International Investment Location Decisions: the

       Case of U.S. Firms,” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 33, No. ½, August, pp. 57-

       76.

Wilkens, Mira (1989), The History of Foreign Investment in the United States to 1914,

       Cambridge, MA, Harvard University Press.

World Bank (1987), “Trade Policy and Industrialization,” World Development Report, 1987,

       June, Washington, D.C., World Bank, pp. 78-94.




                                                                                                75
World Economic Forum (2002), Global Competitiveness Report, 2001-2002, World Economic

      Forum.




                                                                                        76
