                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              SOURCES OF BIAS AND SOLUTIONS
                                    TO BIAS IN THE CPI


                                             Jerry Hausman


                                          Working Paper 9298
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9298


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




Peter Diamond and Ariel Pakes provided useful discussions. Erwin Diewert provided many
comments and has made many suggestions in my research on this topic over the years. Amy
Sheridan provided research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Jerry Hausman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Sources of Bias and Solutions to Bias in the CPI
Jerry Hausman
NBER Working Paper No. 9298
October 2002
JEL No. C43, D12, D43
                                              ABSTRACT


        Four sources of bias in the Consumer Prices Index (CPI) have been identified. The most

discussed is substitution bias, which creates a second order bias in the CPI. Three other changes

besides prices changes create first order effects on a correctly measured cost of living index (COLI).

(1) Introduction of new goods creates a first order effect of “new good bias” (2) Quality changes

in existing goods will lead to “quality” bias, which has first order effects (3) Shifts in shopping

patterns to lower priced stores can create first order “outlet bias”. I explain in this paper that a “pure

price” based approach of surveying prices to estimate a COLI cannot succeed in solving the 3

problems of first order bias. Neither the BLS nor the recent report C. Schultze and C. Mackie, eds.,

At What Price (AWP, 2002), recognizes that to solve these problems, which have been long known,

both quantity and price data are necessary. I discuss economic and econometric approaches to

measuring the first order bias effects as well as the availability of scanner data that would permit

implementation of the techniques. Lastly, I review recent research that demonstrates that these

sources of bias are large in relation to measured inflation in the CPI.

Jerry Hausman
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
jhausman@mit.edu
                       Sources of Bias and Solutions to Bias in the CPI

                                        Jerry Hausman, MIT1
                                         September 30, 2002


I. Introduction

         Return to the days of 19th century London of Dickens’ characters and

impenetrable fogs. A social reformer decides to measure the required minimum cost for

a family of four to have a “proper lifestyle”. The social reformer defines the needed

quantities or “basket” of goods and ventures into the fog to find the prices for the goods

in questions. A year later she goes out again to measure how prices have changed to re-

compute her crude cost of living index (COLI). J. Lowe advocated this approach in

1823.2

         As “every schoolboy knows” (an English expression) this “constant basket”

approach suffers from numerous biases and flaws. The most-discussed flaw is the failure

to allow for substitution. When some prices increase the consumer will switch to cheaper

goods, and vice versa. Use of a constant basket with period 1 quantities, the Laspeyres

approach, will overestimate the change in the COLI, leading to “substitution bias”.3

However, this substitution bias has only a second order effect on the measurement of a




1
  Peter Diamond and Ariel Pakes provided useful discussions. Erwin Diewert provided many comments
and has made many suggestions in my research on this topic over the years. Amy Sheridan provided
research assistance.
2
  See Diewert (1993) for an interesting early history of price index research. Dickens was 11 years old in
1823.
3
  Use of period 2 quantities, the Paasche approach, yields the opposite problem. Konus (1924)
demonstrated that the COLI is bounded by the Paasche and Laspeyres price indices. Bowley (1899) and I.
Fisher (1922) recommended using the geometric mean of the two indices which yielded the first “second
order approximation” that accounts for substitution effects.


                                                    1
correct COLI.4 Calculation of the change in the CPI accounts for the first order effect by

multiplying the period 1 quantities by the change in prices.

         Three other changes besides prices changes create first order effects on a

correctly measured COLI. They will create first order biases in a CPI if they are ignored.

(1) Introduction of new goods creates a first order effect of “new good bias” if ignored.5

(2) Quality changes in existing goods will lead to “quality” bias, which has first order

effects on a COLI.6 (3) Shifts in shopping patterns to lower priced stores can create first

order “outlet bias”.7 However, none of these first order effects can be measured correctly

by price changes alone. Thus, the current BLS data collection approach where the BLS

collects only price data cannot correctly take account of these first order biases.8

         Consider an example where both quality and price increase for an existing good.

Yet, consumers buy more of the good. Our London social reformer, and the current BLS

procedure for most goods, would find that the price index had increased or stayed the

same. However, it is quite likely that a correctly measured COLI would decrease. The

social reformer would have no approach for new goods, again in common with the BLS.

She would put them into the basket at the current price and wait for the price to change,

which is the BLS procedure. Often, much of the increase in consumer welfare from

introduction of the new good, which should be included in a proper COLI, will never be



4
  By first and second order effects, I mean the term that arises in a Taylor expansion of the COLI as I
demonstrate subsequently.
5
  Marshall (1887) discussed problems in measuring the cost of living arising from the introduction of new
goods
6
  Sidgwick (1883) discussed the problem of quality change.
7
  Recent immigration in the east end of London may have led to new stores that charged less than the
existing retail outlets.
8
  The BLS periodically collects expenditure (quantity) data to estimate the weights that enter the CPI.
However, the BLS would need to collect quantity data at high frequency, similar to collection of price data,
to take account of these three sources of bias.


                                                     2
measured by the BLS.9 Lastly, for shifts in shopping patterns if a consumer pays less for

identical goods the COLI would typically decrease. Success of new outlets, such as Wal-

Mart, which now sells approximately 10%-15% of many branded consumer products and

is the largest supermarket chain in the US, would attest to the economic importance to

consumers of lower prices.10 While the social reformer would take account, in a simple

unweighted average, of the prices of the new outlets, she would not take account of the

shift in spending to the new outlets. Again, her approach and the BLS approach would be

the same creation of first order biases.

        I explain in this paper that a “pure price” based approach of surveying prices to

estimate a COLI cannot succeed in solving the 3 problems of first order bias that I have

discussed. The recent report by the Committee on National Statistics (Committee), C.

Schultze and C. Mackie, eds., At What Price (AWP, 2002), recognizes the existence of

these problems, which have been long known, but it does not recommend correct

approaches to deal with them.11

        Any correct approach to incorporating these issues into a COLI must take account

of both quantities and prices.12 By failing to recognize this fundamental point, the

Committee has failed to recommend an approach to the BLS that would lead to a COLI

approach for the 21st century. Instead, the Committee has recommended solutions to




9
  For cellular telephones where it took the BLS 15 years to introduce them into the CPI, see Hausman
(1999).
10
   Wal-Mart’s sales for 2001 for the following companies were: Gillette 12%, Proctor and Gamble 15%,
and Revlon 19.9%.
11
   The study was funded by the BLS. The Committee basically accepts the current BLS approaches to
these problems.
12
   Diewert (1998) and Hausman (1999) have both previous emphasized the importance of quantity data.
Alternatively, expenditures and prices will yield the similar information to quantities and prices.


                                                  3
second order problems of the early 20th century, which will lead to minor improvements

in the original 19th century approach to price index estimation.13

         In the 19th century quantities sold could not be economically measured.

However, beginning in about 1985 as bar code scanners (developed in part at MIT)

became common in US retail outlets, two companies, AC Nielsen and IRI, began

collecting price and quantity data in great detail from retail outlets.14 Almost every retail

outlet is now computerized, and its prices and quantities are recorded and often collected

and re-sold to manufacturers. Supermarkets, neighborhood convenience stores,

pharmacies, and “big-box” (Circuit City) retail outlets all have data that can be purchased

from vendors.15 Thus, the quantity data needed to estimate a “modern” COLI is in large

part available.16 My suggestion would be for the BLS to begin to collect these quantity

and price data and for the BLS to research and develop methods to collect quantity data

where it does not currently exist.17 Sending price surveyors out to stores, which is the

main approach used by the BLS as with the 19th century social reformer, will not get the

job done in the 21st century.18



13
   I discussed the requirement to collect quantity data to estimate a correct cost of living index in Hausman
(1999).
14
   These companies gather the information at the SKU (stock keeping unit) level so that not only is the
exact product known, e.g. Apple Cinnamon Cheerios, but the package size and type is also known along
with the price.
15
   Family purchases in terms of prices and quantities for a random sample of households are also available.
Thus, while the Committee’s worried that the consumer expenditure survey is inaccurate (AWP p. 253), it
did not explore the use of electronic collection of family expenditure data that is currently ongoing.
16
   Furthermore, these data are collected in “real time.” The Committee repeatedly emphasizes the 2-3 year
delay associated with collection of expenditure or quantity data (e.g. AWP p. 57). Scanner data are
available almost immediately and could be incorporated into a price index without a 2-3 year delay.
17
   The BLS has done limited experimentation with scanning data, but has not yet realized that both price
and quantity data are crucial to correct estimation of a CPI. See Silver and Heravi (2001a,b) for results
using of scanner data in the UK and its effect on the calculation of traditional price indices.
18
   The Committee discusses the use of scanner data within the current BLS framework (AWP pp. 266ff).
The Committee has only a very brief discussion (AWP pp. 273ff) regarding using scanner data to decrease
biases in the CPI which I will discuss subsequently without the recognition of the requirement of using
quantity data to reduce bias.


                                                      4
II. Evaluation of Biases in the CPI

        I conduct all my analysis in terms of a cost of living index (COLI), not a “price

index”.19 A COLI is the correct theoretical tool to measure the effect on consumer

welfare of price changes, quality changes, and introduction of new goods, as the

academic literature has long noted and as the BLS has recognized.20 Thus, I define the

COLI based on the expenditure function, which is defined as the minimum income

required for a consumer to reach a given utility level:

(1.1)    y = e( p1 , p 2 ,..., p n ; u ) = e( p, u ) solves min ∑ pi qi such that u ( x) = u
                                                                          i


where there are n goods labeled qi. The expenditure function arises either from the
consumer demand functions through integration or from the constrained maximization of
the direct utility function u(x), using duality theory.21 The change in the required income
when, for instance, price change between period 1 and period 2, follows from the
compensating variation (CV):22


(1.2)    y 2 ( p 2 , u 1 ) − y 1 = CV = e( p 2 , u 1 ) − e( p 1 , u 1 )




19
   The Boskin (1996) Commission recommendation was that the BLS approximate a COLI as closely as
possible. The Committee also finds that a conditional (on environmental background factors) COLI
provides the correct concept for the CPI (AWP p. 73). I do not debate the political economy question of
what is the appropriate index to use for government benefit programs, e.g. Social Security. I find it
unfortunate that many economists have interpreted the Boskin (1996) Report as a “Republican” view of the
CPI and the Committee Report as the “Democratic” response, see e.g. Madrick (2001), whose
recommendation the Committee uses on the front cover of its book. Some of the Committee analysis
seems designed to counter the Boskin (1996) report and defend the BLS approach.
20
   See e.g. Pollak (1988) and for the BLS view see e.g. Abraham et. al. (1998). The Committee (2002) has
an extensive discussion of the theoretical basis of the COLI: AWP, chapter 2.
21
   Most modern micro textbooks discuss duality theory. See e.g. Deaton and Muellbauer (1980). For
econometric methods estimating the expenditure function from the estimated demand function see e.g.
Hausman (1981) and Hausman and Newey (1995).
22
   Superscripts denote the period and subscripts number the goods.


                                                            5
The exact cost of living index becomes P ( p 2 , p 1 , u 1 ) = y 2 ( p 2 , u 1 ) / y 1 which gives the

ratio of the required amount of income at period 2 prices to be as well off as in period 1.

As with any index number calculation, the period two utility level, u2, allows for a

different basis to calculate the cost of living index.



        1. The Effect of New Goods and Services on a COLI: New Good Bias

        Many new products and services have a significant effect on consumer welfare.

For example, in Hausman (1997a, 1999, 2002) I have estimated that the gain in consumer

welfare from the introduction of cellular telephone in the U.S. exceeded $50 billion per

year in 1994 and $111 billion per year in 1999. As I now demonstrate new goods should

be included in calculation of a COLI, where they have a first order effect. However, the

BLS omits the effect of the introduction of new goods in its calculation of the CPI, thus

imparting an upward bias.23 The Committee recommends that the BLS continue its

current practice of excluding the effect of new goods in the CPI (AWP, p. 160).



        A. Using a “Virtual Price” to Estimate the Effect of a New Good

        I explain how new goods should be included using the classical theory of Hicks

(1940) and Rothbarth (1941) that I have applied in Hausman (1996, 1997a, 1999,

2002).24 I discuss why quantity data are required to include the effect of new goods in a

COLI and demonstrate that exclusion of the effect of new goods creates a first order bias

in a COLI.

23
   When goods disappear from the market, the opposite first order effect occurs. However, typically only
unsuccessful (unprofitable) goods disappear, and their negative effect on consumer welfare will typically
be small as I demonstrate in Hausman (1999). The methodology developed here can be used to measure
the negative effect on economic welfare from the disappearance of goods from the market.
24
   Diewert (1980) has an early discussion of the Hick’s approach to new goods.


                                                    6
        As Hicks (1940) demonstrated, the correct price to use for the new good in the

pre-introduction period is the "virtual" price, which sets demand to zero. Estimation of

this virtual price requires estimation of a demand function, which in turn provides the

expenditure function, which allows exact calculation of the COLI. Given the demand

function I can solve for the virtual price and for the expenditure function and make

correct evaluations of consumer welfare and the change in the COLI from the

introduction of a new product or service. In period 1 consider the demand for the new

                                                               1          1    1         1    1
good, xn, as a function of all prices and income, y, q n = g n ( p1 , p 2 ,..., p n −1 , p n , y 1 ) .

Now if the good were not available in period 1 I solve for the virtual price, p*n, which

causes the demand for the new good to be equal to zero,



                 1           1     1          1     *
(2.1)    0 = q n = g n ( p1 , p 2 ,..., p n −1 , p n , y 1 )



However, instead of using the Marshallian demand curve approach of Hicks (1940) and

Rothbarth (1941) in equation (2.1), I instead use the income compensated and utility

constant Hicksian demand curve to do an exact welfare evaluation.25 Income, y, is solved

in terms of the utility level, u1, to find the Hicksian demand curve given the Marshallian

demand curve specification.

        In terms of the expenditure function I solve the differential equation from Roy's

identity which corresponds to the demand function to find the (partial) expenditure

function, using the techniques that I developed in Hausman (1981). The approach solves

the differential equation, which arises from Roy's identity in the case of common

25
  Estimation of the Marshallian demand curve provides the necessary information to calculate the Hicksian
demand curve.


                                                          7
parametric specifications of demand. To solve for the amount of income needed to

achieve utility level u1 in the absence of the new good, I use the expenditure function to

calculate y* , which is the required income to reach the reference utility level u1.

           The effect on the correctly calculated COLI is “first order” because using Taylor’s

theorem: 26

                                                                               ∂e( p # , u 1 )
(2.2)       y 1 − y* = ( p n * − p 1 n )hn ( p # , u 1 ) = ( p n * − p 1 n )                     for p # ∈ ( p*, p 1 )
                                                                                  ∂p n

where the Marshallian demand for the new good equals the compensated Hicksian

demand, q n ( p 1 , y 1 ) = hn ( p 1 , u 1 ) . Alternatively, equation (3.2) measures the area under

the compensated demand curve fore the new good or service, which yields a first order

magnitude as illustrated in Figure 1. The exact cost of living index becomes P(p1, p*, u1)

= y* / y1.

           Note that to use this approach one must estimate a demand curve, which in turn

implies the expenditure function and the ability to do the exact welfare calculation of

equations (1.2) and (1.3). Thus, the only required assumption is to specify a parametric

form of the demand function as in Hausman (1981, 1996, 1999). Alternatively,

estimation of a non-parametric demand curve could be used with welfare calculations

following the approach of Hausman-Newey (1995). To estimate either a parametric

demand curve or non-parametric demand curve, both price and quantity data are required.

This requirement of quantity data is the basis for my recommendation that the BLS

collect price and quantity data if it wants to estimate an accurate COLI.




26
     By “first order” I mean the leading term in a Taylor approximation to the change in the COLI.


                                                               8
        B. A Simplified Approach to Estimate the Effect of a New Good

        Estimation of the expenditure function in equation (1.2) as well as y* typically

requires significant amounts of data and estimation of a demand curve. Compared to the

usual BLS procedure in estimating the CPI, this approach using features of a demand

function is considerably more complicated. However, estimation of the demand function

for a new product (or equivalently a utility or expenditure function) is a necessary

approach to estimation of y*, so that traditional Laspeyres index number formula or

superlative formulae such as a Fisher index will not suffice in this situation.

        I now propose a conservative approach that decreases the information

requirements and should provide a "lower bound" estimate, which I have applied in

Hausman (1996,1997a, 1999). Once the demand curve is estimated, an approximation

can be used by taking the supporting hyperplane at the observed price and quantities,

   1    1
( p n , q n ) , which then leads to an estimate of the virtual price of the lower bound linear

demand curve to the actual demand curve as illustrated in Figure 1. I claim that this

estimate is conservative because the estimated virtual price from the linear demand curve

will be less than the virtual price from the actual demand curve, unless the "true" demand

curve is concave to the origin, which while theoretically possible would not be expected

to occur for most new products and services. The change in expenditure to hold utility

constant with the introduction of the new product, y1 - y*, is the compensating variation

which again can be approximated by the area under the approximate demand curve above

the observed price.

        This amount is easily computed (for the linear demand curve) as

(2.3)   y 1 − y* ≈ CS = (0.5 p n q n ) / α n



                                               9
where CS is the consumers surplus from the introduction of the new product and α n is

the own price elasticity of demand. In terms of the virtual price, ρ n = p n (α n + 1) / α n .
                                                                              *      1




To estimate equation the compensating variation current revenue Rn = p n q n is required.

Again, this approach emphasizes the need for both price and quantity data. The only

econometric estimate needed is for the price elasticity α n , and this parameter appears to

be the irreducible feature of the demand curve that is needed to estimate the change in the

COLI from the introduction of a new product or service.27



        C. The Likely Importance of New Goods in a Correctly Measured COLI

        I next demonstrate that the introduction of new goods is likely to have a

significant effect on a correctly calculated COLI. In my first new good paper, Hausman

(1996) I demonstrated that significant welfare gains arose from the introduction of Apple

Cinnamon Cheerios.28 Petrin (2002) finds large consumer effects from the introduction

of minivans. While some economists have claimed that the introduction of many new

goods typically do not benefit consumers, I demonstrate that market facts and

economically rational behavior by firms demonstrates that new goods are likely to

significantly benefit consumers.29 I call this outcome the “invisible hand of imperfect

competition”: when firms introduce new products in the expectation of making economic



27
   Other means of estimate the own price elasticity exist besides formal econometric estimation of a
demand curve. All of the approaches require both price and quantity data, which follows from the
definition of a price elasticity.
28
   See Hausman-Leonard (2002) for a recent estimation for estimation of the consumer welfare gains from
another new consumer product.
29
   See e.g. Bresnahan (1997) in his comment to my cereal paper.


                                                  10
profits (beyond their investment cost), significant consumers surplus will also be

created.30

        It is a market fact that companies spend large sums of money introducing

hundreds of new goods into the economy each year. The cost of introducing a new

product is typically in the tens of millions of dollars and may exceed $100 million. Most

of these costs are sunk so that the firm must expect to earn sufficient profits (producers

surplus) to recoup its investment in the new product introduction. While many new

product introductions fail, a sufficient number succeed to make the investment profitable

in a risk adjusted expected value sense.

        I use common forms of a demand specification to demonstrate the effect on

consumers, but the demonstration holds more generally. I begin with a constant elasticity

demand curve and constant marginal costs, MC, while holding prices of other products

constant.31 Consumers surplus for the price elasticity (in absolute value) η > 1 is

CS = pq /(η − 1) .32 Calculating marginal profit with constant marginal cost, MC = c, and

using the first order conditions (FOC) that set ( p − c) = ( p / η ) , the firm’s profits

(producers surplus) equal Π = pq / η . Note that if the demand elasticity η is very large,

the firm cannot earn significant marginal profits to earn back its sunk cost investment in

the new good. Also, note the close relationship between the measure of consumer surplus


30
   While significant consumer benefit will arise, social welfare need not increase because much of the
producers surplus for the firm introducing the new good may arise from the “business stealing” effect from
other firms, as discussed e.g. in Spence (1976) and the numerous papers that have followed.
31
   The usual outcome is that the pries for substitute products will decrease so that consumers surplus will
increase even more than this calculation. For an example with this outcome see Hausman-Leonard (2002).
However, a multi-product firms that introduces a new product may be able to increase prices of its other
products as I demonstrate in Hausman (1996), which creates an offsetting effect.
32
   Note that I am calculating the consumers surplus, rather than the compensating variation (CV) to keep
the arithmetic straightforward. The finding holds also when the CV is used. Without loss of generality I
have chosen units that set the constant in the demand function equal to unity. In imperfect competition the
firm price elasticity of demand for each product will typically exceed unity in magnitude.


                                                    11
and profits. This result creates the “invisible hand result of imperfect competition” since

a moderate price elasticity leads to significant consumers surplus if the good is

successful.

         Now in expectation the firm has profits Π ≥ F where F is the fixed cost for

introducing and advertising the product. F is usually between $30-100 million, and

sometimes higher. Rearranging and using the FOC, the firm’s profits Π = (CS / δ ) where

δ = η /(η − 1) > 1 . Therefore I find that consumers surplus exceeds the fixed costs of

introduction since CS = δ Π ≥δ F ≥ F . Thus, consumers surplus from successful new

products must be high for this demand formulation or firms would not introduce them

since they could not cover their fixed costs.33

         Among a flexible (Box-Cox) family of demand specifications the constant

elasticity demand function yields the highest CS. The linear demand function yields the

lowest CS as I discussed previously. Repeating the analysis for the linear demand

function CS = pq / 2η . From the FOC as in equation (2), it follows that Π = pq / η .

Thus, for the linear demand curve I find CS = 0.5Π ≥ 0.5 F . Thus, the minimum

expected consumers surplus is ½ of fixed costs, which is usually a significant amount.

Indeed, this relationship gives a lower bound for expected consumers surplus for all

demand specifications that are concave to the origin.

         A caveat should be mentioned. The demand curve could become horizontal or

near horizontal at given price where a competing good is equivalent in quality and lower
33
  This economic analysis demonstrates that Bresnahan’s (1997) doubts about the value of new goods, to
which the Committee refers (AWP, p. 160) is inconsistent with observed market behavior by profit-
maximizing rational economic firms. An alternative way to consider the question is with nearly flat (high
η ) demand curves, the consumers surplus would be small, but the firm could not earn sufficient marginal
profits to pay for its fixed cost investment. Note that the fixed costs must be earned back over the lifetime
of the product. However, firms also spend significant fixed costs each year for branded products, e.g.
advertising costs.


                                                     12
in price as in vertical differentiation, e.g. a kink point would exist in the demand curve.

Then the demand curve would not be concave to the origin. For most new differentiated

products, I expect this outcome to be unlikely since brand name has a significant role in

demand. Thus, the “invisible hand of imperfect competition” will typically lead to

significant welfare gains from new product introduction, or otherwise, firms would not

find it economically rational to introduce new products. Omission of the effects of the

introduction of new goods by the BLS is likely to create substantial downward bias in the

CPI.



     2. The Effects of Quality Change on a COLI: Quality Change Bias

     I now consider the effects of quality changes on a COLI. The BLS either does not

adjust for quality change (using a “matching procedure” to link in goods with quality

change) or for some products uses a hedonic adjustment procedure, which I discuss

subsequently. The economic theory of quality change arises in a similar way as the new

good analysis that I discussed in the last section. Here, I assume that good n (old quality)

exists in period 1 while good n+1 (new quality) exists in period 2. The difference in

expenditure functions yield the CV, which is the difference in areas under the two

Hicksian compensated demand curves as illustrated in Figure 2:34



                                     1           1     *                      1           1            *
(3.1)    y 2 − y 1 = CV = e( p1 ,..., p n −1 , p n , p n +1 , u 1 ) − e( p1 ,..., p n −1 , p n , p n +1 , u 1 )




34
  I am keeping all other prices the same between the two periods. Prices of other goods in period 2 may
differ from period 1, but equation (4.1) can be used and then other prices in period 2 can be changed. The
order of the change does not matter because of integrability. For a discussion see e.g. Hausman (1981) or
Hausman-Newey (1995).


                                                           13
            *          *
where p n and p n +1 are the virtual prices that set demand to zero. The difference

between the two expenditure functions typically is a first order effect, as I demonstrated

in equation (2.1). Thus, omission of quality change leads to a first order bias in the

estimation of a COLI. I provide an example of this approach in the appendix.

To estimate the effect of a quality change on a COLI, again quantity data will be

required.

        A (lower bound) approximation, holding the price of the product constant, could

again be used to compute:35



                                   1   2    1   1                    2   1          *     1    2     1
                        0.5( p n q n − p n q n )        0.5 p 1 (q n − q n )    ( p − p n )(q n − q n )
(3.2) y − y* ≈ CV ≈                                 =                          = n
                                       αn                        αn                       2

where p n = p n (α n + 1) / α n . If the price does not change, the estimate is the change in
            *     1




quantity times the price adjusted with the demand elasticity. If the price also changes,

using equation (3.2), I find



                           *   2        1       2   2        1   1
(3.3)    CV ≈ 0.5 [ p n (q n − q n ) − ( p n q n − p n q n )]



so that the change in consumer welfare arises from the increase in quantity purchased

minus the difference in expenditure for the new quality product minus the difference in

expenditure for the previous quality product. In general, the net result of both a quantity

increase due to a shift of the demand curve and a price increase can either increase or


35
  This approximation gives a lower bound for the effect of quality change under the assumptions of a linear
demand curve (as before) and the assumption that the new good with improved quality always has higher
demand than the old quality good at each price (their virtual price is assumed to be the same).


                                                        14
decrease the COLI. Again, we see the first order effect of a quality change and the

requirement to measure quantities to estimate the CV or change in the COLI.

        This analysis also demonstrates that a recommendation of the Committee that the

BLS should endeavor to introduce new goods into the CPI earlier, since the BLS did not

include cellular telephones until 15 years after their introduction in the U.S., only solves

part of the problem. It does not really solve the problem of quality change. The result is

still an upward bias in the estimate of the CPI because the increase in the COLI due to

quality change, as with cellular phones that became smaller, more reliable, with longer

battery life, and more convenient to use, would be totally missed. For an earlier year of

introduction, y* from equation (4.2) is smaller, but once cellular is introduced into the

COLI the demand curve typically continues to shift outwards for a significant period of

time. This outward shift in the demand curve caused by increased quality and diffusion

creates additional consumer welfare, which would be incorporated into a COLI through

equation (4.2). Still, much more frequent updates of expenditure weights in the CPI

would help alleviate the current problem. This change has been recommended by many

economists; see e.g. the Boskin (1996) report.

       Thus, for many new goods in each year two effects are present: a decreased price

for the given demand curve and an outward shift of the demand curve holding price

constant. Because of the use of Hicksian compensated demand functions and expenditure

functions in the calculations, the combined effect of the two economic factors is path

(year of introduction) independent. Introduction of new goods and improved quality of

existing goods are actually similar economic effects, which enter a COLI in a similar

manner. This discussion demonstrates why in the presence of the introduction of new




                                             15
goods and quality improvement (or quality deterioration) of existing goods both prices

and quantities (or revenues) must be used to calculate a correct COLI. The BLS

approach of only using prices and ignoring the information in quantity data will never

allow for a correct estimate of a COLI in the presence of new goods and improvements in

existing goods.36



       3. The Effect of Lower Price Stores: Outlet Bias

       An important market outcome in retailing over the past 30 years is the growth of

discount retail outlets such as Wal-Mart and Best Buy and Circuit City for durables.

Wal-Mart is now the largest supermarket chain in the U.S. and for a number of branded

goods it now sells 10%-20% of the output of large branded companies. These outlets

offer significantly lower prices than “traditional” outlets such as department stores. The

lower prices cause a first order effect in a COLI when consumers shift their shopping

patterns away from traditional outlets to these rapidly growing discount outlets.

Obtaining current price and quantity data from these outlets would be straightforward

since they all employ scanner technology.

           The lower prices create a first order welfare increase in a COLI using the

expenditure function because the derivative of the expenditure function with respect to a

change in price equals the quantity purchased, which is a first order effect.37 This result

demonstrates the first order effect of lower outlet prices for identical products. The result

also demonstrates the requirement to measure the quantity purchased in the discount




36
     The quality of goods may also decrease. The analysis would be the same.
37
     This result is known as “Sheppard’s Lemma”, see e.g. Deaton and Muellbauer (1980).


                                                    16
outlets. Thus, only knowing the prices at the discount outlet does not give the needed

information.

         While the Committee recognizes the possibility of “outlet bias”, it recommends

ignoring this first order problem. It agrees with the implicit BLS assumption that the

difference in service quality lead to an equilibration of a “service adjusted” price. This

argument fails on at least two grounds. First, the shareholders of Wal-Mart would be

amazed to find that consumers are indifferent between shopping at Wal-Mart and

shopping at traditional outlets, given Wal-Mart’s phenomenal growth over the years.38

Also, many consumers place a lower value on their time spent shopping as the recent

dotcom e-commerce “B to C” (business to consumer) failures demonstrate. Thus, the

market evidence goes completely against the Committee’s unsupported claim that outlet

bias is not an important factor in a correct calculation of a COLI and its recommendation

that the BLS continue its current procedure (AWP p. 176). When the discount stores are

gaining market share, then this market outcome is evidence of an outlet substitution effect

that should not be ignored by the BLS.



     4. The Effect of Price Change: Substitution Bias

         Lastly, I come to substitution bias, a second order effect, that the Committee

     spends much of it effort in recommending that the BLS address. Using a Taylor

     approximation around the period one price, when only price j changes, I rewrite

     equation (1.2) as 39



38
   Wal-Mart’s lower prices are in part related to superior logistical systems that have nothing to do with
lower service quality levels.
39
   All other prices re assumed to remain constant except for the jth price.


                                                     17
                                                                   1 2 ∂h j ( p , u )
                                                                               1   1
                             2          1              1     2
        y − y ≈ (pj
         2          1
                                 − p j )h j ( p , u ) + ( p j − p j )
                                                1   1

                                                       2                    ∂p j
(4.1)
                                                      1 2 ∂h j ( p , y )
                                                                  1   1
                2        1                1     2
        = (pj       − p j )q j ( p , y ) + ( p j − p j )
                                    1       1

                                          2                    ∂p j

For each given form of expenditure function, or equivalently the demand functions h and

                                        #
q, there exists a given p j ∈ ( p 1 , p 2 ) that makes equation (4.1) hold with exact equality.

This expression is the basis for Diewert’s (1976) notion of a superlative index.40 The

analysis also explains why Irving Fisher’s (1922) geometric mean approach for period

one and period two prices and numerous other approaches will all approximate some

expenditure (utility) function up to second order. The first term (the first order term) is

taken account of in the current CPI, but the “substitution bias” arises from the second

order term as is illustrated in Figure 3.41 I would not claim that the second order terms

are not important—since prices change over all n goods the sum of the second order

substitution effects could be important.42 However, I do find it a rather strange outcome

when the Committee recommends a partial correction to the substitution bias effect,

which is second order, while the Committee recommends the BLS made no attempted

correction to the first order effects that I discussed above. Also, calculation of all



40
   A superlative price index is one that is exact for some second-order flexible function for a homothetic
utility (expenditure) function. Note that the Diewert approach to second order approximations require the
assumption of a homothetic utility function so all expenditure elasticities are assumed to be unity. This
assumption is well known not to hold in practice. Alternatively, homotheticity can be eliminated if the
reference utility level is changed to a geometric average of the reference utilities in the two periods.
41
   The second term is “second order” because it is the product of a change price times a change in quantity.
It is equivalent to what is often called a “Harberger triangle” used to measure deadweight loss See
Hausman (1981) for a further discussion on the accuracy of measuring this deadweight loss amount. More
generally, if all prices change the derivatives of the compensated demands with respect to prices are the
terms in the Slutsky matrix.
42
   A recent empirical investigation by Shapiro and Wilcox (1997) found moderate bias of about 0.3% per
year caused by the substitution effect.


                                                            18
superlative indices requires quantity (expenditure) information in both period 1 and

period 2.43



     III.      Current BLS Approach to Quality Change: Hedonic Regressions

            The current BLS approach to quality change for most goods is to ignore it.

Instead the new product is matched to an existing product, and a linking procedure

follows. The results can be problematic. For example, when Windows 95 was

introduced, it replaced the combination of MS-Dos and Windows 3.1. Windows 95 had

much superior functionality. The BLS procedure would lead to introduction of the

product with no quality adjustment compared to the existing operating systems. However,

market evidence demonstrates that most consumers were better off because they

purchased Windows 95 when they could have continued to purchase MS-DOS/Windows

3.1 at a lower price. Thus, the BLS procedure would lead to an upward bias in the CPI.

            For a small number of goods, e.g. PCs, the BLS has used a hedonic adjustment for

quality change. The BLS appears to be expanding its use of hedonics, as the BLS

website list a number of “developmental” hedonic research programs for consumer

durable goods.44 Unfortunately, I do not think that a hedonic approach is correct in

general. It does not measure consumer preferences, which are the basis for an

expenditure function and a COLI as demonstrated in equation (1.2).45 More generally,


43
  While the BLS will collect quantity data to account for substitution bias, they are only collecting
expenditure data at the highest levels of aggregation; i.e., at the level of some 200 aggregate commodities.
Thus this data base will not allow for estimation of new good bias, quality bias, or outlet bias.
44
   See http://www.bls.gov/cpi/home.htm. Hedonic adjustments for the following products are listed:
clothes dryers, microwave ovens, college textbooks, VCRs, DVD players, camcorders, and consumer audio
equipment.
45
   Diewert (2001) develops sufficient conditions to allow a hedonic regression to be interpreted as a
function of consumer preferences. However, the assumptions, in my opinion, are too strong to be useful,


                                                     19
since a hedonic approach only uses prices of products without using quantity data, it will

not lead to the correct answer as I discussed above. I now discuss the hedonic adjustment

approach.


         1. Hedonic Quality Adjustment

         The BLS has adopted the hedonic approach to adjust for quality changes for

certain products such as computers. A hedonic regression has price (or log price) on the

left hand side (“dependent variable”) and product characteristics on the right hand side

(RHS or “explanatory variables”). The basic idea is to estimate the coefficients of the

RHS variables and then to adjust observed prices for changes in attributes. For example,

suppose the regression has as a RHS variable the log of the microprocessor speed.

Suppose that the price of a computer decreased by 10% over a year’s time and its

processor speed increased from 1.5 mHz to 2.0 mHz. If other RHS variables had

remained constant the estimated price decrease in percentage terms would approximately

be pˆ = −0.1 − b * 0.33 where b is the estimated coefficient of processor speed in the

estimated regression.

         However, this hedonic regression adjustment has no simple relationship with

consumer valuation of the computer, which is the correct basis for a COLI. The price of

a good under imperfect competition is an interaction of three sets of economic factors:

demand, cost, and competitive interaction.46 A hedonic regression mixes these three sets

of factors together and is not estimating a structural relationship, which would permit

them to be separated. The well-known instability of the estimated coefficients across


and I do not believe that the hedonic regression is identified in an econometric interpretation since the
characteristics of the goods would be jointly endogenous with the price.
46
   Under very special conditions (perfect competition) only cost may matter in determination of the price.


                                                    20
years for a hedonic regression on PCs demonstrates the absence of a structural

relationship.47 In one very special case price does not depend on demand so a hedonic

regression could identify the cost factor. However, this special case arises when no

economies of scale or scope are present—essentially the conditions needed for the

Samuelson-Mirrlees non-substitution theorems.48 An assumption of the absence of

economies of scale and scope would not make sense in the PC industry. Further, the

presence of imperfect competition, e.g. in the PC industry the presence of “brand effects”

that are found to be empirically important in many hedonic regressions (e.g. PCs), gives

another reason why in the PC industry hedonic regression are inappropriate to use to

adjust prices.49

        The correct way to measure the effect of quality change for a COLI is to take

account of demand changes that arise, as I discussed above. But to measure demand

changes, quantities of the various models of PCs must be used. The hedonic approach to

quality change and the BLS is attempting to use a “pure price” approach, which cannot

measure the required compensating variation amount.50

        I consider a situation where a good, which I take to be a given brand of personal

computer (PC), has additively separable utility from consumption of other goods. I

assume that a consumer derives utility from 2 features in a PC, to keep notation simple.

The consumers’ (partially indirect) utility function in period 1 is:

(5.1)    v 1 = m( x 1 , z 1 ) + ( y 1 − p 1 ) = g 1 ( x 1 ) + g 2 ( z 1 ) + ( y 1 − p 1 )

47
   See e.g. Berndt et. al. (1995).
48
   I discuss this question at greater length in Hausman (2002b)
49
   Hausman (1996) discussed the importance of imperfect competition in new product entry and
measurement of the effect of new goods on the CPI. Similar issues arise with quality improvement of
existing goods.
50
   Hedonic demand functions that use quantity data could be estimated, which would allows for correct
treatment of quality change.


                                                             21
where y1 is income in period 1, p1 is the price of the computer, and for ease of exposition

I assume that the features, say microprocessor speed (mHz) and hard drive capacity, enter

separably into the utility function.

         In period 2 the features change to x2 and z2. Assume, for ease of exposition, that

income remains the same. To determine the CV solve for CV = ∆y that causes v 1 = v 2 .

                                                                                     #
Because of the additive separability of equation (5.1) we solve for p 2 that causes the

equality to hold, p 2 # = p 1 + g1 ( x 2 ) − g1 ( x 2 ) + g 2 ( z 2 ) − g 2 ( z 2 ) . Thus, the new “quality

adjusted” price is the old price p1 adjusted for changes in features, where the evaluation is

done using the consumers’ utility valuation.

         In determining the market price of a particular PC, three factors enter the

equilibrium solution: cost, demand and competition.51 In a Nash-Bertrand model of

imperfect competition, which describes the PC industry, price would be set as:

                                      1            1
(5.2)     p 1 = m 1 ∗ c 1 = m1 [ w1 h1 ( x1 ) + w2 h2 ( z 1 )]

where m is the markup over marginal cost c1. The markup factor m1 is determined by the

own price demand elasticity, which in turn depends on competition (through the Slutsky

relation). For example, in Nash-Bertrand competition for differentiated products for the

PC model indexed by j, m j = η j /(η j − 1) where η j > 1 is the (magnitude) of the own
                                  1




price elasticity.52 The wi are the “cost per unit” of the transformed units of the

microprocessor speeds and hard drive capacity.53


51
   Pakes (2001) also discusses problems in interpreting a hedonic regression specification using these
economic factors.
52
   Under perfect competition m=1. For this derivation see e.g. Hausman, et. al., "Competitive Analysis
with Differentiated Products," Annales, D'Economie et de Statistique, 34, 1994.
53
   This discussion also demonstrates that the other BLS method of “cost-based adjustment” for quality
change is also incorrect. The BLS uses this approach for automobiles, but the value to consumers is not


                                                       22
        Note that the hi are determine by technology, the x1 and z1 are determined by the

interaction of consumers preferences, technology, and competition, and the wi are

determined, by cost, demand, and competition in the factor input markets, e.g.

competition between AMD and Intel for microprocessors. The hi are related to the gi

which determine a consumers utility valuation of the components in a PC through a

technology transformation function and demand and competition.54

        A hedonic regression, as used by the BLS to adjust prices for quality changes,

determines the price as a function of a product attributes. Demand and competition are

not taken into account. I assume that the econometrician knows (or figures out) the hi

functions and estimates the conditional expectation (regression function). The estimated

coefficients will combine the markup, which would likely differ across firms unless m=1

(perfect competition) and the factor prices wi. Thus, hedonic regressions are not

structural equations since the markups are likely to change across time as are the factor

input prices, the wi. This derivation is consistent with the empirical evidence for PC

hedonic regression that the coefficients change significantly across years, e.g. Berndt et.

al (1995).

        The hedonic adjustment for quality change in computer type j would yield




determined by the incremental costs. Further, the markup for cars, m>1, further demonstrates that the BLS
approach is incorrect.
54
   To the extent that the choices of hi are in response to consumer preferences, an identification problem
exists that does not allow for separation of consumer preferences and technology.


                                                   23
has no straightforward relationship to the evaluation of CV to hold in equation (5.2).

Thus, price adjustment using hedonic price regression has no relationship, under general

conditions, to what is supposed to be measured in a COLI.55

        Two approaches would, in principle, lead to correct measurement of the CV to

use in a COLI. (1) A demand system could be used to estimate demand for PCs in period

1. The CV can then be calculated as the change in the areas under the demand curves

(consumers surplus) or more generally from the expenditure function estimated in period

1, as I discussed above.56 (2) A discrete choice demand system could be estimated where

the left hand side variable is the share of model j in PC sales and equation (5.1) is

estimated directly. The CV is estimated from equation (5.2).57 The important point to

note is that either method requires quantity data so that estimates of the demand

functions (or equivalently the expenditure or utility functions) can occur. Data on price

and product attributes alone will not allow correct estimation of the CV adjustment to the

COLI.58 Thus, our fictional data gatherer in London in the 19th century, or the BLS

today, must gather quantity data as well as price data to adjust for quality change. While

the task may not have been possible in the 19th century, it is possible today. However,

the current approach of the BLS as well as the recommendations in the Committee report

in At What Price will not lead to the correct approach.
55
   Under special condition of perfect competition and a particular demand function, equation (5.5) can be
related to the appropriate consumer valuation. However, the assumptions are too special to be of any
practical importance. In particular, perfect competition describes few, if any, real world markets.
56
   I used this approach for cellular telephones. See J. Hausman (1999).
57
   I used this approach for different models of air conditioners. See J. Hausman (1979). For a recent
application to automobiles of this approach see Berry et. al. (1995).
58
   I disagree with the Committee’s conclusion that hedonic methods are “probably the best hope” for
improving quality adjustments (AWP p.64, p. 122), since hedonic methods are do not estimate consumer
valuation of a product, and consumer demand is the basis of a COLI as I have demonstrated. Interestingly,
the Committee recommends using the “direct method” of hedonic adjustment (AWP p.129) which requires
high frequency data collection of prices and product attributes. If the BLS also collected quantity data at
the same time, it could estimate the change in the COLI from quality change using methods I discussed in
the last section or from equations (5.1) and (5.2).


                                                    24
                                                                         ′        ′
         Furthermore, since I expect that for PCs, we would find that g i < mwi hi where

the primes denote the derivatives, i.e. consumers get less marginal utility for a given

increase in an attribute than the increase in marginal cost, the typical result is that the

BLS adjustment for quality is too large for PCs.59 Thus, I would expect the result that the

BLS hedonic adjustment for PCs has been too large and the price index for PCs used by

the BLS is downward biased with respect to quality adjustments. However, in other

markets for other products the inequality will likely go in the reverse direction, as I

discuss below. The important conclusion is that for any particular product and market,

the hedonic price adjustment does not measure the change in any COLI. Analysis of

quantity data and price data could lead to a correct adjustment.

         2. Medical Goods and Services

         Medical goods and services create two special difficulties: measurement of

outputs and technological change, which is especially rapid. The Committee determined

that outcome-based measures should not be used. (AWP p. 188) The Committee

recommends using diagnosis-based measures instead of input-based measures where

feasible. This recommendation is an improvement, but it does not measure quality

change. For example, improvements in treating breast cancer have been remarkable over

the past decade. While the price has not decreased and may well have increased, given

that survival times have increased significantly many families would be willing to pay a




59
  As an example, suppose in period 1 the hedonic regression measures microprocessor speed in log and a
50% increase in speed lead to a 10% higher price for PCs. In period 2 a PC with the faster microprocessor
speed would have its quality adjusted price reduced by 10% using the hedonic regression. My conjecture is
                                                  1
that thee representative consumers’ function g ( x ) is unlikely to have increased by 10%. If so, the quality
adjustment is too large, leading to a downward biased estimate of the CPI.


                                                      25
large amount of money for the improvement in survival probabilities. A correctly

measured COLI would account for this improvement in outcomes.

         Problems from the interaction of output measurement and technological change

are especially striking for prescription drugs. For existing drugs with patent protection,

price increases have generally been in line with the CPI over the past decade in the range

of 2%-3% per year. When existing drugs come off patent, generic entry is usually rapid

with a significant decrease in price for the generic drug. The CPI for prescription drugs

increased by 4.4% in 2000 and 5.4% in 2001. However, about 25 new drugs are

approved each year. Many of these drugs sell substantial amounts, in the hundreds of

million or billions of dollars per year. In a given year since it is extremely rare for an

existing drug to exit the market, a consumer could continue to buy the old drugs. To the

extent a consumer buys a new, and more expensive drug, for an illness, it is because she

will be better off with the more expensive drug.60 Otherwise, she could buy the old, and

less expensive, drugs. But the BLS nowhere takes account of this improvement in

medical technology and outcomes. The BLS matching approach leads to an overestimate

of the effect of price increases in prescription drugs because it does not account for

improved quality. Nor would a hedonic approach typically be able to be used since an

improvement such as “less side effects” would essentially be an indicator variable with

no explanatory power. The correct approach would be take quantity into account to

measure the compensating variation that goes into a correctly measured COLI.61 Again,

until the BLS begins to take quantities into account, it will not be able to measure

correctly the effects of medical products and services.

60
   I am assuming that doctor’s recommendations are aligned with the consumer’s welfare. To calculate a
COLI, a necessary assumption is that consumers make rational economic choices.
61
   Quantities of prescription drugs sold (and their prices) are readily available from commercial vendors.


                                                    26
     IV.      Estimation of Overall Bias in the CPI

           The CPI is an extremely important tool for economic analysis. The CPI allows

for changes of “nominal” measures into “real” (inflation adjusted) measures. As these

terms suggest, the U.S. government should devote significant resources to the

measurement of the CPI in terms of a COLI because our economic knowledge of

consumer welfare depends, in large part, on accurate measurement. Evaluation of the

bias in the CPI has been difficult with much of the debate based on a few select

measurements, i.e. “analysis by anecdote.”62 Here I review some recently published

research that estimates the bias in the CPI by considering aggregate consumption data.

This analysis, while not definitive, is suggestive of substantial upward bias in the BLS

CPI. The Committee report did not address this research in its evaluation of the

magnitude of the bias in the CPI.

           Costa (2001) and Hamilton (2001) estimate bias in the CPI by using expenditure

survey data to estimate the increase in households’ expenditures versus their real income

over time. This procedure will capture “outlet bias” and “substitution bias”, but it will

not measure either “new good bias” or “quality change” bias. To the extent that most

(all) economists would agree that net quality change has been an improvement over time,

the Costa and Hamilton approaches will yield an under-estimate of CPI bias.

           The basic empirical methodology is to compare households with similar

demographic characteristics and the same real income at different points in time and




62
  Indeed, the debate is similar to some court proceedings where the Court decides based on chosen
examples that the opposing sides present, rather than a systematic analysis of the data.


                                                   27
compare their expenditures of given categories of expenditure.63 Costa (2001) uses food

and recreation expenditures. Using data from 1972-1994 Costa finds that cumulate CPI

bias during this period was 38.4% with an annual bias of 1.6% per year.64 Hamilton

(2001) also estimates CPI bias to be 1.6% per year during this period, using a similar

econometric approach on a different data set. This sizeable estimate of bias demonstrates

how the BLS procedure over estimates the COLI. The actual bias would be even greater

if the effect of new goods bias and quality change bias were included.65

         A recent estimate of quality growth by Bils and Klenow (2001) finds a significant

estimate of quality bias over the period 1980-1996.66 They estimate that the BLS

understated quality improvement and overstate inflation by 2.2% per year on products

that constituted over 80% of US spending on consumer durables.67 These more aggregate

studies along with my (and other) micro studies on particular goods demonstrate that CPI

bias is likely to be substantial.

         The Committee in AWP does not recommend solutions to these bias problems.

Until the BLS incorporates quantity data into their data collection and estimation

procedure, these sources of bias will continue to exist in the CPI. The magnitude of the

biases are much too large to be ignored. New goods bias, quality bias, and outlet bias are




63
   The identifying assumption, besides functional form, is that the expenditure elasticities remain constant
over time for a given category of expenditure after controlling for demographic characteristics. Thus,
residuals from the relationship between real income and predicted expenditures are used to estimate the
bias in prices that are used to deflate income.
64
   Costa’s estimates of annual bias range from 1.4% to 2.6% per year over this period.
65
   The Boskin Report (1996) estimated that these two sources of bias were the largest source of bias in the
CPI during the 1975-1994 period.
66
   They use expenditure data on durable goods, which takes account of the quantities purchased as I
discussed above.
67
   Bils and Klenow use a constant elasticity of substitution specification, which with its implication of the
independence of irrelevant alternatives, may yield an over estimate of quality change as I discuss in
Hausman (1996).


                                                     28
first order biases in the CPI, which the BLS does not correctly adjust for. The BLS

should begin to develop methods that account for these biases.




                                           29
                                                           Appendix



     Estimating the Effect of a Quality Change

     I demonstrate the effect of quality change on a particular example. To calculate the

expenditure function of equation (3.4), as an example, I use the results of Hausman

(1981) for a constant elasticity demand curve to calculate



                                                1+α
(A.1)    e (p,u 1 ) = [ (1 - δ ) (u 1 + A p n         /(1 + α )) ] 1/(1-δ )



where A is the intercept of the demand curve, α is the price elasticity, and δ is the income

elasticity. To consider quality change in its most straightforward setting, I assume that the

price pn remains constant across the two periods but that A increases due to quality

improvement so that the demand curve shifts outward.68 The compensating variation is

calculated from equation (4.1) where y is income:

                                                                         1/(1-δ )
               (1 - δ ) -δ                              (1-δ )
(A.2)    CV =          y [ p 2 n x 2 n - p1 n x1 n ] + y                          - y1
              (1 + α )                                        




68
  Thus, the coefficient A captures the attributes of the product which may be changed by the manufacturer
or may change due to factors such as network effects, e.g. for cellular telephones. The combined effect of
both a shift of the demand curve and a price change can be estimated in a straightforward manner using this
approach. Of course, the econometric estimation must be able to separate out a shift of the demand curve
from movement along a demand curve, which is one of the oldest problems in econometrics.


                                                           30
        If a greater quantity is bought at the same price, consumer welfare typically

increases.69 I applied this approach to calculate the increase in consumer welfare from

improved quality of cellular telephone networks in Hausman (1999).




69
 The compensated demand curves could intersect, which could lead to a decrease in consumer welfare.
However, this outcome is unlikely to occur.


                                                 31
                                          References



Abraham, K., J. Greenlees, and B. Moulton (1998), “Working to Improve the Consumer
Price Index”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 12.

Berndt, E.R. Z. Griliches, and N.J. Rapport (1995), “Econometric Estimates of Price
Indexes for Personal Computers in the 1990s, Journal of Econometrics, 68, 243-268.

Berry S., J. Levinson, and A. Pakes (1995), “Automobile Prices in Market Equilibrium,”
Econometrica, 63, 841-890.

Bils M. and P Klenow, “Quantifying Quality Growth”, American Economic Review, 91,
1006-1030.

Boskin, M. et. al. (1996), "Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living,"
Final Report to the Senate Finance Committee.

Bowley, A.L. (1899), “Wages, Nominal and Real,” in R.H. Palgrave, ed., Dictionary of
Political Economy, London: Macmillan, 640-651.

Bresnahan, T., “Comment,” ed. T. Bresnahan and R. Gordon, The Economics of New
Goods, University of Chicago Press, 238-241.

Costa, D.L. (2001), “Estimating Real Income in the US from 1888 to 1994: Correcting
CPI Bias Using Engel Curves,” Journal of Political Economy, 109, 1288-1310.

Deaton A. and J. Muellbauer (1980), Economics and Consumer Behavior,” Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Diewert, W.E. (1976), "Exact and Superlative Index Numbers," Journal of Econometrics,
4, 114-145.

Diewert W.E. (1980), “Aggregation Problems in the Measurement of Capital”, pp. 433-
528 in The Measurement of Capital, Dan Usher (ed.), Chicago: The University of
Chicago Press

Diewert, W.E. (1993), “The Early History of Price Index Research,” in W.E. Diewert and
A.O. Nakamura, eds., Essays in Index Number theory, vol. I, Amsterdam: Elsevier.

Diewert, W.E. (1998), “Index Number Issues in the Consumer Price Index”, Journal of
Economic Perspectives 12, 47-58.




                                          32
Diewert, W.E. (2001), “Hedonic Regressions: A Consumer Theory Approach”,
forthcoming in Scanner Data and Price Indexes, R. Feenstra and M. Shapiro (eds.),
Studies in Income and Wealth, Volume 61, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.


Fisher, I. (1922), The Making of Index Numbers, Boston: Houghton Mifflin.

Hamilton B.W. (2001), “Using Engel’s Law to Estimate CPI Bias,” American Economic
Review, 91, 619-630.

Hausman J. (1979): "Individual Discount Rates and the Purchase and Utilization of
Energy Using Durables," Bell Journal of Economics, 10.

Hausman, J. (1981), "Exact Consumer Surplus and Deadweight Loss," American
Economic Review, 71, 662-676.

Hausman, J. (1996): "Valuation of New Goods Under Perfect and Imperfect
Competition," ed. T. Bresnahan and R. Gordon, The Economics of New Goods,
University of Chicago Press, 209-237.

Hausman, J. (1997a): "Valuation and the Effect of Regulation on New Services in
Telecommunications," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1997

Hausman, J. (1997b): "The CPI Commission and New Goods," The American Economic
Review, 87.

Hausman, J. (1999): "Cellular Telephone, New Products and the CPI," Journal of
Business and Economics Statistics, 17, 188-194.

Hausman, J. (2002a): “Mobile Telephone,” Forthcoming in M. Cave et. al, Handbook of
Telecommunications Economics, Amsterdam: North Holland.

Hausman, J. (2002b): “Regulated Costs and Prices in Telecommunications,” Forthcoming
in G. Madden ed., International Handbook of Telecommunications,” London: Elgar
Publishing.

Hausman J. G. Leonard, and D. Zona (1994): "Competitive Analysis with Differentiated
   Products," Annales D'Economie et de Statistique, 34.

Hausman J. and G. Leonard (2002): “The Competitive Effects of a New Product
Introduction: A Case Study”, Journal of Industrial Economics, 50.

Hausman J. and W. Newey (1995): "Nonparametric Estimation of Exact Consumers
Surplus and Deadweight Loss," Econometrica, 63.

Hicks, J.R. (1940), "The Valuation of the Social Income," Economic Journal, 42.


                                          33
Lowe, J. (1823), The Present State of England in Regard to Agriculture, Trade and
Finance, 2d ed., London: Longman, Hurst, Rees, Orme, and Brown

Konus, A. (1924), “The Problem of the True Index of the Cost of Living,” Econometrica,
7, 1939, 10-29.

Madrick, J., (2001), “Economic Scene”, New York Times, December 27, 2001, p. c2.
Marshall, A. (1887), “Remedies for Fluctuations of General Prices,” in A.C. Pigou, ed.,
Memorials of Alfred Marshall, London: Macmillan, 1925.

Pakes, A. (2001), “Some Notes on Hedonic Price Indices, with an Application to PC’s”,
paper presented at the NBER Productivity Program Meeting, March 16, Cambridge MA.

Petrin, A. (2002), “Quantifying the Benefits of New Products: The Case of the Minivan,”
Journal of Political Economy, 110, 705-729

Pollak, R. (1989), The Theory of the Cost-of-Living Index, Oxford University Press.

Rothbarth, E. (1941), "The Measurement of Changes in Real Income under conditions of
Rationing," Review of Economic Studies, 100-107.

Schultze C. and C. Mackie, eds. (2002); At What Price? , Washington: Nation Academy
of Sciences Press.

Shapiro, M. and D. Wilcox (1997), “Alternative Strategies for Aggregating Prices in the
CPI,” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, 79, 113-125.

Sidgwick, H. (1883), The Principles of Political Economy, London: Macmillan.

Silver, M.S. and Heravi S. (2001a), “Scanner Data and the Measurement of Inflation”,
The Economic Journal, 111, F384-F405

Silver, M.S. and Heravi S. (2001b), “Why the CPI matched models method may fail us:
results from an hedonic and matched experiment using scanner data,” Univ. Of Cardiff
mimeo.


Spence, A.M. (1976), “Product Selection, Fixed Costs, and Monopolistic Competition,”
Review of Economic Studies, 43.




                                           34
         Figure 1: New Product
p

    p*




    ρ*




    1
p




                                 q
                    1
                   q




           35
        Figure 2: Quality Change
p


pn+1*




 pn*




  p




                      qn     qn+1   q




                 36
     Figure 3: Price Change
p




p2


p1




                              q
          q2     q1




                 37
