                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       HEALTH INSURANCE ON THE INTERNET AND
                             THE ECONOMICS OF SEARCH


                                            Mark V. Pauly
                                            Bradley Herring
                                              David Song


                                         Working Paper 9299
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9299


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




This research was supported, in part, by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation’s Changes In Health Care
Financing and Organization (HCFO) Initiative. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Mark V. Pauly, Bradley Herring, and David Song. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Health Insurance on the Internet and the Economics of Search
Mark V. Pauly, Bradley Herring, and David Song
NBER Working Paper No. 9299
October 2002
JEL No. D83, G22, I10
                                           ABSTRACT


       This paper explores the level and dispersion of premiums paid for individual health insurance
by comparing “asking price” data posted on an electronic insurance exchange with survey data on
premiums actually paid in the period just before the advent of electronic exchanges. The primary
theoretical question is whether the pattern of differences between asking prices and transactions
prices can be explained using a simple search theory. We hypothesize, following suggestions of
Stigler and Rothschild, that higher risks who expect to pay higher premiums for a given policy will
engage in more intensive search than lower risks, given the same distribution of asking prices. As
a result, for a given distribution of asking prices, the dispersion of premiums actually paid
(transactions prices) will be smaller for higher risks. Therefore, the introduction of an electronic
exchange should have a larger potential influence on the dispersion and level of premiums paid for
lower risks than for higher risks. We find evidence consistent with each of these hypotheses.

Mark V. Pauly, Ph.D.                          Bradley Herring, Ph.D.
Chair, Health Care Systems Department         Department of Health Policy & Management
The Wharton School                            Emory University’s Rollins School of Public Health
University of Pennsylvania                    1518 Clifton Road, NE. Atlanta, GA 30322
208 Colonial Penn Center                      bjherri@sph.emory.edu
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
and NBER
pauly@wharton.upenn.edu

David Song
Health Care Systems Department
The Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania
204 Colonial Penn Center
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6218
dasong@wharton.upenn.edu
                                                                                                   1

I. Introduction



       Insurance markets of all types have become available to consumers on the Internet.

Electronic methods offer the possibility of reducing the cost to the consumer of searching among

policies, companies, and premiums virtually to zero. Before the advent of Internet-based

exchanges, the great bulk of consumers used insurance brokers or agents to assist them in their

search. Agents are widely thought to have provided information of the type now available on the

Internet, at a higher cost. The impact of substituting one technology for another, both overall

and for different types of consumers, is not yet fully clear.

       Some people obtain health insurance as individuals, in the same way as they obtain auto,

homeowners, or most other insurances. At present, this fraction is less than 10 percent of total

private insurance since the vast majority of private health insurance is employment-based.

Recent policy proposals envision offering the currently uninsured subsidies of various types that

they can use to obtain insurance in the individual market, which could greatly increase the size of

this market. But how does (or could) this market perform? In this paper we investigate search

behavior in this market, using the advent of Internet-based exchanges as an instrument to do so.

The individual health insurance market appears to have a competitive market structure, and to

earn only competitive rates of return. Yet premiums charged and paid in that market for a given

insurance product appear to vary a great deal. The precise nature of premium variation, the

contribution of search (or non-search) behavior to that variation, and whether the variation is

greater in some circumstances than in others, are not well known. The advent of electronic

exchanges for health insurance offers the promise of substantial improvements in the way health

insurance markets function. We use data from an exchange to simulate the search process both
                                                                                                   2

before and after the arrival of Internet-based exchanges. Our analysis of the search process tests

hypotheses that have implications in other markets as well.

       Empirical evidence on the effect of online price information for markets in general is

mixed. The advent of life insurance quotes on the Internet appears to have reduced premiums in

both Internet and conventional markets (Brown and Goolsbee, 2002). Online auto retailers

appear also to have lowered prices and price dispersion of cars (Scott-Morton, Zettelmeyer, and

Risso, 2000). However, the advent of the Internet in the book industry appears to have lowered

neither prices nor price dispersion (Clay, Krishnan, and Wolff, 2001). In this paper we examine

the individual health insurance market in which there has historically been both substantial price

dispersion and price inflation.

       There is a strong belief that the individual health insurance market has been subject to

both high average administrative or “loading” costs and a wide dispersion of premiums for the

same product, partly because of costly search and substantial buyer ignorance (Pauly and

Herring, 1999). However, virtually all our information on individual-market premiums is based

on data about the “posted” or proposed premiums listed by a few large or selected insurance

firms; see, for example, Frogue (2001). Information on the level of dispersion of “transactions”

prices actually paid to all the firms buyers use in this market is scarce. Since no or few

transactions may be expected to occur at unusually high posted prices, a better understanding of

what actually happens would come from looking at premiums consumers actually pay, and

comparing them with premiums firms propose to charge, rather than focusing entirely on the

latter. Such a comparison will tell us both about dispersion of actual realized market prices, and

about the search behavior of consumers of different types that contributes to this outcome.
                                                                                                  3

       Finally, there is evidence that older people are more likely than young people to obtain

insurance in the individual market, other things equal, but no explanation of their behavior

currently exists (Nichols and Pauly, forthcoming). Since older people pay higher premiums, why

are they more likely to buy? Our analysis provides a potential explanation for this phenomenon

that does not rely on an assumption of misperception of risk among young adults. Rather than

assume that young people mistakenly believe that they will almost never use medical care, we

suggest, and provide evidence for, the hypothesis that search is relatively less efficient for

younger people. They respond by buying less frequently. However, the advent of the Internet

could in principle change this age bias and result in a reduction in the number of young

uninsured persons.



Overview


       There exists, to our knowledge, no database that combines detailed information on posted

individual insurance prices with information on transactions prices. Instead, most information

has come from interviews with firms about their “pricing policies” (Chollet and Kirk, 1998) or

from premium quotes for hypothetical customers (Pollitz, Sorian, and Thomas, 2001). However,

in this study we match premium quotations from a particular Internet exchange with data from

the large sample 1996-1997 Community Tracking Survey’s (CTS) Household Survey that

records premiums actually paid.



The CTS data provides information on actual transactions for a relatively large and nationally-

representative sample of individual insurance buyers in the period just before the advent of

Internet-based health insurance exchanges. The Internet data is provided by the site for
                                                                                                    4

eHealthinsurance.com. This website is the largest health insurance “exchange,” and provides a

set of premium “quotes” for a buyer who provides information on date of birth, gender, smoking

status, and location. We compare the inflation-adjusted CTS data for 438 individual purchases

from 1996-1997 with data extracted from the website in the spring of 2001, when nationwide

quotes became common. (We make a similar comparison for family coverage using website data

extracted in the summer of 2002.)

       This exercise allows us both to judge how premiums paid compare with premiums posted

and to investigate whether use of what is arguably a more efficient way to search will in fact

provide substantial benefits to different kinds of buyers. In principle, the easy availability of

premium quotations from multiple firms for many policies should allow buyers to more easily

identify sellers with low premiums and to select products more closely matched to their

preferences. Before Internet-based exchanges were available, most buyers used agents or

brokers to perform these tasks. Would people be able to do better online than they had been

doing with using agents? And would the Internet provide larger potential gains to some buyers

than others, either compared to what they would have paid in the pre-Internet era or compared to

the insurance benefits they would expect to receive?

       Because of state premium-setting regulations, insurers are only allowed to post on the

Internet the same premiums (plus a service fee) they would have charged to other buyers (i.e., no

“Internet specials”) and generally all of the listing firms’ premiums were posted. While there

may have been self-selection of firms that chose to list on exchanges, the comparison itself will

tell us whether firms that chose to list were relatively low priced. Buyers as well are self-

selected; we do not know the transaction prices that would have been paid by buyers who

searched and then decided not to buy, and some consumers never search at all. Since searchers
                                                                                                   5

(or non-searchers) who did not buy might well have paid higher prices than those who did, our

results may underestimate the benefit from using the Internet for the average person who

searches for individual health insurance.



II. Modeling the Search Process



       The model of the search process for our empirical work is based on Stigler’s (1961)

classic insight that consumers decide how much to search for lower prices by comparing the cost

of additional search with the expected benefit (in terms of discovering a yet lower price) of more

search. McCall (1965) modified and extended this theory to the more appropriate case of

sequential search. A main result Rothschild (1973) draws in his survey of search models is that,

if one assumes that all consumers have the same average cost of search, those consumers buying

higher priced products will search more and, as a result, the dispersion of final prices paid will be

higher for low priced products (Rothschild uses screwdrivers as an example) than for big ticket

items (like automobiles).1

       A complete model of the search process and market equilibrium intended to explain the

prices paid by different kinds of consumers is best constructed by assuming that the key

distinguishing characteristic, for buyers facing the same search cost per seller, is the typical

quantity each buyer purchases. The gain from discovering a lower price is obviously

proportional to the amount that would be purchased at that price (disregarding negligible second-

1
  Stigler actually said that dispersion would be lower for commodities that form a larger share of
total household consumption spending, whether or not the per-unit price was high or low.
Sorensen (2000) more recently has argued that “search-induced price variation will be
independent of scale” because “dispersion is a function of search costs, which are generally
modeled as independent of prices.” (p. 838). We reconcile Rothschild’s conjecture with
Sorensen’s proposition in our discussion.
                                                                                                      6

order effects). While we are unaware of a formal model that includes variation in intended

quantity, it seems clear that, ceteris paribus, prices are likely to be lower relative to cost and less

dispersed the larger is the average or typical amount purchased per year. Prices for white bread

are probably closer to competitive than prices for screwdrivers. Also, those who typically

purchase above-average quantities would be expected to engage in above-average levels of

search, and those who typically purchase below-average quantities in below-average levels of

search; these behaviors should affect the level and dispersion of prices each type of buyer

actually samples.

       For health insurance (viewed as a financial instrument) the relevant measure of the price

is the loading: the amount which must be paid to the insurer to deliver a dollar of expected

benefits, or the percentage of the premium which is not returned to the insured as expected

benefits.2 For health insurance, there is an identifiable source of variation in the amount of

benefits sought: the individual’s expected medical expense, or risk level. Higher risk people

buy more dollars of benefits than do lower risk people, and the total premium, equaling the price

(loading per dollar of expected benefits) times the quantity (dollars of expected benefits), that

they pay reflects this variation. For example, premiums are typically two or more times higher

for middle-aged people than for younger people.

       In effect, a high-risk person buys more “insured dollars” per year than does a low-risk

person3 so that, following Stigler’s logic, such a person (sampling from the same distribution of

offering prices) should on average search more and pay less. (We examine empirically whether

2
  The Phelps (1997) textbook notes that “the price of insurance is L, the ‘loading fee’ of the
insurance above expected benefits” (p. 343).
3
  Thus, in Sorensen’s (2000) terminology, although search is assumed to be independent of the
loading (as a price), it is dependent on the premium (as a measure of total annual spending, or
price times quantity).
                                                                                                       7

the distribution of quotes varies by risk level.) Stigler’s theory would therefore predict that the

dispersion of transactions prices should be lower for individual insurance actually purchased by

older persons compared to that for younger persons. It would therefore also suggest that

transaction prices should be lower relative to posted or quoted prices for older buyers, if the

distribution of posted prices is the same at all risk levels.

        To sum up: Figure 1 shows the relationship between the number of searches per high-

risk person (who buys more and therefore more costly insurance) and the number per low-risk

person. The marginal benefit (MB) is the expected savings from conducting an additional unit of

search, and thus both high-risk and low-risk buyers will in equilibrium purchase at the marginal

benefit level equal to the search cost. Since MBH > MBL, high-risk (older) buyers will engage in

a greater number of searches, all other things equal. Specifically, if the marginal cost (MC) of

search is assumed to be positive and uniform at $C, the number of searches made by high-risk

individuals (SH) will be greater than the number of searches by low-risk individuals (SL). Hence,

we would expect the dispersion of transaction prices for older buyers of health insurance to be

lower than that for younger buyers.

        A second issue is the relationship of transactions premiums to expected insurance benefit

payments. If high-risk buyers engage in more search, the profit margin on their business will be

lower than for low-risk buyers engaged in less search. Facing a higher markup (even though a

lower premium), low-risk (young) buyers will be less likely to buy insurance. If insurers find it

advantageous to offer insurance products to all (profitable) buyers at all risk levels, and if there

are some fixed costs at the firm level, there can be a market-level equilibrium in which all firms

earn the same profits, prices are dispersed, and yet premiums are closer to expected expenses for

high-risk than low-risk buyers (Stigler, 1961; Salop and Stiglitz, 1977; Salop and Stiglitz, 1982).
                                                                                                       8

   These considerations suggest our first two hypotheses:

   1) The dispersion of transactions prices (relative to the dispersion of asking prices) before

       the advent of Internet-based exchanges will be lower for individual insurance sold to

       high-risk buyers than for individual health insurance sold to low-risk buyers.

   2) The ratio of transactions prices to expected expenses will fall as the risk level increases.



The Effect of the Internet



       If the marginal search cost falls to zero (i.e., MC falls from $C to 0), then people of both

risk levels end up making the same number of searches--given that they face the same

distribution of loadings (or prices per dollar of expected insurance benefit). This number of

searches is shown as S* in Figure 1. It therefore follows that the gain (in terms of expected

premium reduction) from reducing search costs will be larger for low-risk individuals than for

high-risk individuals.

       Presumably, the advent of Internet-based exchanges permits a much lower cost of search.

The expected impact on any individual depends on the individual-specific change in the cost of

search, and the shape of what Stigler describes as the “marginal benefit schedule.” Because

high-risk (e.g., older) buyers will wish to search more than low-risk (e.g., younger) buyers, we

can immediately conclude that high-risk buyers will be more likely to use the Internet than low-

risk buyers, other things equal. If the Internet reduces the cost per search by the same amount for

all buyers, the change in the amount of search depends on the slope of the marginal search

benefit schedule at a relative high value for low-risk buyers, versus that at a relatively low value

for high-risk buyers. High-risk buyers will have already exhausted the gains from search, and
                                                                                                     9

therefore will have less to gain (relative to premiums they have already discovered offline) in

terms of finding more favorable prices from using the Internet than will low-risk buyers who

previously searched little. This argument therefore implies our third hypothesis:

   3) The difference between “pre-Internet” premiums and (measures of the magnitude of)

       “post-Internet” premiums will be smaller for high-risk buyers than for low-risk buyers,

       other things (including the distribution of quoted premiums) held constant.

       All three of these conjectures depend on the similarity of shape of the distributions of

quoted premiums by risk level, but our main point here is that the gain in terms of lower prices

from shifting from the use of more costly search methods to a much less costly Internet-based

method will be smaller for those who previously searched more.



III. Previous Research, Our Methodology, and the Data Used



       Previous research provides some evidence in support of the suggested hypotheses. We

found, using the 1987 National Medical Expenditure Survey (NMES) and 1996-1997 CTS data,

that individual insurance premiums actually paid rose with risk, but at a much less than

proportional rate (Pauly and Herring, 1999; Herring and Pauly, 2001). That is, the ratio between

premiums paid and expected benefits (the loading) declined as expected benefits rose, just as

would be expected if higher risks searched more. Even for easily observable demographic

characteristics such as age and gender, the elasticity of transaction premiums with respect to

expected expense was significantly less than unity, usually on the order of 0.5. Including all of

the high-risk conditions such as diabetes and cancer that could be identified in the data (some of

which may not have been known to the insurer at the time insurance was sold), the analogous
                                                                                                 10

elasticity was approximately 0.2. However, neither of those studies contained information on the

premiums insurers actually proposed to charge, so the hypothesis that the firms set posted

premiums closer to expected expense for high risks could not be tested.

       The primary data innovation in this paper is the generation of a large number of Internet

premium “quotations” for self-only and family health insurance coverage for the sample of

individual insurance purchasers in the 1996-1997 CTS Household Survey. We analyze

variations within these data for several purposes. We first examine whether the shape of the

distribution of quoted premiums varies by risk level. We then test whether the dispersion of paid

premiums is lower for older, high-risk individuals than that for younger, low-risk individuals

(Hypothesis #1). We then examine the relationship between premiums and risk (for both quoted

premiums from the website and paid premiums for the CTS respondents) to test whether the ratio

of paid premiums to expected expense decreases as risk increases (Hypothesis #2). Also of

interest is whether the ratio of quoted premiums with respect to expected expense is less than

unity. Finally, we compare the quoted premiums from the website with the paid premiums from

the CTS to examine the potential savings from using the Internet for buyers previously engaging

in some other type of costly search. This allows us to test the hypothesis that an Internet-related

reduction in search costs would provide a larger benefit to low-risk consumers than to high-risk

consumers (Hypothesis #3).

       The CTS Household Survey was undertaken in late 1996 and early 1997, just before

Internet-based insurance exchanges became available. Even at that time, however, potential

insurance buyers had several ways to shop for their individual health insurance. They could use

insurance brokers as “proxy shoppers”: while consumers might not be familiar with the

distribution of premium quotations because they undertook search relatively infrequently,
                                                                                               11

insurance brokers in contrast arrange such transactions all the time and are thought to be

knowledgeable about the premiums (and other contract terms) available from different insurers.

Alternatively, individual buyers could obtain much of the premium information that brokers

knew about by spending a modest amount on an information service such as Quotesmith. For

about $15, anyone could have the same kind of report about premiums for a set of policies for an

individual with given characteristics as was available to brokers.



Generating Internet Based Comparisons



       Our empirical analysis began with the sample of 438 persons who reported purchasing

self-only individual (or “nongroup”) insurance in response to the CTS survey, who provided

information on the type of insurance plan and deductible, and who could be subsequently

matched with our website data. We constructed a computer script (or “automated agent”) that

collects pricing information from the public website for the largest Internet exchange,

www.ehealthinsurance.com; for more detail, see Pauly, Herring, and Song (2002). A visitor to

the website can query for individual insurance plans and premium quotations after entering his or

her age, gender, zip code, and smoking habits. Since each respondent to the 1996-1997 CTS

Household Survey was asked to provide information on age, gender, smoking habits, location of

residence, premium paid, and some characteristics of the insurance bought, our analysis

essentially replicates an online query for each of these individuals (upon generating a random zip

code from within the county identified in the CTS). This computer script therefore can generate

(in several different ways to be described below) relevant sets of website premium quotations for
                                                                                                    12

people of various demographic characteristics. The single policyholders in the CTS survey were

associated with 10,650 website premium quotations.

       About half of this sample was located in an area where the policy identified in the CTS

could be exactly matched with one or more policies listed on the website, based on the plan type

(HMO, PPO, etc.) and size of the deductible. We call this the “perfect match” subsample. To

use the full 438-observation sample, we estimated a “hedonic” premium regression using the

premiums in the website data, relating the website premiums to plan and buyer characteristics.

We then used this regression’s results to generate predicted “composite” website quotations to

match with the actual CTS premiums; we call this the “composite premium” sample. None of

the reasons for missing data seem likely to be related to the behavior we are trying to describe.

       Finally, the CTS premium was inflated by a health premium cost index to be consistent

with the time period of the Internet data, and the premium quotes and paid premiums were then

compared for people with the same characteristics buying the same policies. Although we show

results for the expected or mean premium within the distribution of premium quotes, no rational

buyer, confronted with the range of website prices from low to high, would choose to pay the

average price. Instead, the person would choose to pay a low price—perhaps not the absolute

lowest, because that price may have special restrictions, but a price in the lower part of the

distribution of quoted prices. Accordingly, we also show comparisons of paid premiums to the

10th decile website premium quote.4




4
  For the “composite premium” sample of website purchase, this estimate was constructed by
selecting the premiums whose deviations from the predicted premium were in the bottom decile
of all premiums. Then a regression was run on the observations to estimate a “10th decile”
premium for each CTS observation.
                                                                                                13


Generating Estimates of Risk



       We want to examine how paid premiums from the CTS sample vary with risk relative to

how quoted premiums from the website vary with risk. Following Herring and Pauly (2001), we

first generate an estimate of expected expense by regressing actual medical expenses on several

age-gender dummy variables and geographic indicators for insured individuals in the 1996

Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS). We use the coefficients from this regression to

“sum up” expected expenses for the sample of individual insurance purchasers in the CTS

sample. We then use this predicted value as an explanatory variable in a premium regression,

using either the paid premium or premium quotes as the dependent variable; we use the log of

the premium and the log of expected expense in the second-stage premium regression to provide

an appropriate elasticity estimate with respect to risk (Pauly and Herring, 1999; Herring and

Pauly, 2001).

       Whatever is the case for consumers in general, our main interest is how the difference

between premiums paid in the CTS and quoted premiums from the website varies by consumer

risk level. Since by far the most important and consistent determinants of risk variation are age

and gender, we also calculate the mean difference between premium quotes and paid premiums

by five ten-year intervals for males and females separately. In some cases, the sample size

within these ten age-gender cells is too small, so we instead make comparisons simply between

individuals aged 18 to 44 and individuals aged 45 to 64.



IV. Results
                                                                                                  14


Dispersion of Premiums (Hypothesis #1)



       Recall that we use two methods of calculating the dispersion of premiums. First, for the

“perfect match” sample in which each CTS observation was linked to policies from the website

with the same plan characteristics, we calculate the mean website premium for each observation

in the CTS data. We calculate the standard deviation about the mean for this observation, and

then calculate the average standard deviation across all matched observations. By this

calculation, the average coefficient of variation for quoted premiums in 2001 was 0.35 for

persons aged 18 to 44, and a very similar 0.33 for persons aged 45 to 64. In effect, the

distribution of prices posted on the Internet does not seem to vary with the level of risk (as would

be expected if relative premiums are highly correlated within a firm that applies the same loading

charge to all products).

       To use the larger “composite premium” sample of observations where the CTS person

can be matched only to a website that does not contain an exactly-matched policy, we estimated

our “hedonic” premium regressions using all premium quotations for the CTS sample

observation separately for the younger low-risk (aged 18 to 44) and older high-risk (aged 45 to

64) groups. We then calculate the standard errors of each regression and divide them by the

mean. The measures of variation for premium quotes in 2001 calculated in this way were 0.31

for the younger sample and 0.30 for the older sample. Based on these comparisons of these two

distributions of quoted or posted premiums, we conclude that the distributions about the mean of

posted premiums are virtually the same for both risk groups.

       For the sample of paid premiums from the CTS data, we do not have direct measures of

the distribution or dispersion of premiums paid in the sample of transactions prices because
                                                                                                  15

virtually every observation is a unique combination of age, gender, location, and plan type.

Instead we follow the same procedure outlined in the previous paragraph, estimating a hedonic

premium regression for the two subsamples. The measures of variation for CTS transactions

premiums do differ between the younger low-risk sample and older high-risk subsamples,

thereby confirming Hypothesis #1. The measure of variation was 0.74 for the low-risk

subsample, but only 0.56 for the high-risk subsample.

        In short, while the dispersion of asking prices does not appear to vary with risk, the

dispersion of the transactions prices people choose to pay from those similar distributions is

lower for high-risk individuals than for low-risk individuals. Given similar patterns of asking

prices, high-risk individuals end up paying transactions prices which are less dispersed than

those paid by low-risk individuals. It is, however, somewhat puzzling that the distribution of

posted premiums displays lower variation than the distribution of paid premiums. This is

perhaps both due to the premiums in the CTS being self-reported and thus containing random

noise and due to the fact that only a fraction of insurers list on these sites.



Relationship of Premiums to Risk (Hypothesis #2)



        The next question is how premiums (both quoted premiums and paid premiums) vary

with a measure of an individual’s risk. (Recall that this estimate of risk is constructed from

regressing medical expenditures from the MEPS survey on age, gender, and location.)

Specifically, we regress both quoted premiums from the website and paid premiums from the

CTS on the measure of risk (and a constant term) using a log specification. We also estimate

these models for the full sample, a non-HMO sample, an HMO sample, and the “perfect match”
                                                                                                     16

sample.5 The results are shown in Table 1. First, the estimated elasticities are all significantly

less than unity. Second, and most importantly, they are all lower for the paid premiums in the

CTS than for the quoted premiums from the website; the difference is significant for each

comparison, except for the non-HMO subsamples. Note that, because the paid premiums reflect

actual approved applicants who have been through underwriting, the insurers would have been

able to query buyers about the health status when they applied for insurance (but obviously,

neither insurer nor buyer would know about changes in health status that occurred after

purchase). We obtain similar results when we use the smaller “perfect match” sample.

        These results for paid premiums suggest that the greater search effort higher risks

undertake offsets some of the effect of higher expected expenses. It also means that insurance

actually sold to high-risk individuals is less profitable on average than that sold to low-risk

individuals. (This would still be consistent with individual firms charging similar premiums

(relative to those of other firms) at all risk levels.)



The Effect of the Internet on Premium Savings (Hypothesis #3)



        Can buyers expect to pay less on the Internet than they actually paid before the Internet-

based exchanges were available? Table 2 shows the difference between the median quoted

premium from the website (using the “composite” predicted website premium methodology) and

the paid premium from the CTS, by different age-gender intervals. The table shows both the

absolute difference in premiums and the relative difference in premiums. The difference is

always positive: average website premiums are higher, for most of this sample of purchasers,

5
 Herring and Pauly (2001) noted different elasticities for premiums with respect to risk based on
whether the plan was an HMO.
                                                                                                  17

than what they paid before the availability of Internet-based exchanges. Randomly selecting a

website premium would have led most of these buyers to pay significantly higher premiums.

        However, since we expect consumers to select a low premium—perhaps not the absolute

lowest, because that plan may have special restrictions, but a premium in the lower part of the

distribution of quotes, we show in Table 3 the comparison of paid CTS premiums to the 10th

decile “composite” website premium. The data suggests that, before the advent of Internet-based

exchanges, young people paid transactions prices that were higher than the “low” price they

could find by going on the website in 2001, whereas older people (specifically, men over age 55

and women over age 45) still would pay less than they would have paid by searching on the

Internet. While the sign of the comparisons differs depending on whether the median or the 10th

percentile website premium is used, there is a consistent pattern: hypothesized website

transactions prices increase relative to pre-Internet transactions prices as risk increases.

        Table 4 shows the same type of comparisons between hypothesized website transactions

and pre-Internet paid premiums, based on the smaller subsample of perfect matches. The

website premium here was the lowest one among those plans that matched to the CTS plan. The

premiums on the website are higher than the CTS premiums, but the difference is much smaller

for low-risk persons. As before, high-risk individuals had previously obtained much lower

transactions prices relative to Internet prices.

        So does the Internet save money for individual purchasers? The answer depends in part

on who the buyer is and on how the person is assumed to use the Internet to search. Specifically,

if we use the average website premium as the benchmark, before the Internet was available all

types of purchasers actually paid less than the website price, but the difference was largest by far

for older people. (Remember that insurers did not post lower premiums on the website than they
                                                                                                       18

charged before; indeed, usually they added a small amount to the premium they would have

charged in order to cover the cost of using the site.) If, instead of paying the average, buyers

choose a low price posted on the Internet, younger people might gain (or lose only a little) but

older people will still lose substantially from using the Internet. In short, it is possible to save

money by using the Internet, but there are no guarantees. The evidence here therefore suggests

even more strongly that younger low-risk people were previously less aggressive searchers (and

therefore had more to gain or less (in terms of prices) to lose from going to the more convenient

posted prices on the web) than were older high-risk people.

       However, because the Internet saves on search costs, it may still be rational for older

people to use it even if their final premiums were modestly increased. Both sets of results are

consistent with the view that high-risk individuals had formerly secured transactions prices that,

compared to low-risk individuals, were more advantageous relative to expected benefits.

Measured solely in terms of premium savings, high-risk individuals therefore have less to gain

from using the Internet than low-risk individuals. However, this smaller gain (or loss) for high-

risk individuals must be set against their presumably greater expenditure of effort before the

Internet became available for searching to find these more favorable prices.

       We also generated a similar sample of family premiums in 2002. We used only a

“perfect match” sample here because a regression model did not deal well with the variety of

different kinds of families (mature adults and children). Family premiums are higher than

individual premiums for either young or older (higher risk) individuals because the expected

expense for a family is typically larger than that for an individual. As in the case of high-risk

individuals, the median Internet premium for family coverage was found to be higher than the

“inflated” CTS premium. The median difference for family premiums was $867, compared to a
                                                                                                    19

median difference for individual premiums of $294. This result is consistent with the hypothesis

that family purchasers, like high risk individual purchasers, had already searched effectively for

the best premiums in the market before the Internet became available, so the premiums they

could find on the Internet were not more advantageous than what they had already discovered.

That is, as our theory suggests, the results for family coverage are similar to those for high-risk

individuals.



Age and the Use of the Web



       Are there other theories that could explain why younger people gain more (or lose less)

from the use of the Internet than do older people? An alternative (though not mutually

exclusive) hypothesis suggested by the life insurance analysis of Brown and Goolsbee (2002)

might assume that the implicit cost to using the Internet is lower for younger people. Being more

familiar with the use of the Internet, they use it more frequently. However, Brown and Goolsbee

implicitly assumed that the amount of search in the pre-Internet period was independent of the

use of the Internet. Moreover, it seems implausible that, given the still-rare current use of

Internet-based health insurance exchanges, health insurers would have adjusted their posted

premiums. In contrast to life insurance pricing discussed by Brown and Goolsbee, health

insurance premiums posted on the Internet had to be the same as the prices charged to others, the

use of the Internet-based exchanges remains relatively rare, and premiums have been rising.

       It is possible that those insurers who chose to list on the Internet might have been those

with a premium schedule skewed to attract younger people. Further research is needed to

separate this hypothesis from the one we have proposed.
                                                                                                    20




V. Conclusion



       The results in this paper generally support the hypothesis that the level and dispersion of

premiums paid for individual health insurance both depend on buyer search behavior. High-risk

buyers traditionally have searched more, and consequently paid premiums which (compared to

low-risk buyers) are more favorably related both to benefits received and to average posted or

quoted premiums. Their transactions prices also display less relative variation. These results

somewhat paradoxically imply that low-risk buyers have more to gain from using Internet-based

exchanges than do high-risk buyers. However, in the current situation, the main advantage of

using the Internet may not be so much the ability to secure lower prices as it is a much lower

amount of effort required to find whatever price is finally paid.

       This analysis is not able to address two additional questions which should be answered in

future work. First, we had no data on the search behavior of people who ultimately decide not to

buy insurance. It is possible, for example, that website premiums might be much lower than the

best potential transaction premium for those who previously stopped searching and did not buy.

Second, we know nothing about the underwriting behavior of insurers, either those who list on

the website or those who actually sold coverage to those in the CTS sample. We do know what

insurers are willing to sell to older people (so they do not “try to avoid high risks” entirely), but

we do not know how they deal with potential buyers with less than perfect health.

       From a policy viewpoint, these results help to explain the paradox in which older persons

charged higher premiums are nevertheless more willing than younger people to obtain insurance:

older people search more until they find better deals. They also imply that such ways of
                                                                                              21

reducing search costs as the Internet may be useful in inducing younger lower risks to pay more

attention to the need for insurance.
                                                                                          22

                                         Figure 1

                                 Health Insurance Search




                                                                MBH: Marginal Benefit
                                                                       for High-Risk
MB and MC of Search




                                                                MBL: Marginal Benefit
                                                                       for Low-Risk
                                   MBH
                                                                MCPI: Marginal Cost of
                                                                   Search, Pre-Internet


                           MBL



                      $C                                                   MCPI




                       0                  SL               SH       S*

                                     Number of Searches
                                                                                            23

                                        Table 1

                Elasticities of Premiums with Respect to Expected Expense

                            (Standard Errors in Parentheses)



                                                                         Perfect
                              All        Non-HMO          HMO            Matches

    Premium Quotes*          0.561         0.565          0.484             0.640
       (Website)             (.02)         (.03)          (.04)             (.06)


     Paid Premiums           0.459         0.501          0.376             0.437
          (CTS)              (.05)         (.07)          (.09)             (.07)


            N                 436           293            143              214



 * Predicted premiums matched to the CTS respondent’s characteristics (including plan
preferences) were estimated from a hedonic regression of Internet quotes on Internet plan
                           characteristics and risk variables.
                                                                                       24

                                         Table 2

              Value of Predicted Website Premium Minus Paid CTS Premium:
                             Medians by Age-Gender Category

   (“Composite Premium” Sample Constructed from the Mean Predicted Website Premiums)



                            Males                               Females

             Absolute       Relative               Absolute    Relative
    Age     Difference*   Difference**     N       Difference Difference      N
   18-24        575           0.57         26         445        0.46         15

   25-34        501           0.45         59         410         0.37        50

   35-44        388           0.35         41         614         0.42        34

   45-54        593           0.38         29         1013        0.63        75

   55-64       1311           0.68         25         1473        0.65        84



* Absolute Difference = Website Premium – CTS Premium
** Relative Difference = (Website Premium – CTS Premium) / CTS Premium
                                                                                           25

                                           Table 3

               Value of Predicted Website Premium Minus Paid CTS Premium:
                             Medians by Age-Gender Category*

   (“Composite Premium” Sample Constructed from the Lowest Decile of Predicted Website

                                        Premiums)**



                       Age                 Males                Females
                      18-24                -262                  -265

                      25-34                 -370                  -378

                      35-44                 -406                  -171

                      45-54                 -175                   83

                      55-64                 253                   243



* Absolute Difference = Website Premium – CTS Premium
** For this set of premium comparisons, we estimated a hedonic regression of website premiums
at the lowest decile, then computed predicted website premiums from this model.
                                                                                 26

                                        Table 4

              Value of Predicted Website Premium Minus Paid CTS Premium:
                                    Medians by Age

                   (“Perfect Match” Sample, Median Website Premium)




                                       Absolute             Relative
                     Age
                                      Difference*         Difference**
                 Less than 45             153                 0.10

                  45 or older            1249                 0.33



* Absolute Difference = Matched Website Premium – CTS Premium
** Relative Difference = (Matched Website Premium – CTS Premium) / CTS Premium
                                                                                            27

                                          References


Brown, Jeffrey R., and Goolsbee, Austan. “Does the Internet Make Markets More Competitive?
        Evidence from the Life Insurance Industry.” J.P.E. 110 (June 2002): 481-507.
Chollet, Deborah J., and Kirk, Adele. Understanding Individual Health Insurance Markets.
        Menlo Park, CA: The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation, 1998.
Clay, Karen; Krishnan, Ramayya; and Wolff, Eric. “Prices and Price Dispersion on the Web:
        Evidence from the Online Book Industry.” Working Paper no. 8271. Cambridge, Mass.:
        NBER, May 2001.
Frogue, James. “Recent Survey Points to Affordable Individual Health Insurance.” Executive
        Memorandum no. 740. Washington, D.C.: The Heritage Foundation, April 2001.
Herring, Bradley, and Pauly, Mark V. “Premium Variation in the Individual Insurance Market.”
        International Journal of Health Care Finance and Economics 1(March 2001): 43-58.
McCall, John J. “The Economics of Information and Optimal Stopping Rules.” Journal of
        Business 38 (July 1965): 300-317.
Nichols, Len, and Pauly, Mark V. “The Non-Group Health Insurance Market: Short on Facts,
        Long on Opinions and Policy Disputes.” Health Affairs Web Exclusive, forthcoming.
Pauly, Mark V., and Herring, Bradley. Pooling Health Insurance Risks. Washington, D.C.:
        AEI Press, 1999.
Pauly, Mark V.; Herring, Bradley; and Song, David. “Tax Credits, the Distribution of Subsidized
        Health Insurance Premiums, and the Uninsured.” Frontiers in Health Policy Research 5,
        Garber, Alan M, ed.: 103-122.
Phelps, Charles E. Health Economics, 2nd Edition. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1997.
Pollitz, Karen; Sorian, Richard; and Thomas, Kathy. How Accessible is Insurance for Consumers
        in Less-Than-Perfect Health? Menlo Park, CA: The Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation,
        2001.
Rothschild, Michael. “Models of Market Organization With Imperfect Information: A Survey.”
        J.P.E. 81 (November-December 1973): 1283-1308.
Salop, Steven, and Stiglitz, Joseph. “Bargains and Ripoffs: A Model of Monopolistically
        Competitive Price Dispersion.” Rev. Econ. Studies 44 (October 1977): 493-510.
Salop, S., and Stiglitz, J.E. “The Theory of Sales: A Simple Model of Equilibrium Price
        Dispersion with Identical Agents.” A.E.R. 72 (December 1982): 1121-1130.
Scott-Morton, Fiona S.; Zettelmeyer, Florian; and Silva-Risso, Jorge. “Internet Car Retailing.”
        Working Paper no. 7961. Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, October 2000.
Sorensen, Alan T. “Equilibrium Price Dispersion In Retail Markets for Prescription Drugs.”
        J.P.E. 108 (August 2000): 833-850.
Stigler, George J. “The Economics of Information.” J.P.E. 69 (October 1962): 213-225.
