                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES



                      STOCHASTIC TAXATION AND ASSET PRICING IN
                           DYNAMIC GENERAL EQUILIBRIUM


                                             Clemens Sialm


                                          Working Paper 9301
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9301


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




I thank Doug Bernheim, Darrell Duffie, Bob Hall, Jim Hines, Ken Judd, Dirk Krueger, Davide Lombardo,
Robert McMillan, Sita Nataraj, Monika Piazzesi, Jim Poterba, Antonio Rangel, Tom Sargent, John Shoven,
Joel Slemrod, Kent Smetters, Jeff Strnad, Gerald Willmann, Shu Wu, and seminar participants at the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve Bank, Harvard, Illinois, Michigan, the San Francisco Federal Reserve
Bank, Stanford, UC Davis, UC San Diego, University of Southern California, Wellesley, and Williams for
helpful comments on earlier drafts. All errors are mine. Financial support by the Kapnick Foundation and
the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Clemens Sialm. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Stochastic Taxation and Asset Pricing in Dynamic General Equilibrium
Clemens Sialm
NBER Working Paper No. 9301
October 2002
JEL No. G1, H2, E4

                                          ABSTRACT


       Tax rates have fluctuated considerably since federal income taxes were introduced in the
United States in 1913. This paper analyzes the effects of stochastic taxation on asset prices in a
dynamic general equilibrium model. Stochastic taxation affects the after-tax returns of both risky
and safe assets. Whenever taxes change, bond and equity prices adjust to clear the asset markets.
These price adjustments affect assets with long durations, such as equities and long-term bonds,
more than short-term assets. Under plausible conditions, investors require higher term and equity
premia as compensation for the risk introduced by tax changes.




Clemens Sialm
University of Michigan Business School
701 Tappan Street
Ann Arbor, MI 48105
and NBER
sialm@umich.edu
1 Introduction
One of the few certain forecasts about the tax system is that it will change.
Since federal income taxes were introduced in 1913, the tax system of the
United States has been reformed several times. Marginal income tax rates
have uctuated considerably over this period, as depicted in Figure 1, which
shows the federal marginal income tax rates for individuals in ve di erent
tax brackets.1 On top of marginal tax rate changes, other provisions of the
tax code also changed, adding to the overall uncertainty of tax law.2 This
paper investigates how stochastic tax policies a ect asset prices and whether
they introduce an additional risk factor in the economy, which changes equity
and term premia.
    The theoretical model generalizes the Lucas (1978) asset pricing model
by introducing a at consumption tax that follows a two-state Markov chain.
Whenever taxes change, stock and bond prices adjust instantaneously to clear
the asset markets. The price adjustments are more severe for assets with long
durations, such as equities and long-term bonds, than for assets with shorter
durations. Individuals require higher expected returns for holding the assets
with more severe price changes under plausible conditions. Hence, long-term
bonds and equities tend to pay on average higher returns than short-term
bonds. The asset pricing implications are not driven by a di erential taxation
of di erent asset classes because a consumption tax a ects bonds and stocks
in a symmetric way.
    Stochastic taxes have three e ects on asset prices. First, they change the
level of disposable income over time (income e ect). Frequent tax changes
increase the variability of consumption for a given production process. A
higher variability of consumption signi cantly a ects asset prices and leads to
a higher equity premium, as previously shown in the asset pricing literature.
Second, time-varying tax rates distort the relative price of consumption over
time and a ect the incentives to save and invest (substitution e ect). Even
if all the tax revenues are rebated to taxpayers and the consumption process
remains completely una ected by tax changes, stochastic taxes a ect asset
prices and equity and term premia. Third, taxes can in uence the rate of
   1A  detailed description of the data is given in Appendix A.1.
   2 Pechman   (1985) traces the changes in the e ective distribution of tax burdens over
the period from 1966 to 1985. Tax burdens increased in the lower part of the income scale,
declined sharply at the top, and remained roughly the same or rose slightly in between.
He shows that e ective taxes varied less than marginal tax rates.


                                            2
Figure 1: Marginal Income Tax Rates at Di erent Real Income Levels
The marginal income tax rates over the period from 1913 to 1999 are depicted
for families with real income levels of 50, 100, 250, and 500 thousand U.S.
dollars (with 1999 consumer prices), and the marginal tax rate for the highest
tax bracket.
                               1
                                                        Max
                              0.9

                              0.8

                              0.7
          Marginal Tax Rate




                                                        500 K
                              0.6
                                                        250K
                              0.5

                              0.4
                                                        100K
                              0.3

                              0.2                       50K

                              0.1

                               0
                              1910 1920 1930 1940 1950 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000
                                                     Year




growth of the economy and thereby a ect asset prices (growth e ect). Some
tax regimes might be more conducive to economic growth than others.
    A numerical example illustrates that, for reasonable parameter values,
stochastic taxation increases the return premium of long-term bonds and
equities over short-term bonds, without generating implausible returns of
short-term bonds. The e ects of tax changes on the equity and term premia
are signi cant even if all the tax revenues are rebated to the taxpayers.
    This paper is related to the literature in nance that addresses the high
equity premium and to the literature in public economics that analyzes the
e ects of taxes on saving decisions and portfolio choice. The papers in the -
nance literature show that conventional asset pricing models cannot generate
equity premia as observed in the United States during the last century. The
literature has focused on three related puzzles: Mehra and Prescott (1985)
show that extremely high levels of risk aversion are necessary to explain the

                                                    3
large equity premium (equity premium puzzle ).3 Weil (1989) demonstrates
that the risk-free rate increases dramatically at higher levels of risk aversion
(risk-free rate puzzle ). And Shiller (1981) argues that stock prices tend to be
more volatile than the underlying uncertainty in the economy (excess volatil-
ity puzzle ). This paper sheds some light on the e ects of stochastic taxes
on asset prices and equity and term premia. Many alternative explanations
have been identi ed as potential explanations of these puzzles.4
    The papers in public economics analyze the e ects of taxes on saving
decisions and portfolio choice. The e ect of taxation on portfolio allocation
in a partial equilibrium model was rst discussed by Domar and Musgrave
(1944) and Stiglitz (1969).5 A few papers discuss the e ects of uncertain fu-
ture taxes on the economy. Auerbach and Hines (1988) analyze the pattern
of U.S. corporate investment incentives over the period between 1953 and
1986, incorporating the feature that investors are aware that next year's tax
code may not be the same as this year's. Bizer and Judd (1989) present a
dynamic general equilibrium model where taxpayers understand the uncer-
tainty in tax policy when making their investment decisions. The impact of
tax policy uncertainty on rm-level and aggregate investment is estimated
by Hassett and Metcalf (1999). Several recent papers investigate the im-
pact of speci c tax reforms on asset returns.6 Sialm (2001) shows that tax
reforms have an economically and statistically signi cant correlation with
asset returns. The impact of tax changes on asset prices is more pronounced
for assets with long durations, such as stocks and long-term bonds, than for
assets with shorter durations.
   3 Hansen   and Singleton (1983) and Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) provide an alter-
native illustration of the equity premium puzzle.
   4 Some proposed resolutions include more general preferences and expectations of in-
dividuals (e.g., Epstein and Zin (1989), Abel (1990), Constantinides (1990), and Camp-
bell and Cochrane (1999)); incomplete markets (e.g., Mankiw (1986), Constantinides and
DuÆe (1996), Heaton and Lucas (1996), Storesletten, Telmer, and Yaron (2001), and Con-
stantinides, Donaldson, and Mehra (2002)); trading and transaction costs (Mankiw and
Zeldes (1991) and Vissing-Jrgensen (2002)); and rare events and survivorship bias (Rietz
(1988) and Jorion and Goetzmann (1999)). Kocherlakota (1996) and Campbell (1999) are
recent surveys of this literature.
   5 More recently, Eaton (1981), Gordon (1985), Judd (1985), Hamilton (1987), Kaplow
(1994), and Zodrow (1995) analyze the e ects of di erent tax systems on risk taking in
more general models.
   6 See for example, Amoako-Adu, Rashid, and Stebbins (1992), Guenther and Willenborg
(1999), Slemrod and Greimel (1999), Lang and Shackelford (2000), Blouin, Raedy, and
Shackelford (2000), Sinai and Gyourko (2000), and McGrattan and Prescott (2001).

                                           4
    This paper extends the literature in nancial economics and the literature
in public economics by analyzing the impact of frequent tax reforms on asset
prices in a general equilibrium model. The e ects of uncertain taxes on the
distribution of asset prices and on term and equity premia have not been
previously studied.
    The remainder of the paper is divided into ve sections. The next section
describes a simple representative agent model. Section 3 derives closed form
solutions for equity prices and illustrates the quantitative e ect of stochastic
taxes using a plausibly parameterized numerical example. The pricing of
zero-coupon bonds with di erent maturities are explored in Section 4. Sec-
tion 5 summarizes the necessary conditions for an increasing term structure
of interest rates and Section 6 proves that the equity premium increases in
an environment with tax reforms if certain conditions are satis ed. Section 7
checks the sensitivity of the results of the numerical model.

2 The Model
This paper generalizes the Lucas (1978) representative agent asset pricing
model by introducing a at consumption tax that follows a two-state Markov
chain. This subsection describes the technology, the tax system, the prefer-
ences of the representative agent, and the equilibrium conditions.

2.1    Technology

The output in the exchange economy is exogenous and perishable. Aggregate
output y > 0 follows a geometric random walk with drift, where zt denotes its
stochastic growth rate. Output growth zt+1 has a mean of t and a standard
deviation of t . The moments of the growth rate can be time-dependent.
The distribution of the growth rate is known one period in advance.
                    yt+1 = yt exp(zt+1 ); zt+1  N (t ; t2 ):             (1)
    Two asset classes are traded in this economy: risk-free zero-coupon bonds
with di erent maturities (B) and one risky equity security (S). A zero-coupon
bond with remaining maturity m 2 f0; 1; 2; 3; : : :g pays a dividend of dB;m
                                                                         t   =
                 B;m
1 if m = 0 and dt = 0 otherwise. Each individual can issue or buy these
bonds. There is no net aggregate supply of any bonds.


                                        5
    The equity security corresponds to the market portfolio and pays a div-
idend of dSt = yt at the beginning of each period t.7 The prices of the two
asset classes pSt and pB;m
                       t   are de ned `ex-dividend.' The dividend and the
price vectors at time t are abbreviated with dt 2 <n+ and pt 2 <n+ , where n
denotes the total number of assets traded in the economy (n 1 bonds and
1 equity security). Assets can be traded without incurring any transaction
costs and investors face no borrowing or short-selling constraints.

2.2     Tax System

The government imposes a at consumption tax and all assets face the same
e ective tax rates.8 Future tax rates  are stochastic and follow a two-state
Markov-Chain with 0  L  H < 1. The transition probabilities ij
between the two states are de ned as:
                             ij = P rob(t+1 = j jt = i ):                             (2)
    Time-varying tax rates may re ect unpredictable changes in the balance
of power among di erent groups of taxpayers. The tax revenues are exactly
identical to the outlays of the government. The government uses a xed
proportion ! 2 [0; 1] of the aggregate tax revenues Tt to nance a public
good gt = !Tt and rebates the remaining resources to the individuals as a
lump-sum payment which can be used to purchase the aggregate consumption
good without incurring any additional taxes.
    The growth rate of the output and the dividends zt+1 = ln dSt+1 ln dSt can
depend on the current tax rate t to allow for the possibility of distortionary
   7 This  paper follows the equity premium literature by assuming that equity is a claim
on the aggregate resources of the economy. In reality, stocks are a levered claim on the
resources and exhibit considerably more risk. The return premium of an asset increases
with its leverage (Modigliani and Miller 1958). Thus, this assumption understates the
actual premium of levered assets.
    8 The goal of this paper is not to describe the detailed e ects of all the speci c features
of the U.S. tax code on asset prices, it is to show how stochastic taxation a ects asset prices
and risk-premia. The current tax system in the United States is a progressive income tax
where some sources of income are partially or completely tax-exempt or tax-deferred. In
addition, states usually impose sales taxes on consumption goods. A at consumption
tax simpli es the algebra in this paper signi cantly and enables the derivation of closed
form solutions. Bossaerts and Dammon (1994) derive testable restrictions on asset prices
if investors have the option to time the realization of their capital gains and losses for tax
purposes.

                                              6
taxes. The growth rate of dividends zt+1 is independent of next period's tax
rate t+1 . This is a natural assumption because the future tax rate t+1 (which
is announced at the beginning of period t +1) cannot a ect the dividend dSt+1
(which accumulated during the period t and is paid to shareholders at the
beginning of period t + 1).9 The mean and the variance of the growth rate
zt+1 are L and L2 if t = L and H and H2 if t = H .

2.3       Utility

The representative consumer purchases the n available assets in quantities
xt 2 <n to maximize expected life-time utility. Utility is time-separable and
the period utility is separable in the private consumption good c and the
public good g . The coeÆcient ! is a measure of the separability between
the private consumption good and the outlays of the government. If ! = 0
(no separability), then all the tax revenues are rebated to the taxpayers and
the outlays of the government and the private consumption good are perfect
substitutes. If ! = 1 (full separability), then all the tax revenues are used to
 nance the public good. The asset pricing results with full separability are
identical to the case where the government throws away the tax revenues.
The discount factor is denoted by 2 (0; 1). The period utilities of the two
goods are denoted by u(c) and v (g ), where u0 (c) > 0 and u00 (c)  0.
   The consumer's problem is to maximize:
                             X1
                         Et       i (u(c ) + v (g )) ;                       (3)
                                        t+i       t+i
                             i=0

   where:
               ct = (1 t )[(pt + dt )0 xt 1       p0t xt ] + (1 ! )Tt ;           (4)
               gt = !Tt :                                                          (5)
    Consumers are assumed to have a power-utility function with a coeÆcient
of relative risk aversion 2 [0; 1).
   9 An alternative assumption would be that the government pre-announces the tax rates
one year in advance. This complicates the analysis by replacing the two states of the
Markov chain with four states, because then the current tax regime depends not only on
the current tax rate but also on the pre-announced future tax rate. The equity and the
term premia in the base case are actually higher if the tax rates are pre-announced.


                                          7
                                         c1t   1
                              u(ct ) =             :                     (6)
                                            1
    Individuals with = 0 are risk-neutral and individuals with = 1 have
logarithmic-preferences u(ct ) = ln(ct ). The risk aversion coeÆcient equals
the reciprocal of the elasticity of intertemporal substitution.
    The rst-order conditions for the two asset classes are:
         pB;m  0                    m E (u0 (c
          t u (ct )(1 t ) =            t     t+m )(1 t+m )) ;
                                                                    
                                                                         (7)
             S 0                          0                   S   S
           pt u (ct )(1 t ) = Et u (ct+1 )(1 t+1 )(pt+1 + dt+1 ) :     (8)
    An optimal solution to the agent's maximization problem must also sat-
isfy the following transversality condition:
                                                            
                      lim i Et u0(ct+i )(1 t+i )pSt+i xSt+i = 0:        (9)
                     i!1

2.4    Market Equilibrium

For market equilibrium, the quantities of each asset demanded must equal
the exogenous supply. The zero-coupon bonds have zero aggregate supply
and the aggregate supply of equity is normalized to one. In equilibrium, the
tax revenues, the consumption of the representative agent, and the provision
of the publicly provided good amount to:
               Tt = t dSt ;                                               (10)
               ct = (1 t )dSt + (1 ! )t dSt = (1 !t )dSt ;              (11)
               gt = !Tt = !t dSt :                                        (12)
   The (ex-post) marginal rate of intertemporal substitution of the private
good is in equilibrium:
                                                      
                 u0 (ct+i )     ct+i       1 !t+i dSt+i
                            =          =                   :           (13)
                  u0 (ct )       ct         1 !t dSt
    The rst-order conditions (7) and (8) give the relationship determining
the prices of bonds and equity securities. A zero-coupon bond with maturity
m 2 f0; 1; 2; 3; : : :g and unit face value dB;  0
                                              t = 1 should trade in equilibrium
at the following price:
                                       0                
                          B;m     m     u (ct+m ) 1 t+m
                         pt = Et                           :                (14)
                                         u0 (ct ) 1 t
                                         8
    The price of the risky asset can be expressed in the following way if the
transversality condition holds.
                   1                             
       S
                 X
                            i u0 (ct+i ) 1 t+i S
     pt =             Et                       d    ;                           (15)
                 i=1
                               u0(ct ) 1 t t+i
                      1                                S 1 !
                   S
                     X
                                 i 1 t+i 1 !t+i        dt+i
           = dt          Et                                S         = dSt Æt :
                     i=1
                                    1 t      1 !t       dt
    The current tax regime determines the probability distribution of future
tax rates and of future growth rates zt+i = ln dSt+i ln dSt+i 1 . The price-
dividend ratio of equity Æt and the price of the bond pB;m   t   do therefore not
depend on the level of the equity dividends dSt . They only depend on the
current tax regime and the maturity of the bonds.
    Taxes a ect asset prices over three mechanisms. First, tax rates in uence
the consumption levels if some portion of the tax revenues are used to fund
the public good (i.e., ! > 0). This a ects the marginal rate of intertemporal
substitution in equation (13). Tax changes result in a higher variability of
consumption. Second, taxes distort the price of the private consumption
good in di erent periods. Thus equations (14) and (15) include the ratio of
the tax rates. Third, taxes in uence the distribution of the growth rate of
the economy.
    A at consumption tax has no e ect on asset returns if the tax rate
does not vary over time (i.e., L = H ). The tax terms in the marginal
rate of intertemporal substitution in equation (13) cancel if t = t+i for
i 2 f0; 1; 2; : : :g. The tax factors in the pricing equations (14) and (15) also
cancel. In this case, taxes do not in uence the distribution of the growth rate
of the economy. A constant tax decreases consumption in all time periods by
the same proportion and does not a ect the marginal rate of intertemporal
substitution if the utility function has a constant coeÆcient of relative risk
aversion.

3 Equity Valuation
The rst part of this section derives closed-form solutions of the equity prices
in the two tax regimes. The second part solves the model for plausible param-
eter values and shows that the e ects of tax regime changes are economically
signi cant.

                                         9
3.1    Analytical Derivation

The price-dividend ratio of equity is denoted by Æt = pSt =dSt . The rst-order
condition (8) can be expressed as:
                         0                                
              pSt        u (ct+1 ) 1 t+1 dSt+1
      Æt = S = Et 0                             (1 + Æt+1 ) ;              (16)
              dt          u (ct ) 1 t dSt
                   S 1         "                                    #
                   dt+1            1 t+1 1 !t+1
          = Et S             Et                              (1 + Æt+1 ) :
                    dt              1 t      1 !t
    The last equality follows from the independence of the dividend growth
rate zt+1 and the tax rate t+1 and the price-dividend ratio Æt+1 . As seen
in Section 2.4, the price-dividend ratio does only depend on the current tax
regime. The growth rate of the dividend depends by assumption only on the
tax rate at time t and not on uncertain future tax rates. The rst factor is de-
termined by the dividend-process and is denoted by t = Et (dSt+1 =dSt )1 =
  exp ((1     )t + 0:5(1    )2 t2 ). This factor depends on the current tax
rate ( t = L if t = L and t = H otherwise). The second factor is de-
termined by the tax-process and depends on the future price-dividend ratio
and current and future tax rates. I use the following abbreviation:
                                                 
                             1 t+1 1 !t+1
                    t;t+1 =                         > 0:              (17)
                              1 t      1 !t
    The tax pricing factor t;t+1 equals one if the tax rates do not change
(HH = LL = 1). It is de ned as LH if the tax rates increase and as HL if
they decrease. Note that LH is the reciprocal of HL . The expected value
of t;t+1 equals H = HH + HL HL in the high- and L = LL + LH LH
in the low-tax regime. The price-dividend ratio depends only on the current
tax regime and is denoted by Æt = ÆH if t = H and Æt = ÆL otherwise.
               ÆH =      H [HH (1 + ÆH ) + HL HL (1 + ÆL )] ;          (18)
               ÆL =      L [LL (1 + ÆL ) + LH LH (1 + ÆH )] :          (19)
    Solving the system of linear equations for the two price-dividend ratios
yields:
                             H [H + L (1 HH LL )]
          ÆH =                                                   ;      (20)
                   1 [HH H + LL L + H L (1 HH LL )]
                             L [L + H (1 HH LL )]
           ÆL =                                                  :      (21)
                   1 [HH H + LL L + H L (1 HH LL )]
                                      10
   To ensure that the transversality condition (9) holds, I assume that 0 <
 i < 1 for i 2 fL; H g. In this case, the price-dividend ratios in equations
(20) and (21) are positive as shown in Appendix B.1.
   The following proposition shows the relationship between the tax regime
and the price-dividend ratio of equity securities in the special case where the
dividend growth rate is independent of the current tax rate (part i) and in
the general case (part ii).

Proposition 1 (i) If the tax and the dividend processes are independent
(i.e., L = H and L = H ), then the price-dividend ratio is higher in the
high-tax regime if < ~ and lower in the high-tax regime if > ~ :
                             ÆH R ÆL if           Q ~;
   where the critical risk aversion   ~   is given by:

                              ln(1 L )        ln(1   H )
                       ~=                                   :               (22)
                            ln(1 !L )         ln(1   !H )
   (ii) The price-dividend ratios in the two tax regimes have the following
relationship with dependent dividend and tax processes:

                         ÆH R ÆL if      R LL:
                                           H H

Proof: All proofs can be found in Appendix B. 2

     If tax rates are not expected to change over time (i.e., H = L ), then the
price-dividend ratios are equal in the two states (i.e., ÆH = ÆL = H =(1
  H ) = L =(1      L )).
     The coeÆcient ~ is larger than 1 and decreasing in ! . ~ is de ned for all
! 2 (0; 1]. If all the tax revenues are rebated to the tax payers as a lump-sum
distribution (! = 0), then ~ = 1. If the tax revenues are used to nance a
separable public good (! = 1), then ~ = 1.
     The special case where the dividend process does not depend on the
current tax regime (part i) is discussed rst. It is surprising that the price of
equity can be higher in the high-tax regime. To better understand this result,
it helps to analyze the di erent e ects which determine asset prices. First,
the government takes away a higher proportion of the aggregate dividends in
high-tax regimes (income e ect). Individuals would like to compensate for

                                          11
this tax by consuming more and by decreasing their demand of risky assets.
In equilibrium, the supply of assets cannot adjust and the price of equity has
to decrease due to the income e ect. Second, consumption is relatively more
expensive in periods with high taxes since future taxes are expected to be
equal to or lower than current taxes (substitution e ect). Individuals want
to consume less and invest more during these periods. In equilibrium, the
price of the risky asset has to increase as a consequence of this substitution
e ect. The elasticity of intertemporal substitution determines which of the
two e ects is more important. The second e ect is stronger for individuals
who are more willing to substitute consumption intertemporally (i.e., < ~ ),
whereas the rst e ect is stronger for individuals with a low elasticity (i.e.,
   > ~ ). The price-dividend ratios are identical in the two states if = ~ . In
this case, the two e ects exactly o set each other because the expenditure
elasticity equals zero.
    If all the tax revenues are used to nance the separable public good (i.e.,
! = 1), then ~ = 1 and equity valuations are higher in the high-tax regime
only if individuals are less risk-averse than a log-utility individual. If all the
tax revenues are rebated to the tax payers (i.e., ! = 0), then ~ = 1 and
equities are always valued higher in the high-tax regime. In this case, the
aggregate consumption level does not depend on the tax rate and is equal to
the before-tax dividend. Thus, the rst e ect of taxes on equity valuation
is completely eliminated with full redistribution. However, the second e ect
is still important, because individuals have an incentive to consume less in
periods where the tax on consumption is higher. Valuations in the high-tax
regime tend to be higher than those in the low-tax regime at low levels of
risk aversion and at low levels of separability.
    A dependence between the two processes adds a third e ect of taxes on
equity valuation. The current tax regime a ects the distribution of future
output levels (growth e ect). It is diÆcult to characterize the condition for
the general case, because the exponent of the pricing factor is a quadratic
function of the risk aversion .
    The expected gross return of equity at time t can be separated into the
following two components because of the independence of the price-dividend
ratio and the contemporaneous dividend:
                                 S                              
                                 pt+1 + dSt+1             1 + Æt+1
                Et (rt+1 ) = Et                 = t Et              ;        (23)
                                      pS
                                      t                     tÆ
   where t = Et (dSt+1 =dSt ) = exp(t + 0:5t2 ).

                                          12
Table 1: Numerical Assumptions
This table summarizes the base case parameter values used in the numerical
example. denotes the coeÆcient of relative risk aversion, the discount
factor, L and H the tax rates in the low-tax and high-tax regimes, LL
and HH the transition probabilities between the two regimes, and  and 
the mean and the standard deviation of the logarithm of the growth rate of
dividends.
         CoeÆcient              L H LL HH                  
         Value          2.50 0.98 0.30 0.40 0.80             0.80    0.02 0.05


3.2     Numerical Example

To determine whether stochastic taxation is economically signi cant the
model is solved for plausible underlying parameter values. In this exam-
ple, the two tax rates are assumed to be L = 0:3 and H = 0:4 and the
transition probabilities are LL = HH = 0:8. This implies an average du-
ration of a tax regime of ve years. The average tax rate equals 35 percent
and has a standard deviation of 5 percent. These values correspond roughly
to past tax changes of an investor in the $250,000 tax bracket. For exam-
ple, between 1940 and 1999, tax rates increased four times and decreased six
times by more than ve percent. The average increase equaled 11.06 percent
and the average decrease equaled 8.22 percent. The distribution of average
tax changes is similar for the longer period between 1914-1999.10
    The growth rate of the economy has a mean of 2 percent and a standard
deviation of 5 percent. These moments correspond roughly to the real per-
capita growth rate of GNP in the U.S.11 The distribution of the growth rate
   10 I concentrate on the tax rates of relatively wealthy individuals, because those indi-
viduals hold a signi cant portion of nancial assets. Poterba (2000) shows that the top
one percent of equity holders own 52.2 percent of household holdings of corporate stock
according to the 1998 Survey of Consumer Finances.
   11 The data are taken from Sialm (2001). The real per-capita growth rate of GNP
has a mean of 2.4 percent and a standard deviation of 4.5 percent between 1940-1999.
The standard deviation is considerably larger during the whole sample between 1914-1999
(5.89 percent). This assumption di ers from those in some papers in the equity premium
literature, which use the moments of aggregate consumption to calibrate the economy.
There are two reasons for this modi cation. First, I am interested in analyzing the e ects
of tax changes on asset returns. Simply looking at the moments of after-tax consumption
does not provide any insights into the e ects of tax changes on asset returns. Second,


                                            13
Figure 2: Price-Dividend Ratios of Equity
The dashed curves show the price-dividend ratios in an environment without
tax rate changes and the solid curves show the price-dividend ratios in the
low-tax and the high-tax regime in an environment with tax rate changes.
Panel A corresponds to the case where all the tax revenues are rebated to
the tax payers (! = 0) and Panel B depicts the case where the tax revenues
are used to nance a separable public good (! = 1).
                                 Panel A: ! = 0                                                          Panel B: ! = 1
                          100                                                                     100

                           90                                                                      90
                                     High−                                                                   High−
                                     Tax                                                                     Tax
                           80                                                                      80

                           70                                                                      70
   Price−Dividend Ratio




                                                                           Price−Dividend Ratio
                           60                                                                      60

                           50                No Tax                                                50
                                             Change
                           40                                                                      40                 Low−
                                                                                                                      Tax        No Tax
                                                                                                                                 Change
                           30                                                                      30

                           20                                                                      20
                                 Low−
                           10    Tax                                                               10

                            0                                                                       0
                             0   1         2        3         4   5                                  0   1         2        3         4   5
                                     Relative Risk−Aversion                                                  Relative Risk−Aversion




is assumed to be independent of the current tax regime. OLS regressions
indicate that the per-capita growth rate does not depend signi cantly (at a
  ve percent level) on the marginal tax rates. Sensitivity analyzes summarized
in Section 7 show that changes in these assumptions do not a ect the results
much. The base case assumes a discount factor of = 0:98. The analyses in
this section will concentrate on risk aversion coeÆcients in the range between
0 and 5. Table 1 summarizes all the assumptions in the base case.
    Figure 2 shows how the price-dividend ratio depends on the coeÆcient of
relative risk aversion. The two extreme cases with full lump-sum rebates (! =
tax rate changes are much more signi cant for high-income individuals, who own a large
proportion of the nancial assets, than for the average individual. Using aggregated values
of after-tax consumption ignores a large portion of the risk of changing tax rates, which
is signi cant for individuals in relatively high marginal tax brackets. Vissing-Jrgensen
(2002) discusses the biases of aggregating consumption levels.


                                                                      14
0) and with complete separability between the private and the public good
(! = 1) are depicted in Panels A and B. The dashed curves show the price-
dividend ratios in an environment without tax changes. The ratios depend
neither on the tax rate nor on the separability coeÆcient ! . Therefore,
the dashed curves are identical in Panels A and B. The price-dividend ratio
without tax rate changes equals 20.61 at a risk aversion of = 2:5. The ratio
increases considerably as individuals become less risk-averse.
    The two solid curves depict the price-dividend ratios in the low-tax and
the high-tax regime in an environment with tax rate changes. The valuation
is always higher in the high-tax regime if all the revenues are rebated (! = 0).
If all the tax revenues are used to nance the separable public good (! = 1),
then the valuations are higher in the high-tax regime at low-levels of risk
aversion (i.e., < ~ (! = 1) = 1) and higher in the low-tax regime at high-
levels of risk aversion. The valuations are exactly identical if individuals have
logarithmic utility. In this case, tax regime changes have no e ect on asset
valuations, and the price-dividend ratio is exactly what it would be in an
environment without tax changes.
    If all the tax revenues are rebated as a lump-sum distribution to the
representative agent (i.e., ! = 0), then with a risk aversion of 2.5 the price-
dividend ratio equals 22.21 in the high-tax state and 19.23 in the low-tax
state. Tax changes result in very large variations in stock prices. Stock prices
increase instantaneously by 15.50 percent (= 22:21=19:23 1) whenever tax
rates are raised and fall by 13.42 percent (= 19:23=22:21 1) whenever
they decrease. If the tax revenues are used to nance a separable public
good (i.e., ! = 1), then the price-dividend ratio equals 18.62 in the high-tax
state and 23.11 in the low-tax state. Stock prices fall in this case by 19.43
percent whenever taxes increase and increase by 24.11 percent whenever taxes
decrease. The model assumes that the timing of tax regime changes is not
anticipated by the investors. In reality, market participants learn gradually
about possible future tax reforms and the price changes occur over longer time
horizons as investors adjust their expectations about future tax changes.
    Figure 3 depicts the expected returns of equity in an environment with
and without tax rate changes. Introducing tax regime changes increases
the expected return of equity. The mean return of equity increases slightly
from 7.11 percent to 7.32 (7.58) percent if ! = 0 (! = 1). The expected
returns of the assets vary considerably between the di erent tax regimes.
For example, the expected equity return is 4.00 (12.57) percent in the high-
tax regime and 10.63 (2.59) percent in the low-tax regime if ! = 0 (! = 1)

                                       15
Figure 3: Expected Returns of Equity
Panels A and B show the expected returns of equity in the case where all
the tax revenues are rebated to the tax payers (! = 0) and where the tax
revenues are used to nance a separable public good (! = 1). The dashed
curves show the expected returns in an environment without tax rate changes
and the solid curves show the expected returns with tax rate changes.
                           Panel A: ! = 0                                                      Panel B: ! = 1
                    0.15                                                                0.15




                                  With Tax                                                           With Tax
                     0.1          Changes                                                0.1         Changes
  Expected Return




                                                                      Expected Return
                                                                                                                      No Tax
                                               No Tax                                                                 Changes
                                               Changes
                    0.05                                                                0.05




                      0                                                                   0
                       0   1         2        3          4   5                             0   1         2        3         4   5
                               Relative Risk−Aversion                                              Relative Risk−Aversion




under the base case assumptions. This model of tax regime switches gives a
plausible explanation for time-varying expected returns of assets as suggested
by Campbell (1991). Expected returns tend to be higher in the high-tax
regime if individuals are relatively risk averse and if a smaller share of the
tax revenues is rebated to the taxpayers.

4 Bond Valuation
The prices of zero-coupon bonds can be derived from equation (7):
                0                       h                        i
  B;m     m      u (ct+m ) 1 t+m                   B;m 1     B;m 1
 pt = Et                            =  E        p
                                       t t t;t+1 t+1      + d t+1      : (24)
                  u0 (ct ) 1 t
   The second equality uses the de nition t = Et (dSt+1 =dSt ) . The sep-
aration into two components is possible because the price of the bond pB;m
                                                                       t
does not depend on the level of the dividend dSt .

                                                                 16
     The equilibrium prices of a zero-coupon bond with maturity m can be
expressed recursively using the initial conditions pB;  0   B;0        B;0
                                                       H = pL = 0 and dH =
dB; 0                 B;m
                          = 0 if m 2 f1; 2; 3; : : :g.
 L = 1. Note that dt
                        h                                        i
       pB;m +1   =             B;m     B;m            B;m
                     H HH (pH + d ) + HL HL (pL + d ) ; B;m            (25)
        H
                       h                                        i
       pB;m +1 =     L LL (pB;m + d B;m ) +   (pB;m + dB;m ) :         (26)
        L                     L                LH LH H

   The next proposition proves in which tax regime the valuations of zero-
coupon bonds with a maturity of m are higher.
Proposition 2    (i) Suppose that the dividend process is independent of the
tax process. The price of a zero-coupon bond with a maturity of     m   years is
higher in the high-tax regime if    < ~    and lower in the high-tax regime if
  > ~:
                            H R pL
                           pB;m               Q ~:
                                   B;m
                                        if
   (ii) Bond prices with a maturity of m years have the following relationship
with dependent dividend and tax processes:


                        H R pL
                       pB;m                     R LL:
                             B;m
                                 if H H
     If the dividend growth rate does not depend on the current tax rate (part
i), then the condition for bond prices is exactly identical to the condition for
equity securities from Proposition 1. In this case, valuations of both assets
are higher in the high-tax regime if < ~ . The income and the substitution
e ects have the same intuition for bonds as for equity securities.
     The growth e ect, which is relevant if the dividend and the tax processes
are dependent, di ers for equity and one-period zero-bonds. The growth rate
a ects the discount factor of bonds  but not the future payo s of the bonds.
For equity, both the discount factor and the future dividends are a ected.
This explains why the condition (ii) for bonds di ers in general from the
condition for equity.
     The properties of bond prices are discussed in more detail in Appendix B.3.
If tax regimes are persistent (HH + LL > 1), then the ratio of the bond
prices in the two tax regimes converges monotonically towards a steady state
value as the maturity of the bonds increases. If tax regimes are transitory
(HH + LL < 1), then the ratio of the two bond prices oscillates around the
steady-state level and converges if either HH > 0 or LL > 0. If the tax rate

                                      17
Figure 4: Expected Returns of Short-Term Bonds
Panels A and B show the expected returns of a zero-coupon bond with a
maturity of one year. The dashed curves show the expected returns in an
environment without tax rate changes and the solid curves show the expected
returns with tax rate changes.
                            Panel A: ! = 0                                                     Panel B: ! = 1
                      0.1                                                                0.1

                     0.09                                                               0.09

                     0.08              No Tax                                           0.08             No Tax
                                       Changes                                                           Changes
                     0.07                                                               0.07
   Expected Return




                                                                      Expected Return
                     0.06                                                               0.06
                                                                                                              With Tax
                     0.05                                                               0.05                  Changes
                                  With Tax
                     0.04         Changes                                               0.04

                     0.03                                                               0.03

                     0.02                                                               0.02

                     0.01                                                               0.01

                       0                                                                  0
                        0   1         2        3         4   5                             0   1         2        3         4   5
                                Relative Risk−Aversion                                             Relative Risk−Aversion




switches deterministically between the two regimes (HH = LL = 0), then
the ratio of the bond prices uctuates between two di erent values and does
not converge.
    Figure 4 depicts the expected returns of a one-period zero-coupon bond
in an environment with and without tax rate changes using the base case
assumptions from Table 1. If tax rates do not change over time, then the
return of the short-term bond equals 6.44 percent at a risk aversion of = 2:5
and increases signi cantly at higher levels of risk aversion. This result is at
odds with the average historical real return of short-term Treasury securities.
Introducing tax changes decreases the expected return of short-term bonds
slightly. At a risk aversion of = 2:5, the mean return of the risk-free
one-period bond equals 6.29 (6.10) percent if ! = 0 (! = 1).




                                                                 18
5 Term Structure of Interest Rates
In an environment without tax changes, the expected gross return of a bond
with maturity m is given by:
                              pB;m 1 pB;m 1        1
                   E rB;m = B;m = B;m 1 = :                            (27)
                                p        p         
Corollary 1  The expected return of zero-coupon bonds does not depend on
the maturity m if tax rates do not vary over time.

    Next, I discuss the term structure in an environment with tax rate changes.
The expected gross returns of a bond with maturity m in the two tax regimes
is given by:
                                  pB;m 1 +  pB;m 1
                   E rHB;m = HH H B;m HL L                 ;              (28)
                                                    pH
                                        LL pB;m 1 +  pB;m 1
                                                         LH H
                    E rLB;m           =        L
                                                     B;m        :                (29)
                                                   pL
   The next proposition summarizes the necessary conditions for an increas-
ing or decreasing term structure of interest rates.
Proposition 3   Suppose that tax regimes are persistent (HH + LL > 1).
   (i) Longer term bonds have a higher expected return than shorter term
bonds if the dividend process is independent of the tax process.
    (ii) The slope of the term structure of interest rates is determined by the
following condition with dependent dividend and tax processes:
                          
 E riB;m+1       R E riB;m           for i 2 fL; H g if (L L   H H )(1 H ) R 0:
   A necessary condition for a monotonously increasing term structure is
that tax regimes are persistent (i.e., HH + LL > 1). This condition is
plausible because tax rates are more likely to remain unchanged than to
change in each period. I will demonstrate that the term structure is non-
monotonous if tax regimes are only transitory.
   Part (i) states that the term premium increases with the maturity of the
bonds if the distribution of dividends does not depend on the current tax rate
(H = L ). Stochastic taxes add an additional source of uncertainty to the

                                              19
Figure 5: Expected Bond Returns
The dashed curves show the expected bond returns in an environment with-
out tax rate changes and the solid curves show that the expected bond returns
increase as the maturity of zero-coupon bonds increases. Panel A corresponds
to the case where all the tax revenues are rebated to the tax payers (! = 0)
and Panel B depicts the case where the tax revenues are used to nance a
separable public good (! = 1).
                              Panel A: ! = 0                                                     Panel B: ! = 1
                     0.072                                                              0.072


                      0.07                                                               0.07
                                                                                                          With Tax
                                                                                                          Changes

                     0.068             With Tax                                         0.068
   Expected Return




                                       Changes                        Expected Return

                     0.066                                                              0.066


                     0.064             No Tax                                           0.064             No Tax
                                       Changes                                                            Changes

                     0.062                                                              0.062


                      0.06                                                               0.06
                          0   5   10     15       20   25   30                               0   5   10      15       20   25   30
                                       Maturity                                                            Maturity




economy and require higher returns to long-duration bonds that are exposed
more to tax uncertainty. This result does not depend on the uses of the
tax revenues. The numerical example below shows that the term structure
is usually steeper when the tax revenues are not rebated (! = 1). In this
case, tax changes a ect both the consumption levels of the representative
individual and the relative price of consumption over time. If the tax revenues
are completely rebated (! = 0), then the consumption levels are una ected
by tax changes. However, bond prices are still a ected by tax changes because
the relative price of consumption varies over time.
    Part (ii) allows the growth rate of the economy to be correlated with the
current tax regime. A decreasing term structure is possible if the distribu-
tion of the dividend growth rate is suÆciently di erent between the two tax
regimes. The term structure is decreasing if the tax changes are such that
they reduce the aggregate uncertainty investors are exposed to.


                                                                 20
    The expected returns oscillate around the long-term values if tax regimes
are transitory (HH + LL < 1). In this case, the expected returns are
not monotonous in the maturity. If tax regimes switch deterministically
(HH = LL = 0), then expected returns of bonds with di erent maturities
 uctuate between only two values and do not converge. Section B.4 in the
Appendix describes the properties of bond returns in more detail.
    Next, I compute the expected bond returns for di erent maturities given
the parametric assumptions from Table 1. Figure 5 depicts the expected bond
returns with (solid curves) and without (dashed curves) tax rate changes. In
an environment without tax changes, the term structure of interest rates is
 at with a yield of 6.44 percent with the parameters given in Table 1. With
tax regime shifts, the expected returns of zero-coupon bonds increase with
the maturity. All the bonds with a maturity of more than one year are higher
in a model with stochastic taxes than the bond returns without tax changes.
The expected returns of the bonds converge to 6.69 (7.01) percent with ! = 0
(! = 1) as m ! 1. The average term premium amounts to 0.89 percent
(= 7:01 6:10) if ! = 1 and 0.40 percent (= 6:69 6:29) if ! = 0.

6 Equity Premium
The equity premium compares the expected return of equity to the return
of risk-free one-period zero-coupon bonds. The following proposition states
the conditions under which the equity premium increases in an environment
with tax changes.
Proposition 4    The equity premium i for i 2 fL; H g equals the sum of a
premium due to dividend uncertainty iD and a premium due to tax changes
iT :                            
                    i = Et rtS+1 rtB;1 = iD + iT :                 (30)
   (i) If the dividend process is independent of the tax process, then both
premia are positive.
   (ii) The sign of the tax premium is determined by the following condition
with dependent tax and dividend processes:

          iT   R0   for i 2 fL; H g if ( LL   H H )(1   H ) R 0:
   The excess return of stocks over short-term bonds is due to two premia.
The rst premium iD equals the equity premium in an environment without

                                       21
tax changes and is always positive. The second premium iT is due to tax
changes and is positive if the condition in part (ii) is satis ed. It is possible
that the equity premium becomes negative if the distribution of the dividend
growth rate is suÆciently di erent between the two tax regimes. The equity
premium decreases if the tax changes are such that they reduce the aggregate
uncertainty investors are exposed to. Part (i) states that the tax premium
is always positive if the distribution of dividends does not depend on the
current tax rate. The sign of the tax premium does not depend on whether
tax regimes are transitory or persistent.
    The conditions in parts (ii) of Propositions 3 and 4 look very similarly,
but they depend on  and , respectively. These two factors di er, because
the growth rate of dividends a ects only the payo s of equity and not the
payo s of bonds. It is therefore possible to observe an increasing term struc-
ture of interest rates and a negative tax premium. If the growth rate is
independent of the tax rate, then the equity and the term premium increase
after introducing tax reforms.
    The three e ects that drive the asset valuation give an intuition of the
e ect of tax changes on the equity premium. The rst e ect (income e ect)
increases the equity premium because tax changes increase the variability of
consumption over time. It is well-known that an increase in consumption
volatility increases the required risk-premia. The rst e ect disappears if
all the tax revenues are rebated to the representative agent. In this case,
the consumption process is not a ected by tax changes. The second e ect
(substitution e ect) remains important in the case with a full rebate. Varying
tax rates a ect the relative price of consumption over time. The third e ect
(growth e ect) can increase or decrease the equity premium, depending on
the correlation between taxes and productivity growth. Individuals require
higher expected returns for holding long-duration assets, such as stocks and
long-term bonds, compared to short-term bonds. The increase of the equity
premium occurs because equities have a relatively long duration.12
    The following gures compute the equity premium using the parameters
in Table 1. The dashed curves of Figure 6 show that the equity premium in-
creases slowly with risk aversion in a conventional model without tax changes.
For example, the equity premium equals only 0.67 percent at a coeÆcient of
risk aversion of = 2:5. This is considerably lower than the equity premium
of between 2.55 and 4.32 percent estimated by Fama and French (2002). Fig-
 12 Abel   (1999) divides the equity premium into a term premium and a risk premium.


                                          22
Figure 6: Equity Premium
The dashed curves show the equity premia without tax rate changes and the
solid curves show the premia with tax rate changes. Panel A corresponds to
the case where all the tax revenues are rebated to the tax payers (! = 0)
and Panel B depicts the case where the tax revenues are used to nance a
separable public good (! = 1).
                                   Panel A: ! = 0                                                                  Panel B: ! = 1
                            0.08                                                                            0.08

                            0.07                                                                            0.07

                            0.06                                                                            0.06
   Expected Equity Premia




                                                                                   Expected Equity Premia
                            0.05                                                                            0.05
                                                                                                                              With Tax
                                                                                                                              Changes
                            0.04                                                                            0.04

                            0.03                                                                            0.03
                                                                                                                                                No Tax
                                         With Tax                                                                                               Changes
                            0.02         Changes                                                            0.02

                            0.01                                                                            0.01
                                                                No Tax
                                                                Changes
                              0                                                                               0
                               0   1         2        3         4         5                                    0   1         2        3          4        5
                                       Relative Risk−Aversion                                                          Relative Risk−Aversion




ure 6 demonstrates that the equity premium is larger in a model with tax
rate changes (solid curves). Panel B shows that the equity premium is highly
sensitive to changes in the coeÆcient of relative risk aversion if the govern-
ment does not rebate the tax revenues to the taxpayers (i.e., ! = 1). The
equity premium is lowest at a risk aversion of = 0:66. An average equity
premium of 6.95 percent results at a coeÆcient of relative risk aversion of 5.
The equity premium at this level of risk aversion without tax rate changes
would have been only 1.37 percent.
    Panel A of Figure 6 shows the equity premium if the government rebates
all the tax revenues to the representative individual (i.e., ! = 0). The equity
premium is higher in this case compared to the case where ! = 1 if the risk
aversion is smaller than = 2:0. It is still considerably higher than the
equity premium without tax regime changes. However, the equity premium
increases only slowly with risk aversion. In this paper, equity securities are
unlevered, because their payo s correspond to the total production of the

                                                                              23
economy. The equity premia of levered securities increase with the leverage.
This additional factor together with the additional modi cations of conven-
tional asset pricing models mentioned in the introduction helps to match the
historical moments of equity returns.
    The higher term premium accounts for a large portion of the equity pre-
mium. The e ect of tax rate changes on assets depends primarily on the
duration of the assets. Both equity and bonds have long durations and are
highly sensitive to changes in tax rates. For tax changes to have a substantial
e ect on the equity premium, risk-aversion has to be suÆciently large and
separability between the public and the private good has to be suÆciently
high.

7 Sensitivity Analyses
To check the robustness of the numerical example in the previous section, the
numerical assumptions are changed. Panels A and B of Figure 7 depict the
expected returns of short- (one year) and long-term (thirty years) bonds and
equity at di erent levels of persistence of the tax regimes with a symmetric
transition matrix (i.e., HH = LL ) and at a risk aversion of = 2:5. If tax
rates are permanent (HH = LL = 1), then the term premium due to tax
changes equals zero. The equity premium equals the premium in an envi-
ronment without tax changes. The price changes are large and infrequent at
high persistence levels and small and frequent at low persistence levels. The
term premium is largest for intermediate persistence levels, when tax changes
are common and price changes are relatively large. The term premium tends
to be maximized if HH = LL = 0:5, because then the uncertainty about
future tax rates is highest. The level of the term premium is lower if all the
tax revenues are rebated to the tax payers.
    Panels C and D of Figure 7 show the dependence of the returns of the two
assets on the di erence between the tax rates in the two states. The average
tax rate is kept constant at its average level of 35 percent. As the di erence
between the tax rates in the two tax regimes increases, the mean return
of equity securities and long-term bonds increases and the mean return of
short-term bonds decreases. Most of the equity premium is due to the term
premium if the tax di erence is relatively large.
    The numerical exercises performed previously assume that the distribu-
tion of the growth rates is identical in the two tax regimes. The results in

                                      24
Figure 7: Asset Returns with Changing Persistence Levels and Tax Rates
The expected returns of one and thirty-years zero-coupon bonds and equity
securities are depicted at di erent persistence levels (Panels A and B) and
with di erent tax rates (Panels C and D).
                              Panel A: ! = 0                                                               Panel B: ! = 1
                      0.1                                                                          0.1

                    0.095
                                                                                                 0.095
                     0.09
                                               Long−                                              0.09
                                Equity                                                                                      Equity
                                               Term
                    0.085
                                               Bonds
                                                                               Expected Return
  Expected Return




                                                                                                 0.085
                     0.08

                    0.075                                                                         0.08

                     0.07
                                                                                                 0.075
                                                                                                                            Long−
                    0.065
                                                                                                                            Term
                                                                                                  0.07                      Bonds
                                    Short−                                                                Short−
                     0.06           Term                                                                  Term
                                    Bonds                                                        0.065    Bonds
                    0.055

                     0.05                                                                         0.06
                         0    0.2       0.4       0.6     0.8        1                                0    0.2       0.4       0.6     0.8     1
                                 Persistence of Tax−Regime                                                    Persistence of Tax−Regime

                              Panel C: ! = 0                                                               Panel D: ! = 1
                    0.11                                                                         0.11


                     0.1                                                                          0.1


                    0.09                                                                         0.09
                                                                                                                   Equity
  Expected Return




                                                                               Expected Return




                                             Equity
                    0.08                                                                         0.08
                                                                                                                                     Long−
                                                           Long−                                                                     Term
                    0.07                                                                         0.07                                Bonds
                                                           Term
                                                           Bonds
                    0.06                                                                         0.06
                                                Short−
                                                                                                                   Short−
                                                Term
                    0.05                                                                         0.05              Term
                                                Bonds
                                                                                                                   Bonds

                    0.04                                                                         0.04
                        0    0.05       0.1     0.15     0.2       0.25                              0    0.05       0.1     0.15     0.2    0.25
                               Difference between Tax Rates                                                 Difference between Tax Rates




                                                                          25
Section 6 demonstrate that the premium due to tax changes can be either
positive or negative if the growth rate of the economy depends on the tax
rate. The di erences between the moments of the growth rates in the two
regimes have to be relatively large to generate a negative tax premium. If
H = L , then the growth di erential H L would need to be larger than
4:1 percent for ! = 0 and the di erential H L would need to be smaller
than 6:2 percent for ! = 1 to generate a negative tax premium.
    The previous results assume that tax rates follow a two-state Markov
chain. The results do not change much if additional states are introduced.
Alternative speci cations of the Markov chain can either increase or decrease
the equity premium relative to the base case with two states. For example,
a three-state Markov chain with  2 f0:275; 0:350; 0:425g and with a proba-
bility of remaining in the current state of 0.8222 and equal probabilities to
switch to any of the two other states has the same unconditional mean and
variance of the tax rates and the same expected tax change in each period
as the two-state Markov chain used previously. In this example, the equity
premium increases marginally from 1.03 to 1.04 percent if ! = 0 and it in-
creases from 1.48 to 1.51 percent if ! = 1. The equity premium increases
slightly because larger tax changes become possible. The equity premia are
considerably larger in the highest and the lowest tax state compared to the
middle tax state.

8 Conclusions
This paper generalizes the Lucas (1978) asset pricing model by introducing
a at consumption tax, which follows a two-state Markov chain. This tax
does not merely a ect equity securities, it a ects all assets symmetrically.
Whenever taxes change, asset prices need to adjust instantaneously to clear
asset markets. These price changes increase the variability of expected and
actual asset returns. The price adjustments are more severe for assets with
long durations, such as equity and long-term bonds, than for assets with
shorter durations. Individuals require higher expected returns for holding
the assets with more severe price changes under plausible conditions.
    Tax rate changes a ect asset prices even if all the tax revenues are rebated
to the representative individual and the consumption process remains com-
pletely una ected by tax changes. This occurs because tax changes distort
the price of consumption over time and a ect investment incentives.

                                      26
    A numerical example demonstrates that stochastic taxation can account
for a large portion of the return premium of equities over short-term bonds,
without generating implausible returns on short-term bonds.
    This paper makes several simpli cations which could be relaxed in fu-
ture work. First, the model uses a simple exchange economy without real
investment opportunities to illustrate the e ects of tax changes. Endoge-
nizing real investment choices will result in a more realistic model of the
economy. Second, the current tax system in the United States is not a at
consumption tax system. It is a progressive income tax system where some
income sources are exempt from taxes (e.g., tax-deferred accounts, municipal
bonds). In particular, stocks and bonds face di erent e ective tax rates. The
e ects of tax reforms will di er if the e ective tax on stock returns is smaller
than the tax on bond returns and if the variability of the tax rates of the
two assets di ers. The analysis under a more realistic tax system would be
interesting. Third, the tax shocks in this paper are exogenous. Time-varying
tax rates may re ect unpredictable changes in the balance of power among
di erent groups of taxpayers. A political-economy model could explain the
mechanism that generates frequent tax rate changes.




                                      27
References
 Abel, A. B. (1990). Asset Prices Under Habit Formation and Catching Up
    With the Joneses. The American Economic Review 80 (2), 38{42.
 Abel, A. B. (1999). Risk Premia and Term Premia in General Equilibrium.
    Journal of Monetary Economics 43 (1), 3{33.

 Amoako-Adu, B., M. Rashid, and M. Stebbins (1992). Capital Gains Tax
    and Equity Values: Empirical Test of Stock Price Reaction to the In-
    troduction of Capital Gains Tax Exemption. Journal of Banking and
    Finance 16 (2), 275{287.

 Auerbach, A. J. and J. R. Hines (1988). Investment Tax Incentives and
    Frequent Tax Reforms. The American Economic Review 78 (2), 211{
    216.
 Bizer, D. S. and K. L. Judd (1989). Taxation and Uncertainty. The Amer-
    ican Economic Review 79 (2), 331{336.

 Blouin, J. L., J. S. Raedy, and D. A. Shackelford (2000). Capital Gains
    Holding Periods and Equity Trading: Evidence from the 1998 Act.
    NBER Working Paper 7827.
 Bossaerts, P. and R. M. Dammon (1994). Tax-Induced Intertemporal Re-
    strictions on Security Returns. Journal of Finance 49 (4), 1347{1371.
 Campbell, J. Y. (1991). A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns.
    Economic Journal 101 (405), 157{179.

 Campbell, J. Y. (1999). Asset Prices, Consumption, and the Business
    Cycle. In J. Taylor and M. Woodford (Eds.), Handbook of Macroe-
    conomics, Vol. 1, Chapter 19, pp. 1231{1303. Amsterdam: North-
    Holland.
 Campbell, J. Y. and J. H. Cochrane (1999). By Force of Habit: A
    Consumption-Based Explanation of Aggregate Stock Market Behav-
    ior. Journal of Political Economy 107 (2), 205{251.
 Constantinides, G. M. (1990). Habit Formation: A Resolution of the Eq-
    uity Premium Puzzle. Journal of Political Economy 98 (3), 519{543.
 Constantinides, G. M., J. B. Donaldson, and R. Mehra (2002). Junior
    Can't Borrow: A New Perspective on the Equity Premium Puzzle.
    Quarterly Journal of Economics 117 (1), 269{296.


                                  28
Constantinides, G. M. and D. DuÆe (1996). Asset Pricing with Heteroge-
    neous Consumers. Journal of Political Economy 104 (2), 219{240.
Domar, E. D. and R. A. Musgrave (1944). Proportional Income Taxation
    and Risk-Taking. Quarterly Journal of Economics 58 (3), 388{422.
Eaton, J. (1981). Fiscal Policy, In ation and the Accumulation of Risky
    Capital. Review of Economic Studies 48 (3), 435{445.
Epstein, L. G. and S. E. Zin (1989). Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the
    Temporal Behavior of Consumption Growth and Asset Returns I: A
    Theoretical Framework. Econometrica 57 (4), 937{969.
Fama, E. E. and K. F. French (2002). The Equity Premium. Journal of
    Finance 57 (2), 637{659.

Gordon, R. H. (1985). Taxation of Corporate Capital Income: Tax Rev-
    enue versus Tax Distortions. Quarterly Journal of Economics 100 (1),
    1{27.
Guenther, D. A. and M. Willenborg (1999). Capital Gains Tax Rates and
    the Cost of Capital for Small Business: Evidence from the IPO Market.
    Journal of Financial Economics 53 (3), 385{408.
Hamilton, J. H. (1987). Taxation, Savings, and Portfolio Choice in a Con-
    tinuous Time Model. Public Finance / Finances Publiques 42 (2), 264{
    281.
Hansen, L. P. and R. Jagannathan (1991). Implications of Security Mar-
    ket Data for Models of Dynamic Economies. Journal of Political Econ-
    omy 99 (2), 225{262.

Hansen, L. P. and K. J. Singleton (1983). Stochastic Consumption, Risk
    Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns. Journal of
    Political Economy 91 (2), 249{265.
Hassett, K. A. and G. E. Metcalf (1999). Investment with Uncertain Tax
    Policy: Does Random Tax Policy Discourage Investment? Economic
    Journal 109 (457), 372{393.

Heaton, J. and D. Lucas (1996). Evaluating the E ects of Incomplete
    Markets on Risk Sharing and Asset Pricing. Journal of Political Econ-
    omy 104 (3), 668{712.

Internal Revenue Service (Ed.) (1954). Statistics of Income. Washington
    D.C.: U.S. Treasury Department.

                                  29
Jorion, P. and W. N. Goetzmann (1999). Global Stock Markets in the
   Twentieth Century. Journal of Finance 54 (3), 953{980.
Judd, K. L. (1985). Redistributive Taxation in a Simple Perfect Foresight
   Model. Journal of Public Economics 28 (1), 59{83.
Kaplow, L. (1994). Taxation and Risk Taking: A General Equilibrium
   Perspective. National Tax Journal 47 (4), 789{798.
Kocherlakota, N. R. (1996). The Equity Premium: It's Still a Puzzle.
   Journal of Economic Literature 34 (1), 42{71.

Lang, M. H. and D. A. Shackelford (2000). Capitalization of Capital Gains
   Taxes: Evidence from Stock Price Reactions to the 1997 Rate Reduc-
   tion. Journal of Public Economics 76 (1), 69{85.
Lucas, R. E. (1978). Asset Prices in an Exchange Economy. Economet-
   rica 46 (6), 1429{1445.

Mankiw, G. N. (1986). The Equity Premium and the Concentration of
   Aggregate Shocks. Journal of Financial Economics 17 (1), 211{219.
Mankiw, G. N. and S. P. Zeldes (1991). The Consumption of Stockholders
   and Non-Stockholders. Journal of Financial Economics 29 (1), 97{112.
McGrattan, E. R. and E. C. Prescott (2001). Taxes, Regulations, and
   Asset Prices. NBER Working Paper 8623.
Mehra, R. and E. C. Prescott (1985). The Equity Premium: A Puzzle.
   Journal of Monetary Economics 15 (2), 145{161.

Mitchell, B. (1983). International Historical Statistics: The Americas and
   Australasia. Michigan: Gale Research.

Modigliani, F. and M. M. Miller (1958). The Cost of Capital, Corporate
   Finance, and the Theory of Investment. The American Economic Re-
   view 48 (3), 261{297.

Pechman, J. A. (1985). Who Paid the Taxes, 1966-86? Washington D.C.:
   The Brookings Institution.
Pechman, J. A. (1987). Federal Tax Policy (Fifth ed.). Washington D.C.:
   Brookings.
Poterba, J. M. (2000). Stock Market Wealth and Consumption. Journal
   of Economic Perspectives 14 (2), 99{118.



                                  30
Rietz, T. A. (1988). The Equity Risk Premium. A Solution. Journal of
    Monetary Economics 22 (1), 117{131.

Shiller, R. J. (1981). Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justi ed
    by Subsequent Changes in Dividends? The American Economic Re-
    view 71 (3), 421{436.

Sialm, C. (2001). Tax Changes and Asset Returns: An Empirical Investi-
    gation. Stanford University, mimeo.
Sinai, T. and J. Gyourko (2000). The Asset Price Incidence of Capital
    Gains Taxes: Evidence from the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 and
    Publicly-Traded Real Estate Firms. NBER Working Paper 7893.
Slemrod, J. and T. Greimel (1999). Did Steve Forbes Scare the US Mu-
    nicipal Bond Market? Journal of Public Economics 74 (1), 81{96.
Stiglitz, J. E. (1969). The E ects of Income, Wealth, and Capital Gains
    Taxation on Risk-Taking. Quarterly Journal of Economics 83 (2), 263{
    283.
Storesletten, K., C. I. Telmer, and A. Yaron (2001). Asset Pricing with
    Idiosyncratic Risk and Overlapping Generations. Carnegie Mellon,
    mimeo.
U.S. Government Printing OÆce (Ed.) (2000). Economic Report of the
    President. Washington D.C.

Vissing-Jrgensen, A. (2002). Limited Stock Market Participation and
    the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution. Journal of Political Econ-
    omy 110 (4), 825{853.

Weil, P. (1989). The Equity Premium Puzzle and the Risk-Free Rate Puz-
    zle. Journal of Monetary Economics 24 (2), 401{421.
Zodrow, G. R. (1995). Taxation, Uncertainty and the Choice of a Con-
    sumption Tax Base. Journal of Public Economics 38 (2), 257{265.




                                   31
A Data
A.1     Marginal Tax Rates

Taxable income was derived for ve real income levels after deducting exemp-
tions for a married couple ling jointly with two dependent children from the
income levels. The proportion of total deductions relative to the adjusted
gross income was assumed to equal the proportion of total deductions in the
whole population for each year as reported by the Internal Revenue Service.
The marginal income tax brackets and exemptions were determined using
the Statistics of Income of the Internal Revenue Service (1954) for the years
1913-1943, Pechman (1987) for the years 1944-1987, and di erent issues of
the Instructions to Form 1040 from the IRS for the remaining years between
1988-1999. The values of the Consumer Price Index from 1913-1957 were
taken from Mitchell (1983) and for the other years from the U.S. Govern-
ment Printing OÆce (2000). Total deductions as a proportion of adjusted
gross income (AGI) were derived from di erent issues of the Statistics of
Income of the IRS.

B Proofs
B.1    Proof that Price-Dividend Ratios are Positive

This proof shows that the price-dividend ratios in equations (20) and (21)
are positive if 0 < i < 1 for i 2 fL; H g. The numerator of equation (20)
NH is positive if 0 < i < 1 for i 2 fL; H g:
            NH =    H [H+ L (1 HH LL )]
               =    H [HH + HL HL + L (1 HH LL )]
               =    H [HH (1  L ) + HL HL + L (1 LL )] > 0:

   The denominator DH of equation (20) is positive if 0 <    i   < 1, because:
        1    DH = HH H + LL L + H L (1 HH LL )
                = H [HH + HL L ] + L [LL + LH H ] H             L
                 H + L H L = H + (1 H ) L < 1:
   Similar operations show that (21) is positive.

                                     32
B.2     Proof of Proposition 1

(i) If L = H and L = H , then L = H . In this case only the rst
product in the numerator di ers between equations (20) and (21). HL =
[(1 L )=(1 H )][(1 !L )=(1 !H )] . HL = 1 if = ~ and @HL =@  0.
Thus, HL R 1 if Q ~ . Because LH = 1=HL , LH Q 1 if Q ~ .
H = HH + HL HL and L = LL + LH LH are simply weighted averages
of HL and LH with 1, respectively. Thus, H R 1 R L if Q ~ . ÆH R ÆL if
H R L , because the denominators in equations (20) and (21) are positive
as proved in Appendix B.1 and because by assumption 0 < L = H . Thus,
ÆH R ÆL if Q ~ .
    (ii) Equations (20) and (21) di er only in the rst product of their numer-
ators. The denominators in equations (20) and (21) are positive as proved
in Appendix B.1. Therefore ÆH R ÆL if H H R LL . 2

B.3     Proof of Proposition 2

I show the conditions which are necessary for bond prices to be higher in the
high-tax regime. The bond price ratio m with maturity m > 1 is:
                      pB;m                         m 1+  ]
              m   =    H = f(   m   1 ) = H [HH          HL HL
                                                                                  (31)
                      pB;m
                       L                  L [LL + LH LH m 1 ]
   The bond price ratio is a function of its lagged value        m   = f(   m   1 ). Its
 rst derivative is:
                       d m       H L [HH + LL       1]
                           1 =                           1 )]2                    (32)
                      d m      [L (LL + LH LH   m

    Thus, d m =d m 1 R 0 and d2 m =d m 1 2 Q 0 if HH + LL R 1. f is
increasing and concave if the tax regimes are persistent and decreasing and
convex if the tax regimes are transitory. Moreover, m is positive for all
maturities m.
    Figure 8 depicts four di erent cases, depending on whether tax rates are
persistent and depending on the size of the discount factors: In case 1.1 tax
regimes are persistent (HH + LL > 1) and the discount factor is higher
in the high-tax regime (H H > L L ). In the rst period, 1 = f (1) =
H H =L L > 1. Because f ( ) is increasing and concave, 2 = f ( 1 ) > 1 .
The bond price ratio increases monotonically and converges to its steady

                                       33
Figure 8: Dynamics of Price Ratio
These gures depict the bond price ratios in four di erent cases according
to equation (31). If tax regimes are persistent, then the price ratio con-
verges monotonically to its steady state (Cases 1.1 and 1.2). If tax regimes
are transitory, then the price ratio oscillates around its steady state (Cases
2.1 and 2.2). The bond-price ratio is larger than one if H H > L L
(Cases 1.1 and 2.1) and smaller than one if H H < L L (Cases 1.2. and
2.2).
            Case 1: Persistent Tax Regimes (HH + LL > 1)
       Case 1.1: H H > L L            Case 1.2: H H < L L
        m                                                   m
       ψ                                                    ψ


        ψ*
                                                                                  45o
           1
        ψ                                                           1


                1    ψm
                                                                1
                                                            ψ                       ψm

                                                            ψ*




                     45o
                0                                                   0
                 0                1        ψ*   ψm−1                 0   ψ*   1         ψm−1

            Case 2: Transitory Tax Regimes (HH + LL < 1)
       Case 2.1: H H > L L            Case 2.2: H H < L L
        m                                                   m
       ψ                      m                             ψ
                              ψ


            1
                                                                                   45o
        ψ
        ψ*                                                          1


                1


                                                            ψ*

                                                            ψ
                                                                1
                                                                                   ψm


                          o
                     45
                                                                    0
                                  1   ψ*        ψm−1                 0   ψ*   1         ψm−1




                                                       34
state  > 1. Thus, m > 1 for all maturities. In case 1.2 tax regimes are
persistent and the discount factor is lower in the high-tax regime. In the
  rst period, 1 = f (1) = H H =L L < 1. Because f ( ) is increasing and
concave, 2 = f ( 1 ) < 1 . The bond price ratio decreases monotonically
and converges to its steady state  < 1. m < 1 for all maturities.
    This proves that Proposition 2 holds if tax rates are persistent. The
following discussion shows that the proposition also holds in cases 2.1 and
2.2. In case 2.1 tax regimes are transitory and the discount factor is higher
in the high-tax regime. In the rst period, 1 = f (1) = H H =L L > 1.
Because f ( ) is decreasing and convex, 2 = f ( 1 ) < . The bond price
ratio oscillates around its steady state  > 1. In case 2.2 tax regimes are
transitory and the discount factor is lower in the high-tax regime. In the
  rst period, 1 = f (1) = H H =LL < 1. Because f ( ) is decreasing and
convex, 2 = f ( 1 ) > . The bond price ratio oscillates around its steady
state  < 1.
    Next, I analyze whether the price ratios converge to the steady-state
level . Suppose rst, that HH = LL = 0. In this case, the function f is
identical to its inverse f 1 :
                                           
                        f ( ) = f 1 ( ) = H HL :                        (33)
                                         L LH
   Thus, the bond ratio follows in this case a cycle of m = 1 =
H H =L L if m is odd and m = 0 = 1 if m is even. With HH = LL = 0,
the price ratio does not converge to . Proposition 2 still holds in this
case because m  1 for all m if H H > L L and m  1 for all m if
H H < L L .
   The next sections show that the bond price ratio m converges to  as
m goes to 1 as long as either HH > 0 or LL > 0. First, I look at the case
where 0 < m < . The price ratio converges to  if m+1 < m 1 for all
possible m. Note that both m+1 and m 1 are larger than  if m < 
whenever the price ratios are oscillating around the steady-state value.
   The function f ( ) and its inverse f 1 ( ) are de ned as follows:
                              H (HH + HL HL )
                      f( ) =                       ;                    (34)
                              L (LL + LH LH )
                                      H HL HL
                    f 1 ( ) = L LL                  :                   (35)
                              H HH L LH LH

                                     35
     Note that m+1 = f ( m ) and m 1 = f 1 ( m ) by the de nition of the
functions f and f 1 . The price ratio converges to its steady-state level 
if f ( ) < f 1 ( ) for all possible < . Thus, the price ratio converges if:
               H (HH + HL HL ) L LL            H HL HL
                                       <                         :           (36)
                L (LL + LH LH ) H HH L LH LH
     The function f is decreasing in cases 2.1 and 2.2 and takes its lowest level
if   ! 1:
                                              
                          lim f ( ) = H HH :                          (37)
                           !1        L LH HL
   The denominator of the right side of equation (36) is negative, because
H HH L LH LH  H HH L LH LH (H HH )=(LLH HL ) = 0.
   Simplifying equation (36) gives:
                          [H HH + L LL ] g ( ) < 0;                     (38)
     where:
      g ( ) = 2 (L LH LH ) + (L LL       H HH ) (H HLHL ) :       (39)
    The rst factor of equation (38) is strictly positive as long as either HH
or LL is strictly positive. The quadratic equation (39) is exactly identical
to the equation that solves for the steady-state price ratio . To derive the
equation for the steady state price simply set  = f ( ) in equation (34).
The solutions to the quadratic equation are:
                                q
              H HH   L LL  (H HH L LL)2 + 4L H HL LH
     1;2 =                       2L LH LH
                                                                  : (40)
    One solution to equation (40) is positive and the other is negative. Since
bond prices are always positive we can ignore the negative solution. The
quadratic equation (39) is g ( ) < 0 if 0  <  and g ( ) > 0 if  < <
1. Thus, the second factor g( ) of equation (38) is negative if 0  < .
Thus, inequality (36) is satis ed if 0 < < 
    Next, I look at the case where  < m < 1. The price ratio converges
to its steady-state level  if f ( ) > f 1 ( ) for all possible . Thus, the
price ratio converges if:
                H (HH + HL HL ) L LL            H HL HL
                                   >                             :          (41)
                L (LL + LH LH ) H HH           L LH LH
                                        36
    Following similar steps as for the case where 0  < , it can be
demonstrated that inequality (41) is satis ed whenever g ( ) > 0, which
holds if  < < 1.
    These arguments show that the bond price ratios converge to the
steady-state value  if either HH > 0 or LL > 0. In case 2.1, where
H H > L L , 0 = 1 < m < m+2 < , where m is even and m >
  m+2 >  > 1, where m is odd. Thus, m > 1 for all m > 0. In case
2.2, where H H < L L , 0 = 1 > m > m+2 > , where m is even and
  m < m+2 <  < 1, where m is odd. Thus, m < 1 for all m > 0. This
proves case (i) of the Proposition.
    Note that the condition H H R L L in part (i) simpli es to H R L if
L = H and L = H . As shown in the proof to Proposition 1, H R L if
  Q ~. 2
B.4     Proof of Proposition 3

This proposition assumes that tax regimes are persistent (HH + LL > 1).
I will brie y characterize the term structure if tax regimes are transitory at
the end of this section. The expected bond return in the high-tax regime is:
                      
                        B;m
                                    HH m 1 + HL
                   E rH =                                 :               (42)
                                 H (HH m 1 + HL HL )
   The expected bond return is a function of the bond price ratio: RH (     m ),
where m = pB;m    B;m
            H =pL . The rst derivative with respect to is:

                       dRH       (       1)
                           = HH HL H HL            :                       (43)
                        d   [H (HH + HL HL )]2
     dRH =d   R   0 if HL R 1. I demonstrated in Section B.3 that         m   R
 m   1 R 1 if H H   L L R 0 as long as tax regimes are persistent.
    Next I discuss the term structure in four cases: First, if H H > L L and
HL > 1, then m increases with m and the expected bond return RH ( m )
increases monotonously with the maturity m. Second, if H H > L L and
HL < 1, then m increases with m and the expected bond return RH ( m )
decreases monotonously with the maturity m. Third, if H H < L L and
HL > 1, then m decreases with m and the expected bond return RH ( m )
decreases monotonously with the maturity m. Fourth, if H H < L L and

                                      37
HL < 1, then      m  decreases with m and the expected bond return RH ( m )
increases monotonously with the maturity m. Thus, the bonds with longer
maturity have a higher expected return in the high-tax state if (H H
L L )(HL 1) > 0. It can also be shown that bonds with longer maturity
have a higher expected return in the low-tax state if (L L H H )(LH 1).
Note that this condition is identical to (H H L L )(H 1) > 0. This
proves part (ii) of the Proposition.
    In part (i), it is assumed that H = L . The condition from part (ii) is
equivalent to (H L )(HL 1) > 0. Note that H = HH + (1 HH )HL .
Thus, H is between 1 and HL and L is between 1 and LH . The sign of
(H L ) is therefore identical to the sign of (HL 1). This implies that
(H H L L )(HL 1) is always positive. This concludes the proof.
    Next, I characterize the expected returns of bonds with maturity m if tax
regimes are transitory. dRH =d R 0 holds again if HL R 1. With transitory
regimes m R m 2 R 0 and m R  R m 1 R 0 if H H L L R 0.
Thus, the bond price ratio uctuates around its steady state value.
    The term structure has the following shape in the di erent cases: First,
if H H > L L , then m increases with m if m is odd and decreases if even.
Second, if H H < L L , then m decreases with m if m is odd and increases
if even. The expected bond return RH ( m ) oscillates around its steady state
and converges towards the steady state if either HH > 0 or LL > 0. If
HH = LL = 0, then the bond price ratio and the bond return follow a
stable cycle. 2

B.5     Proof of Proposition 4

The following proof holds in the high-tax state. The proof for the low-tax
state is similar. The return of equity in the high-tax state equals:
                                                          
                               1 + ÆH             1 + ÆL
        E (rHS )   = H HH              + HL      ;                    (44)
                                    ÆH          ÆH
                          1   HH   H LL L + HH H H + HL L L
                   = H                                           :
                                    H [H + L (1 HH LL )]
   Plugging the return of the risk-free asset with a maturity of one year dur-
ing the high-tax-state into equation (44) and simplifying gives the following
equation:
                                          
                        Et (rHS ) = rHB;1 H H (1 + H );                  (45)
                                              H

                                         38
   where:                                                      
                           HH (1 H )                 L
                                                 H    H L
                 H =    H                             :
                        HH (1 L ) + HL HL + L LH
   The one-period interest rate rHB;1 = 1=(H H ) > 0 is de ned as the
gross return and is therefore always strictly positive. The second factor
(H H = H = exp( H2 )  1, because  0) results from the uncertainty of
dividend payments. The third factor 1 + H results from tax rate changes.
This factor equals 1 in an environment without tax rate changes (i.e., HH =
LL = 1 or H = L ), because H = L = 1.
   The premium due to dividend uncertainty HD is positive:
                              H H                exp( H2 )   1
                HD = rHB;1            rHB;1 =                         0:
                                H                       H H
   The premium due to tax uncertainty HT is:
                                    H H          exp( H2 )H
                     HT = rHB;1            H =                  :
                                      H                 H H
   The sign of HT is identical to the sign of H . The factor H is negative if
(L L H H )(1 H ) < 0. The tax premium iT is negative if H H < L L
whenever  ~ and if H H > L L whenever > ~ , because  ~ implies
that H  1 and > ~ implies that H < 1.
   Note that the condition (L L H H )(1 H ) < 0 is equivalent to the
condition (H H L L )(1 L ) < 0, because if H Q 1 then L R 1.
   If L = H and L = H , then L = H and H simpli es to:
                                   HH (1 H )(L H )
                 H =    H                                 :
                              HH (1 L ) + HL HL + L LH
    This term is always positive since the sign of (1 H ) is identical to the
sign of (L H ), because 1 lies between L and H . 2




                                            39
