                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          THE DUAL EFFECTS OF INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY REGULATIONS:
                 WITHIN- AND BETWEEN- PATENT COMPETITION
                    IN THE US PHARMACEUTICALS INDUSTRY


                                          Frank R. Lichtenberg
                                           Tomas J. Philipson


                                          Working Paper 9303
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9303


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




We are thankful for comments on the paper by numerous seminar audiences and in particular by Stephen
Propper and Ernie Berndt. Both authors are thankful for financial support from Pfizer Inc, Astra -Zeneca, and
Merck & Co., and Philipson from The George Stigler center for The Study of The Economy and The State.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Frank R. Lichtenberg and Tomas J. Philipson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Dual Effects of Intellectual Property Regulations:
Within- and Between- Patent Competition in the US Pharmaceuticals Industry
Frank R. Lichtenberg and Tomas J. Philipson
NBER Working Paper No. 9303
October 2002
JEL No. I1, L1, K2
                                                ABSTRACT

A patent only protects an innovator from others producing the same product, but it does not protect him
from others producing better products under new patents. Therefore, one may divide up the source of
competition facing an innovator into within-patent competition, which results from production of the same
product, and betweenpatent competition, which results from production of products on other patents. Previous
theoretical and empirical micro -based analyses have emphasized the effects of intellectual property
regulations on within -patent competition by showing how protecting innovative returns from imitators raises
R&D incentives. However, between-patent competition affects innovative returns, particularly through
creative destruction in the many high-tech industries that seem central to overall economic progress. This
suggests that a fuller understanding of IP-regulations take into account its effects on between-patent
competition. We find that the total effects of intellectual property regulations depend heavily on whether these
unexplored effects are present. We attempt to estimate the relative magnitudes of the two sources of
competition in limiting innovative returns in the U.S. pharmaceuticals market. In this market within -patent
competition from so-called generic producers has been analyzed relatively more compared to competition
between-patents through so called therapeutic competition. We estimate that between-patent competition,
most of which occurs while a drug is under patent, costs the innovator at least as much as within-patent
competition, which cannot occur until a drug is off patent. The reduction in the present discounted value of
the innovator’s return from between-patent competition appears to be at least as large as the reduction from
competition within -patents, and may be much larger.




Frank R. Lichtenberg                                                         Tomas J. Philipson
Graduate School of Business                                                  Department of Economics
Columbia University                                                          University of Chicago
3022 Boradway, 726 Uris Hall                                                 1155 East 60th Street
New York, NY 10027                                                           Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER                                                                     and NBER
frank.lichtenberg@columbia.edu                                               t-philipson@uchicago.edu
I. INTRODUCTION

         Economists have long appreciated the importance of R&D and technological change for economic progress

and there is a large literature analyzing the sources and consequences of technological change. Consequently,

economists have also been interested in understanding the effects and desirability of public interventions affecting

the amount and speed of technological change. Such policies include, for example, direct R&D tax-incentives, non-

profit tax exemptions for research institutions, public financing of R&D activity, as well as many other instruments

attempting to stimulate various forms of research and innovative activity.

         Perhaps the most important and direct policies affecting R&D are intellectual property regulations,

especially patent, copyright, and trademark policy. There is a substantial body of theoretical work examining the

effects of these intellectual property regulations on the amount of innovation they induce. Traditional theoretical

analyses generally assesses the impact of intellectual property (IP) regulations through their effect on protecting

innovative returns from potential imitators by focusing on how those regulations affect the behavior of subsequent

imitators producing the same product as the innovator2 .

         However, the loss of innovative returns due to such within-patent competition from imitators, for example

through patent expiration, is of course only one way in which innovative returns may be destroyed. The other is

through between-patent competition from new patents being developed by competitors. A patent only protects an

innovator from others producing the same product, but it does not protect him from others producing better products

under new patents. For example, in the pharmaceutical industry, within -patent competition after patent expiration is

from so called generic manufacturers, and between-patent competition through new patents is from so called brand-

name manufacturers engaging in therapeutic competition within diseases and drug classes. Between-patent

competition may be as important a limit on innovative returns as within-patent competition. This is particularly true

in high-tech fields, which may be important to aggregate productivity growth, such as the telecommunications,

biotechnology, and pharmaceutical industries. In these industries, the demand for a given innovation is often

destroyed by entry of new, superior products long before patent expiration. In addition, within-patent competition


2
 Reducing imitation is the implicit value of IP regulations in microeconomic analysis of, for example, Nordhause (1969), Wright
(1983), Judd (1985), Gilbert and Shapiro (1990), Klemperer (1990), Horstman et al . (1993), Gallini (1992), Green et al (1995),
and Scotchmer (1996). Following Schumpeter, there also is a substantial macro -economic literature on the growth effects of
creative destruction, see , for example, Aghion and Howitt (1992). Although related, this literature does not consider the effects
of IP regulations on firm-level R&D incentives as stressed here.


                                                                3
occurs many years in the future, thereby being less important for the present value of innovative returns, and also

occurs after the between-patent competition has had time to run its course. Therefore, extensive ”creative

destruction” through between-patent competition leaves less to be subsequently destroyed by “uncreative” within-

patent competition.

         To gain a more complete understanding of the effects of IP regulations on innovative activity, it is therefore

important to unders tand their effects on between- as well as within-patent competition. Despite the abundance of

analyses on the important role of IP regulations in limiting imitation, less seems known about the total effects of

such regulations when taking into account how they affect the creative destruction across patents that takes place

through between-patent competition. Without understanding the dual effects of IP-regulations on both forms of

competition on innovative returns, policies aimed at stimulating R&D may not have their intended qualitative and

quantitative effects.

         This paper provides a theoretical examination of the dual impacts of IP-regulations in determining the

overall effects of many of the IP-interventions used to stimulate R&D. Our main argument is that considering the

impact not only on within-patent competition but also on between-patent competition matters for assessing the R&D

effects and desirability of standard intellectual property regulations. Regulations that may seem effective when only

considering their impact on keeping imitation at bay may be highly ineffective when taking into account their impact

on between-patent competition.

         In particular, we stress that the dual effects of IP-regulations on both types of competition are likely to be

offsetting. The fact that future innovation limits the rewards to current innovation implies that IP-policies aimed at

stimulating R&D may have dual- and offsetting effects on innovation. The first is the direct positive effect but the

second is the indirect negative effect by stimulating between-patent competition. R&D stimuli do not only raise the

current incentive to innovate but also the incentives of producers engaging in between-patent competition. For

example, an increase in an R&D tax-break would not only make research cheaper for the innovator but would also

imply that the innovator will be able to enjoy his market for a shorter duration before new patents would destroy it.

Because existing explicit analyses ignores one of the dual effects, the effect on between-patent competition, it gives




                                                            4
misleading implications about the effects and desirability of IP-regulations3 . In particular, this dual impact of IP-

regulations suggests that it may be hard for the public sector to fine-tune R&D as suggested by existing formal

analyses —aggregate industry R&D may be less elastic to stimulus because of the dual impact it has.

          Given the importance of both within- and between-patent competition, the paper attempts to estimate their

relative impacts on innovative returns for one of the most R&D intensive industries in the U.S.--pharmaceuticals. In

1997, R&D-intensity (R&D expenditure as a percentage of net sales in R&D-performing companies) was three

times as high in the “drugs and medicines” industry as it was in the economy as a whole (10.5% vs. 3.4%).4

Although pharmaceutical industry is often mentioned as one in which patents have their standard textbook effects, it

appears that the relative importance of between-patent or therapeutic competition, rather than within-patent

competition from generics, is not well understood in this industry5 . Other drugs are often a larger threat to a given

patented drug than the generic entry it may face down the line when the patent expires. Although generic

competition may limit innovative returns, we find that less than half of drugs experience generic entry upon patent

expiration. Generic entry may be unprofitable because therapeutic competition has made the imitated product

obsolete. Put differently, between-patent competition limits the returns to within-patent entry. As therapeutic

competition proceeds over time, more and more drugs are developed to treat a given disease, making it not only

more difficult to keep an innovative return but also to generate a profit to start with.

          From a measurement perspective, the pharmaceutical industry is unique in studying the two sources of

competition because researchers have access to the data generated by the extensive regulatory oversight of this

industry by the Food and Drug Adminis tration (FDA). 6 It would be very difficult to generate the same type of data

for other industries since merging sales data with patent data would be more difficult and since it would be difficult

to define boundaries in which patents compete as easily as can be done with therapeutic categories of drugs. Our


3
   IP-regulation effects apply to other regulations that do not explicitly regulate innovation but nevertheless impact innovative
returns, such as free-trade regulations. These regulations encourage globalization of markets. Globalization is often argued to
stimulate R&D because larger markets enable the fixed costs of R&D to be absorbed better. However, globalization also
stimulates across-patent competition through creative destruction. Larger markets do not only imply that a given innovator may
benefit more, but also that the future innovators who will destroy his product will have larger incentives as well.
4
  Source: http://caspar.nsf.gov/nsf/srs/IndRD/NSF 01%2D305/A-21.xls
5
  There exists an empirical literature that implicitly concerns both forms of competition, see e.g. Berndt el al (1995), Berndt et al
(1996), and Lu and Comanor (1998), but not one determining their relative importance of the two in limiting innovative returns.
6
  According to section 505 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, “No person shall introduce or deliver for introduction
into interstate commerce any new drug, unless an approval of an application…is effective with respect to such drug…Such
person shall submit to the Secretary as a part of the application…full reports of investigations which have been made to show
whether or not such drug is safe for use and whether such drug is effective in use.”
(http://www.fda.gov/opacom/laws/fdcact/fdcact5a.htm)
                                                                  5
overall findings suggest that creative destruction through between patent competition accounts for at least as much

erosion of innovator returns as within-patent competition caused by patent expiration, and often considerably more.

The relative importance of between-patent competition may be even higher in other high-tech industries because the

average effective patent length is shorter in pharmaceuticals than it is in other industries.7 We use our estimates of

the two forms of competition to assess the impact of marginal changes in patent lengths on innovative returns, such

as those resulting from the Hatch-Waxman Act for US pharmaceuticals or from the international expansion of patent

lives from 17 to 20 years. Although the latter represents almost an 18% increase in the patent life, it may only raise

the innovative return by a couple of percent due to both discounting and between-patent competition.

         The paper may be briefly outlined as follows. Section 2 discusses the dual effects of IP-regulations when

both within- and between-patent competition are considered. Section 3 contains our empirical analysis on the extent

to which innovative returns are limited by both forms of competition. We first consider aggregate evidence on the

importance of the two sources of destruction as well as individual drug level panel data that enables us to perform a

decomposition of the destruction of returns into its components destroyed creatively through between-patent

competition and uncreatively through within-patent competition. Lastly, Section 4 concludes.



II: PUBLIC R&D INTERVENTIONS WITH WITHIN- AND BETWEEN-PATENT COM PETITION



         Consider a firm that invests a fixed cost f to obtain a new innovation with probability of success s and

profitability π. We represent a given R&D policy through a vector θ=(θc ,θs ,θπ ) affecting directly these three

quantities; the parameter θc represents a public policy lowering the marginal cost of R&D such as an R&D tax-

break, the parameter θs a policy raising the marginal probability of research success, such as government funded

NIH research that complements private R&D, and θπ a policy raising ex-post profitability of the innovation such as

IP protections that raises barriers of within-patent competition by, for example raising the length or breadth of a

patent. Thus the policy vector represents three different forms of policies that all stimulate R&D. The expected

profits under a given fixed cost R&D investment f are given by




7
 In the case of pharmaceuticals, part of the patent time is devoted to the FDA approval process. According to Grabowski and
Vernon (1996), the average effective patent life for drugs (including partial patent restoration provided by the Hatch-Waxman
                                                               6
                                                      s(f; θs )π(θπ )-c(f; θc )



Throughout, we assume the regularity conditions sf           0, sff   0, cf   0, cff   0 so that the marginal impact (cost) of

R&D success falls (rises) with its level. The necessary first-order condition for optimal R&D is thus



                                                    sf (f; θs )π(θπ )= cf (f; θc )



Under the regularity conditions above, the necessary FOC is also sufficient for an unique optimal amount of R&D,

denoted f(θ), as a function of R&D policies. Using the implicit function theorem on the implicit function defining

this relationship between R&D efforts and R&D policy, policy changes translate into changes in R&D according to




                                    − c fθc                       s fθs                           sπθ π
                           fθ c   =         ≥0           f θs =         ≥0             f θ πs =         ≥0
                                     −S                           −S                               −S


where -S is positive if the second-order condition holds. The three R&D stimuli all raises R&D in a straightforward

manner. These implications do not only apply to a single monopoly firm undertaking R&D, but also apply under

certain fairly general regularity conditions to aggregate R&D when there are many competing firms who engage in

competitive R&D through so-called 'patent races'. Note that such races implicitly concern within-patent competition

as opposed to between-patent competition stressed here. The fact that R&D is easily stimulated or discouraged

through such changes in R&D policy implies that there is a clear role for the public sector to affect R&D, such as

stimulating R&D if it is under-provided due to spillovers or the fact that patents incur deadweight costs, or

discouraging R&D if it is over-provided, e.g. through patent races. The crucial aspect of ignoring between patent

competition is that the innovative returns or prize awarded, here denoted π, is not dependent on the amount of R&D

investment, here denoted f, undertaken by the typical firm. This separation underlies the sunk- or fixed cost-aspect

of R&D in a standard context, but we will argue is a connection that is important for the dual effects of IP-policy.




Act) is 11-12 years, whereas the effective patent life for products other than pharmaceuticals is 18.5 years.
                                                                  7
          Consider the innovative returns of a patent with patent length τ. It faces between-patent competition from a

number of competing patents        N t at period t and within-patent competition from a number of imitating competitors

n t after the patent has expired. Within patent competition is from producers with the same product, as opposed to




             πt = πo nt α N t β
between patent competition that is from producers with new and perhaps better products. Assume that profits in

each period as a function of market structure is proportionate to the number of both types of entrants as in




                         α     β
             πt = πo nt N t


where   πo is factor of proportionality and where the negative parameters α and β represents the assumed

proportionate affects in profits from the two types of entry. The growth of entry by between- versus within-patent

competitors is assumed to be at the rates b and w for between-and within-patent competition respectively


           n t = (1 + w) t , t > τ & N t = (1 + b) t , t ≥ 0


The present value of the flow of profits from the innovation is then




                  ∞                    τ                ∞
            V ≡ ∑ R t πt = π o [ ∑ [ RB ]t +          ∑ [R      A   ]t ]
                  t= 0                t =0            t =τ +1

where R is the discount factor and         RB and RA are the “effective” discount rates before and after the patent expires
defined by



                             RB = R(1 + b)α
                             RA = R(1 + b)α (1 + w) β




                                                                       8
We may write the value of the innovation as a function of the extent of within- and between patent competition as 8



                                             1 − RτB   R τ +1
                          V ( w, b) = πo [           + A ]
                                             1 − RB 1 − RA



            Naturally, both within- and between patent competition lowers the innovative return; V(b,w) is decreasing.

However, the cross derivative displays an interesting feature. A common argument about the value of patents is that

imitation reduces the value of creativity--indeed this is the most common rationale offered for tolerating the

distortions imposed by patent protection in the first place. However, the innovative return above implies that

imitation is hurt by creativity. As can be seen by direct inspection of V above, this interaction occurs for two related

reasons. The first is that between patent competition leaves less over to be destroyed after patent expiration by

within patent competition. The second is that between patent competitors compete with within patent competitors

after expiration. Therefore, within-patent competition has a smaller effect on innovative returns the larger is the

extent of between-patent competition as in


                d 2V
                     ≤0
                dwdb

            This interaction implies that changes in patent length may not affect R&D incentives in quantitatively

important ways when there is substantial between-patent competition. For example, consider when the depreciation

of patented profits occur at a rate of        RB =(0.95) x (0.85) = 0.81 being due to a 5 percent discount rate and 15 percent

profit depreciation due to between patent competition. In this case even when there are no profits to be had once the

patent has expired (w=-1) the value of the innovative return of a 17 year patent is as close as 97 percent of the value

of a patent with infinite length. This implies that recent international agreements of extending patent lives from 17 to

20 years, even though that this represented close to a 18 percent increase in the patent life, it would have only

increased innovative returns by a couple of percent.




                           τ
                                   1 − xτ             ∞
                                                               xτ
8
    Using the fact that   ∑ xt =    1− x
                                              and   ∑ xt =    1− x
                                                                     for any 0<x<1.
                          t= 0                      t =τ +1
                                                                     9
         Now consider the effects of R&D stimuli that not only affect the initial innovator but also the entry of

within - and between patent competitors through the entry rates w(θ) and b(θ) being positively related to the R&D

policies. The expected value of undertaking a given level of R&D is now

                                                         s(f; θs ) V(θ )-c(f; θc )

where V(θ)=V(b(θ),w(θ)) reflects the present value of the innovative return induced by the policy vector. The effect

of marginal changes in R&D policy on the level of R&D undertaken by the firm is now




                                   − c f θc + s f Vθ c                s fθ sV + s f Vθ s            s f Vθπ
                          fθ c =                             fθ s =                        f θπ =
                                           −S                                −S                      −S


Comparing these effects to those without between-patent competition we see that R&D policies have a direct effect

on R&D as discussed before but in addition have indirect effects represented by how the profitability of the

innovator is affected by the change in policy. The indirect effect may be offsetting or reinforcing, depending on how

between-patent competition affects profits. The offsetting case is likely to occur when between-patent competition

occurs through R&D on substitute products as opposed to the reinforcing case that is likely to occur when between-

patent competition occurs through R&D on complementary products. The complementarity case may not only

operate through the demand side, but may be present through producer activities such as spillovers in advertising.

However, the case of substitutability may be the most important for many IP policies. In this case, there is an

offsetting indirect effect due to between-patent competition that goes against the direct effect considering only

within -patent competition. Consider for example extending patent length which when only considering within

patent competition would raise R&D unambiguously. However, due to its effect on between-patent competition,

there is an offsetting effect. Whatever stimulates R&D today also stimulates creative destruction tomorrow and

hence discourages R&D today. Indeed, aggregate R&D may fall with an R&D subsidy when product leaders cut

back more in their R&D than the rise in R&D that follows from the increased incentives for creative destruction.

These non-standard or neutralizing effects may imply that it is very difficult for governments to 'fine-tune' or

manipulate R&D efforts and economic growth. Public adjustments in IP-policy may be partly or fully offset by the

private market in determining the rewards to inventive activity.



                                                                      10
         The particular case of pharmaceutical innovation may illustrate these offsets. In this industry, R&D policy

consists of publicly regulated testing and marketing of drugs and devices, as e.g. through the FDA in the US. In our

setting, FDA lowers the success probability s by rejecting some innovations and raises the cost of R&D c beyond

private levels through distorting the cost of clinical trials. Previous analyses has stressed that FDA discourages

innovation this way (see e.g. Peltzman (1973)). However, this ignores that the FDA simultaneously discourages

creative destruction through between-patent competition. In some sense it serves as an improved patent by keeping

out low-quality innovators that could have competed with high-quality innovators. The fact that pharmaceuticals is

one of the most R&D intensive industries may lead one to think that its negative impact on creative destruction may

be an important component on the benefit side as is the direct impact of R&D on the cost side.




                                                          11
III. EMPIRICAL ANALYSIS FOR THE US PHARMACEUTICAL INDUSTRY



         In this section we attempt to evaluate the empirical importance of the two sources of competition for the

US pharmaceutical industry. In this industry, within-patent competition after patent expiration is from so-called

generic manufacturers, and between-patent competition is from so-called brand-name manufacturers engaging in

therapeutic competition within a given disease class. Section 3.1 documents the entry of both forms of competitors

as a function of the age of the patent, section 3.2 the effects such entry has on innovative returns, and section 3.3

attempts to decompose the share of the present value of an innovation lost to the two forms of competition.



A. Partitioning Drugs to Within versus Between Competition



         Even though the regulation of U.S. pharmaceuticals allows a unique opportunity to study between- versus

within - patent competition, the definitions of different types of drugs are quite elaborate and cumbersome. To clarify

the analysis we therefore first describe the definitions employed throughout our measurement. There are five levels

of the drug classification hierarchy. These are (from highest to lowest): a drug class (e.g. antidepressants), a drug

subclass (e.g. SSRI antidepressants), a (single- or multi-ingredient) drug (e.g. sertraline), a sub-drug which specifies

the active ingredients/strength/route of administration/dosage form of a drug (e.g. sertraline 10 mg. tablet taken

orally), and finally a drug product that specifies the producer of a sub-drug (e.g. sertraline 10 mg. tablet taken orally

sold by Barr Laboratories). There is a distinct National Drug Code (NDC code) determined by the FDA, that is

much like a bar code, for each drug product on the market.

                   According to the medical information company Multum's Lexicon, as of September 2000 there

were 2123 drugs with 1830 different ingredients, thereby making most drugs single-ingredient drugs but allowing

for some with multiple ingredient drugs. There were just below 3 times as many, 6200, sub-drugs, and about 35

times as many, about 70,000, drug products (different NDC codes). The magnitude of drug products stems from the

fact that there were about 683 drug producers (manufacturers, redistributors, and repackagers). For economic

purposes, sub-drugs may be close but not perfect substitutes but drug products within the same sub-drug are

certainly close to perfect substitutes.

                                                           12
            Our analysis refers to competition between patents as competition between drugs in the same drug class

(e.g. competition between Lipitor, Zocor, and other cholesterol-lowering drugs). We refer to competition within

patents as competition between producers of the same drug (e.g. competition between Andrx, Aventis, Biovail, and

other producers of the drug diltiazem).



B. Estimates of average rates of entry by age of drug

            Figure 1 presents data on the typical extent of within-patent competition—n, the average number of

producers of a drug-and between-patent competition—N, the average number of drugs within a drug’s class—by age

of the drug (number of years since FDA approval) during the period 1982-2001. 9 Figure 1 reveals that there is a

substantial amount of between-patent competition for a drug even upon entry, about 25 drugs already exist in the

class, as well as through additional entry while on patent. On the other hand, within-patent competition increases

only by less than a single drug within the first 10 years. Here are a few summary statistics (We explain below how

these statistics were calculated).



                                                  average
                                       average    number of
                                       number of drugs
                                       producers within a
                             Drug age of a drug drug’s class
                                     0       1.02       24.9
                                     5       1.17       27.9
                                    10       1.91       31.5
                                    14       2.78       33.9


            The purpose of this section is to more systematically assess the entry patterns of Figure 1, what effect they

have on measures related to the innovative return of a drug, and when those effects are taken into account, and to

measure how the two forms of competition compare in reducing the innovative return. To preview, our main finding

will be that between-patent competition is many times more harmful than within-patent competition in reducing the

present value of sales for a given drug.




9
    FDA approval dates prior to 1982 are censored in the Orange Book.
                                                               13
1. Within-patent entry



          Our first source of data on the general pattern of within-patent entry in the pharmaceutical industry is the

The Orange Book of the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). It lists all approved prescription drugs, including

brand-name drugs that represent between-patent competition and generic drugs that represent within-patent

competition.10 The Orange Book offers two different ways to estimate the rate of entry of producers into markets for

particular pharmaceutical products, one at the drug level and one at the ingredient level.



          As The Orange Book records the date of FDA approval as well as whether generic entry has occurred11 , it

allows us to estimate an age-profile of generic entry. More precisely, the presence of so-called therapeutic

equivalence (TE) codes in the Book indicates approval of a generic version of the drug. This allows us to measure,

for each of the 4195 drugs represented in the Book: (1) the year the product was first approved by the FDA, and (2)

whether any records of that product contained a TE-code that would occur under generic entry. We then calculated

the proportion of drugs that had experienced entry by age as plotted in Figure 2 where the age of a drug is defined as

the calendar year less the FDA drug approval year.



                                                         Insert Figure 2



The proportion of drugs with generic entry rises from 3% at age 0 to 11% at age 5, and increases by an average of

400 basis points per year until age 18. 12 The profile is a step-function for a given drug, but due to the variation in

effective patent lives, aggregation implies a close to continuous function. Although the age-imitation probability

profile shown in Figure 2 is rather noisy, it indicates that within-patent competition is fairly limited, especially when

compared to between-patent entry documented in later sections.


10
   The web -site of the book is (http://www.fda.gov/cder/orange/default.htm)
11
   More precisely, each record in the Approved Drug Products file of The Book contains the active ingredient(s) for the product,
dosage, route of administration, strength, the firm holding legal responsibility for the new drug application, and the approval Date
(The date the product was approved as stated in the FDA approval letter to the applicant. Products approved prior to the January
1, 1982 contain the phrase: "Approved prior to Jan 1, 1982".), and the therapeutic equivalence (TE) code; the TE Code indicates
the therapeutic equivalence rating of generic to brand-name drugs.



                                                                14
                             There is an alternative, and apparently more reliable, way to measure the rate of within

patent entry. For each of the 1520 ingredients identified in the Approved Drug Products file of the Orange Book, we

determined the first date at which a product containing that drug was approved. As an example, consider below the

data for the antiarrhythmic drug amiodarone hydrochloride:



Year approved              Applicant
1985                       Wyeth Ayerst
1998                       Copley Pharm
1998                       Eon
1998                       Upsher Smith
1999                       Alphapharm
1999                       Novopharm


            For each drug first approved in 1982 or later, we computed the number of producers representing the within

patent entrants (n) that were approved up until age t. To determine the typical rates of increase of the number of

entrants over the life cycle of a drug, we estimated the following regression:



                      ln n it = αi + δt + u it                                            (1)



where n it is the number of producers approved to market drug i up until age t, αi is a fixed effect for drug i, and δt is

a fixed effect for age t. Hence (δ5 - δ0 ), for example, represents the mean log change in the number of applicants

between age 0 and age 5.

            Note that within patent entry occurs before statutory industry patent lengths, historically 17 years but

currently 20 years, in the pharmaceutical industry. This is because part of that length is devoted to FDA approval of

the drug. As a consequence, a non-degenerate distribution of ages of drugs from the time they are marketed until

within -patent entry occurs. Nevertheless, the data reveals that a drug is fairly well-protected from early entry, after

which the probability of entry rises exponentially as the drug age approaches the statutory patent length. However,

as all drugs observed had effective patent lengths below 18 years, when the entry probability is slightly larger than a

half, the average probability of within patent competition at the time of patent expiration is below a half.


12
     Due to the censoring of approval dates prior to 1982 in The Orange Book , we cannot compute the proportion by single year of

                                                                 15
2. Between-patent entry

To assess between patent competition empirically, one has to define what the relevant markets are in which patents

compete, potentially interpreted as patents across which demand exhibits zero cross-price elasticities. Drugs are a

very useful product market to study in this respect because the disease categories into which so called therapeutic

competition occurs are relatively well defined compared to other markets. To define therapeutic classes in which

patents compete, we used the The National Drug Code (NDC) Directory 13 . The NDC serves as a universal product

identifier for human drugs. The Directory uses a general therapeutic or pharmacological classification scheme for

drug products reported to the FDA under the provisions of the Drug Listing Act. The classification scheme used was

based on the AMA Drug Evaluations Subscription and generally follows the organization of material in that

publication. The drug class for each product was determined by the labeled indication. The drug class codes and

their definitions are listed in Appendix Table 1.          We linked two NDC files to obtain a mapping from drugs

(ingredients) to drug classes. Some drugs appear in multiple drug classes. When this occurred, we assigned the

drug to the drug class with which it was most frequently linked. We then linked this list of drugs to the list of drugs

obtained from The Orange Book (described above), which included the FDA approval date of the drug. Finally, we

sorted the resulting list, by drug class and approval date. This list shows the history of new drug approvals, by drug

class. As an example, here are the results for drug class 1944, antihistamines:

Date approved         Ingredient
Before 1/1/82         Astemizole
Before 1/1/82         Clemastine
Before 1/1/82         Cyproheptadine
Before 1/1/82         Hydroxyzine Monohydrochloride
Before 1/1/82         Terfenadine
Before 1/1/82         Tripelennamine
1/25/82               Diphenhydramine Hydrochloride
7/7/82                Promethazine Hydrochloride
7/19/82               Dexchlorpheniramine Maleate
4/12/93               Loratadine
12/8/95               Cetirizine Hydrochloride
7/25/96               Fexofenadine Hydrochloride
11/1/96               Azelastine Hydrochloride




age for ages greater than 18. For the 1689 products with first FDA approval dates prior to 1982 (age > 18), the proportion of
products indicating generic entry is 57%.
13
   http://www.fda.gov/cder/ndc/index.htm
                                                               16
Using this information, we computed the number of drugs in a given drug’s class representing the between-patent

comp etition (N), by age of the drug defined as before by the calendar year less FDA drug approval year. We then

estimated an equation similar to eq. (1), substituting (ln Nit ) for (ln n it ).

          Estimates of the coefficients of the normalized age dummies (δt - δ0 ) are reported in Table 1 and plotted in

Figure 3. 14 In the first 3 years, the mean number of applicants increases by just 1.2%, while the mean number of

drugs in the class increases by 12.6%. In the next 3 years, the mean number of applicants accelerates significantly,

and the mean number of drugs in the class decelerates somewhat; by year 6, the mean number of applicants is 9.5%

larger than it was at birth, while the mean number of drugs in the class is 20.9% larger than it was at birth. The

increase in the number of drugs in the class remains higher than the increase in the number of applicants for the drug

until year 14.15

          These calculations indicate that in the first 13 years of a drug’s life, and especially in the earlier years, the

number of between patent competitors in the drug’s class typically increases more, in percentage terms, than the

number of within patent competitors approved to market the same drug. Of course, the fact that the rate of between-

patent entry is higher does not necessarily mean that between-patent entry has a larger impact on innovator sales

than within-patent entry. To determine the relative magnitudes of the impacts of between-and within-patent entry on

innovator sales, we need to estimate a model of innovator sales as a function of the two kinds of entry.



C. Estimating the effects of entry on innovator drug sales growth

          In this section we attempt to estimate the effects of both forms of patent competition on the sales of a new

drug.




14
   The ln(n) regression is based on data for 538 ingredients; the standard errors of the δt estimates range between .056 and .060.
The ln(N) regression is based on data for 725 ingredients (sample size 7713); the standard errors of the δt estimates range
between .014 and .016. The mean value of N at age 0 is 24.9.
15
   The average rate of growth of N from year 0 to year 16 is 2.7% (=42.5% / 16). This estimate is about 50% higher than the
growth rate of the aggregate stock of ingredients between 1986 and 2000. According to Multum Lexicon 9/17/00 edition, there
were 1830 active ingredients. During the period January 1986-August 2000, the FDA approved a total of 417 new molecular
entities. This implies that there were 1413 (= 1830 – 417) active ingredients at the beginning of 1986, and that the average
annual growth rate of the stock during the period was 1.72%.
                                                                17
1. The Data



         Ideally, to estimate the effects of between- and within -patent competition, one would like to have a

complete set of longitudinal data on innovator sales, by product. Unfortunately, we were unable to obtain data on

sales to all customers. However comprehensive data on Medicaid sales during 1996-1999 are available from

Medicaid State Drug Utilization files published by HCFA.16 Medicaid accounts for about one-sixth of national

prescription drug expenditure. 17



                                                           Insert Figure 4



         As Figure 4 indicates, the period covered by the Medicaid data is a good one in which to study the effects

of entry of new drugs because there was substantial entry of new drugs. Between 1986 and 1995, the average

annual number of drugs, or new molecular entities (NMEs), approved by the FDA was 24. Between 1996 and 1999,

it was 39—a 65% increase. This surge in approvals is partly attributable to a reduction of FDA approval times,

which was made possible by the 1992 Prescription Drug User Fee Act. Between 1992 and 1998, mean NME

approval time declined 61%, fro m 30 months to under 12 months.

         The State Drug Utilization Data report the total reimbursed amount in dollars, and two quantity measures--

total units reimbursed18 , and total number of prescriptions--by product and state, quarterly during the period 1996-

1999. We constructed from these two different price measures: price per prescription, and price per unit (where

tablet is an example of a unit). We downloaded about 200 Medicaid state drug utilization files (one per state per

year, 1996-1999), containing about 7 million records. We then aggregated the data up to the national level, so that

we had quarterly data for 16 quarters on about 42,000 products (NDC codes)--about half a million observations. We

linked these data to HCFA’s Drug Product Data file 19 , which indicates whether each product in the entire formulary

of products available under the Medicaid Drug Rebate program is an innovator or non-innovator product.




16
   See http://www.hcfa.gov/medicaid/drugs/drug5.htm
17
   Source: HCFA National Health Care Expenditures (http://www.hcfa.gov/stats/nhe-oact/).
18
   Units refers to the number of tablets, capsules, and the like.
19
   (http://www.hcfa.gov/medicaid/drugs/drug6.htm)
                                                            18
         Table 2 reports summary statistics based on the Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data. The total

reimbursed amount is about 20% lower than the Medicaid expenditures reported in the National Health Care

Expenditures statistics. The micro data indicate that Medicaid reimbursed about $47 billion during the period 1996-

1999, and paid for about 317 million prescriptions per year.20 The average price (amount reimbursed per

prescription) increased from $31.01 to $44.04 from 1996 to 1999. 21

         In general, each state Medicaid program pays a rebated amount below the pharmacy average wholesale

price (AWP) paid in the private sector. Part of this rebate is mandated by federal law, being 15.1 % for patented

(brand name) drugs and 11% for non-patented (generic) drugs. However, this mandatory rebate is not always

binding in the sense that prices may be charged below it, and differentially so across states. Our average Medicaid

prescription prices are fairly close to prices that can be computed from other sources.



                                                       Insert Table 3



Table 3 reports statistics computed from the 1996 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey (MEPS) Prescribed Medicine

Events file on the number and average price of Medicaid and non-Medicaid prescriptions in 1996. That file reports

the total amount paid for the prescription, and the amount paid by various payers, including Medicaid. A Medicaid

prescription is defined as one in which there was any payment by Medicaid. The average price of a prescription was

$32.88, and there was very little difference between the average price of Medicaid and non-Medicaid prescriptions.

This price is about 6% higher than the average price computed from the Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data files.

         IMS data on all U.S. prescriptions in 1999, as reported in Pharmacy Times 22 , provide another basis for

comparison.23 According to IMS, total 1999 sales in the U.S. Prescription Market were $124,835,595,000, and there

were 2,821,770,000 total prescriptions dispensed.24 Hence the average price of a prescription was $44.24 in 1999.

This differs by only 0.5% from the average 1999 price computed from the Medicaid State Drug Utilization Data

files, $44.04.     This evidence suggests that the Medicaid program accounts for a significant share of total U.S.


20
   According to HCFA data on National Health Expenditures By Type Of Service And Source Of Funds, total Medicaid drug
expenditure was about 25% higher: $11.1 billion in 1996, $13.0 billion in 1997, and $15.5 billion in 1998. See
http://www.hcfa.gov/stats/nhe-oact/tables/nhe98.csv.
21
   Most of this 42% increase in the average price was due to changing product mix, rather than increasing prices of given
products.
22
   http://www.pharmacytimes.com/
23
   Unfortunately, similar data are not available for previous years.
                                                             19
pharmaceutical sales, and that drugs purchased under Medicaid are fairly representative of all U.S. drug transactions,

at least in terms of price. Therefore estimates of the effect of within- and between-patent competition on Medicaid

sales are likely to be informative about their effects on pharmaceutical sales in general. 25




 2.Estimates

         We obtain these estimates by estimating models of the following form:



         ∆ ln Qjkt = α ln Njt + β ln n jt + αjk + δt + u jkt          (2)



where Qjkt is the quantity or value of product j sold by firm k in quarter t, Njt is the number of between-patent

competitors in the same drug class as drug j in quarter t, and n jt is the number of within-patent competitors in quarter

t. This log-linear specification is appropriate if, as we believe, there are diminishing marginal effects of entry on

incumbent sales, e.g. if the first entrant’s sales are reduced more by entry of a second firm than they are by entry of a

third firm.

         To calculate N and n on a quarterly basis for tens of thousands of products, we used Multum’s Lexicon,

which features a hierarchical classification system that links similar products sold by different manufacturers and

organizes drugs into drug classes.26



                                                           Insert Table 4



Estimates of eq. (2), by product type (innovator vs. non-innovator), are presented in Table 4. The estimates are

based on a sample of over 388 thousand observations on almost 32 thousand products. The dependent variable in

column 1 is quarterly growth in the number of units reimbursed. The estimates indicate that both kinds of entry


24
   This implies that 12% of all U.S. prescriptions were reimbursed by Medicaid.
25
   Analysis of 1997 Medical Expenditure Panel Survey data indicates that generics account for a higher share of Medicaid
prescriptions than they do of non-Medicaid prescriptions (45% vs. 37%). Hence our estimates may understate the relative
importance of between-patent competition in the overall market for pharmaceuticals.
26
   Because entry —especially entry of new, patented products—is likely to occur in markets experiencing high demand growth,
one would not necessarily expect N to be negatively correlated with the level of sales. When the dependent variable is the growth
in value or quantity, as in eq. (2), the fixed product effects αj k control for unobserved demand growth, which is presumably
positively correlated with both sales growth and entry.
                                                                20
reduce the growth of innovator sales, although the between-patent entry coefficient is two and a half times as large

as the within-patent entry coefficient.27

          Columns 2 and 3 reveal that similar estimates are obtained when the dependent variable is growth in the

number of prescriptions or growth in total dollar amount reimbursed.28 Similarity of the coefficients of the quantity

and value regressions implies that neither type of entry has much effect on innovator product prices. This is

consistent with previous studies, which have found little effect of generic entry on branded (innovator) drug prices.

          We can estimate the year-by-year reductions in innovator sales growth due to within- and between-patent

entry by combining the estimates of eq. (1) (plotted in Figure 3) and eq. (2) (shown in the first column of Table 4).

In particular, we multiply the first column of Table 1 by the ln(n) coefficient ( -.068), and the second column of

Table 1 by the ln(N) coefficient ( -.194). The estimated reductions in innovator sales growth are plotted in Figure 5.



                                                [FIGURE 5 INSERTED HERE]



The estimates imply that throughout the first 16 years, and especially in the early years, between-patent entry

reduces innovator sales growth much more than within-patent entry. After 5 years, between-patent entry has

reduced innovator sales growth by 3.6%, while within-patent entry has only reduced it by 0.4%. At 10 years, the

estimated reductions are 5.9% and 1.4%, respectively. The gap begins to narrow after year 13, but in year 16,

within -patent entry has still reduced sales growth less than between-patent entry: 4.1% vs. 8.2%.




D. Decomposing Loss in Innovative Returns from Within- versus Between Patent Competition



27
   The effect of entry on innovator sales growth is our principal concern, but we also report in Table 4, for purposes of
comparison, corresponding estimates for non -innovator drugs. Both entry variables have significant negative coefficients in the
non-innovator product regression, but the relative magnitude of the coefficients is just about the reverse of what it was in the
innovator product regression. The coefficient on within-patent entry is about three times as large as the coefficient on between-
patent entry. Evidently, entry of additional generic firms is a greater threat to incumbent generic firms than it is to the innovator.
But entry of new brands is a far greater threat to innovators than it is to imitators.
28
   It is also not inconsistent with Lu and Comanor’s (1998) findings. Let Pi (i = 1, 2, …) represent the price of the ith branded
drug entering a drug class: P1 is the price of the first entrant, P2 is the price of the second entrant, etc. Lu and Comanor examined
the relationship between PN and N, and found that PN is inversely related to N: later entrants tend to charge lower prices. We are
implicitly examining the effect of entry of the Nth branded drug (an increase from N-1 to N in the number of members of the
drug class) on the mean of (P1, P 2, …, PN-1).
                                                                 21
         The estimates plotted in Figure 5 can be used to calculate the effects of within- and between-patent entry

during years 0-16 on the present dis counted value of sales during those years, evaluated at age 0, i.e. the date of

FDA approval. Consider the counterfactual sales in the absence of any entry in which case within- or between-

patent entry at all ages was set to zero: ∆n =∆N=0. Now assume that annual sales was a thousand for all ages until

expiration; Yt = $1000 for t = 0, 1, 2,…, 16 . Use the estimated entry rates multiplied by their estimated effects on

sales to calculate two new sales profiles by age; one when there is only within-patent competition (∆n as observed,

∆N=0) and another when there is only between patent competition (∆N as observed, ∆n=0). Our estimates imply

that within-patent entry alone reduces sales in years 5, 10, and 15, to $993, $943, and $828 respectively, and that

between-patent entry alone reduces sales in years 5, 10, and 15, to $887, $686, and $476, respectively. In other

words, between-patent entry reduces sales in year 15 by more than twice as much as within-patent entry. Using a

5% interest rate, we estimate that within-patent entry alone reduces the PDV of year 0-16 sales by 4% ($11,313 vs.

$11,838), and that between-patent entry alone reduces the PDV of year 0-16 sales by 17% ($9420 vs $11,838).

Between-patent entry has about four times as large an effect on the PDV of year 0-16 sales as within-patent entry.

This finding is not very sensitive to the choice of interest rate. If we use a 3% interest rate, the reductions in the

PDV of year 0-16 sales from within - and between-patent entry are 5% and 18%, respectively; if we use a 7% interest

rate, they are 4% and 16%. Thus it appears that our estimate suggests that between-patent competition is more

important in affecting this measure of an innovative return than is within patent competition.



E. IMPLIED EFFECTS OF MARGINAL CHANGES IN THE LENGTHS OF PATENTS

         We use our estimates of the impact on innovative returns for two forms of competition to assess the impact

of marginal changes in patent lengths on innovative returns, such as those resulting from the Hatch-Waxman Act for

US pharmaceuticals or from the international expansion of patent lives from 17 to 20 years.



                            [FIGURE 6 INSERTED HERE]

More precisely, suppose that the within-patent entry profile in Figure 5 was shifted to the left by either 1 year, 3

years, or 5 years. We assume that after 16 years, the within-patent entry profile continues to decline by –0.8% per

year. The effect of this shift on the PDV of innovator sales depends on the joint discounting induced by the rate of


                                                            22
between-patent entry and the rate of interest. Now consider three different sets of values of between-patent entry--

baseline as estimated in Figure 5, 50% decrease from baseline, and 50% increase from baseline—and four different

interest rates: 0, 3, 5, and 7%. Figure 6 depicts the estimated percentage reductions in PDV of innovator sales

resulting from these 1-year, 3-year, and 5-year acceleration of patent expiration, under the different scenarios. A

useful upper bound on the loss (the percentage reduction in the PDV) is the corresponding percentage reduction in

the patent life itself. However, as seen from Figure 6, often the actual loss is far below that upper bound.



IV. Concluding Remarks

         A patent only protects an innovator from others producing the same product, but it does not protect him

from others producing new products under new patents. Therefore, one may divide up the source of competition

facing an innovator as into within-patent competition which results from production of the same product and

between-patent competition which results from production of products on other patents. Previous analyses, whether

theoretical or empirical, has focused on the effects of IP-regulations on within-patent competition, by showing how

protecting innovative returns from imitators affects R&D incentives. However, the importance of between-patent

competition in affecting innovative returns, particularly through creative destruction in the many high-tech

industries being central to overall economic progress, suggests that a fuller understanding of IP-regulations takes

into account its effects on between-patent competition. We showed how between patent competition may respond to

IP-regulations in ways that many times offset their primary effects of stimulating R&D.

         We attempted to estimate the relative magnitudes of the two sources of competition in limiting innovative

returns in the U.S. pharmaceuticals market. In this market within-patent competition from so called generic

producers has been over-emphasized relative to competition between-patents through so called therapeutic

competition. We estimated that between-patent competition, most of which occurs while a drug is under patent,

costs the innovator at least as much as within-patent competition, which cannot occur until a drug is off patent.

The reduction in the present discounted value of the innovator’s sales from between patent competition appears to

be at least as large as the reduction from competition within patents, and may be much larger. This is suggestive of

that the statutory monopoly awarded through a patent does not always confer great monopoly power in the usual

sense of being able to raise price without substantial substitution

                                                           23
          There were several weaknesses in the analysis that may be addressed more appropriately in future analyses.

First, the degree to which selection affects the relative importance of the two types of competition should be

considered more fully. If entry off- and on-patent are differentially correlated with unobservable determinants of

sales, such as demand shocks, then the method proposed to estimate the relative importance of the two may be

biased.

          Although the effects of limiting within-patent competition may be small due to both discounting and

between-patent competition, the effects of limiting between-patent competition may be large. An interesting case

that illustrates this is the U.S. Orphan Drug Act of 1983. This act added a 7-year exclusivity right to a class of drugs

for rare diseases, in addition to additional tax-breaks for R&D expenditure. It thereby provided a unique reduction in

between-patent competition, without the offsetting effects discussed in this paper for other types of stimuli. The Act

dramatically raised both R&D spending and entry of orphan drugs, facts that may be a testament to the relative

importance of between-, rather than within-, patent competition in eliminating innovative returns.

          Given the importance of between patent competition in the pharmaceutical industry, and the fact that it

seems likely to be even more important for other high-tech industries that may be central to overall economic

progress, we hope that future analyses will shed more light on its impact on optimal IP-policies. The discussed feed-

back effects across patents induced by standard IP-measures suggests that firm-level effects may be different than

industry-level effects. Current empirical work on the effects of R&D stimuli on research activity, see e.g. the review

by Hall and Van Reenen (1999), does not consider the differences in firm-vs industry level effects, nor the different

impact such stimuli may have on within versus between patent competition. A better understanding is needed of the

ways in which IP-regulations affects not only the incentives to imitate through within patent competition, but also

the incentives to generate new intellectual property rights and the resulting feedback effects those new rights have

on innovation in the first place.




                                                          24
References

             [1] Aghion, P., and Peter Howitt (1992), “A Model of Growth Through Creative Destruction”,

                 Econometrica 60 (2), 323-351.

             [2] Berndt, Ernst R., Iain M. Cockburn, and Zvi Griliches, (1996), “Pharmaceutical Innovations and

                 Market Dynamics: Tracking Effects on Price Indexes for Antidepressant Drugs” Brookings Papers

                 on Economic Activity. Microeconomics, Vol. 1996, pp. 133-188.

             [3] Berndt, Ernst R., Linda Bui, David R. Reiley, Glen L. Urban, (1995), “Information, Marketing,

                 and Pricing in the U.S. Antiulcer Drug Market “ The American Economic Review 85(2), Papers

                 and Proceedings, May, pp. 100-105.

             [4] Green, Jerry, and Suzanne Scotchmer, (1995), ”On The Division of Profits In Sequential

                 Innovation”, RAND Journal of Economic, 26, 20-33..

             [5] Gallini, Nancy, (1992), “Patent Policy and Costly Imitation”, RAND Journal of Economics, 23, p.

                 52-63.

             [6] Gilbert, Richard and Carl Shapiro, (1990), “Optimal Patent Length and Breadth”, RAND Journal

                 of Economics, 21, p. 106-112.

             [7] Grabowski, Henry, and John Vernon (1996), “Longer Patents for Increased Generic Competition

                 in the US: The Waxman-Hatch Act After One Decade,” PharmacoEconomics 10, Suppl. 2, pp.

                 110–123.

             [8] Hall, B., J. Van Reenen, (1999), “How effective are fiscal incentives for R&D? A Review of The

                 Evidence”, NBER Working Paper No 7098, Cambridge, MA.

             [9] Horstmann, Ignatius, Glenn MacDonald and Alan Slivinski (1993), “Patents as Information

                 Transfer Mechanisms: To Patent or (Maybe) Not to Patent”, Journal of Political Economy

             [10] Judd, Kenneth, (1985), “On the Performance of Patents”, Econometrica, 53, p.567-585.

             [11] Klemperer, Paul, (1990), “How Broad Should the Scope of Patent Protection Be?”, RAND

                 Journal of Economics, 21, p. 113-130.




                                                         25
[12] Lu, J.Z, and W.S. Comanor, (1998), ”Strategic Pricing of New Pharmaceuticals”, Review of

    Economics and Statistics , 80(1), 108-118.

[13] Nordhaus, William, (1969), Invention, Growth, and Welfare, Cambridge: MIT Press.

[14] Peltzman, Sam, (1973), “An Evaluation of Consumer Protection Legislation: The 1962 Drug

    Amendments” The Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 81, No. 5., pp. 1049-1091.

[15] Pakes, Ariel, (1985), “Patents as Options: Some Estimates of The Value of Holding European

    Patent Stocks”, Econometrica, v 54, 755-84.

[16] Scotchmer, Suzanne, (1996), “Protection Early Innovators: Should Second-Generation Products

    be Patentable?,” RAND Journal of Economics, 27, p. 322-331.

[17] Wright, Brian, (1983), “The Economics of Invention Incentives: Patents, Prizes, and Research

    Contracts”, American Economic Review 73.




                                          26
                                                                                   Figure 1




                                                                           Figure 1
                                        Typical extent of within- and between-patent competition, by age of the drug,
                                                                          1982-2001
                             40.0                                                                                                                3.00



                             35.0
                                                                                                                                                 2.50

                             30.0
Between-patent competition




                                                                                                                                                        Within-patent-competition
                                                                                                                                                 2.00
                             25.0



                             20.0                                                                                                                1.50



                             15.0
                                                                                                                                                 1.00

                             10.0
                                                           Between-patent competition: average number of drugs within a drug’s class
                                                                                                                                                 0.50
                              5.0                          Within-patent competition: average number of producers of a drug



                              0.0                                                                                                                0.00
                                    0      1     2     3     4       5        6       7       8        9      10       11      12      13   14
                                                                             Age of drug (years)




                                                                                   Page 1
                                              Figure 2
            Proportion of Products with Therapeutic Equivalence Code, by age, 1982-2001

70.0%



60.0%



50.0%



40.0%



30.0%



20.0%



10.0%



0.0%
        0      2         4         6          8             10      12      14            16   18
                                           Age of product (years)
                                             Figure 3
                              Number of drugs approved in class, and
                number of applicants approved to market drug, by drug age, 1982-2001
70.0%


                No. of applicants approved to market drug (log change since FDA approval of drug)
60.0%
                No. of drugs approved in class (log change since FDA approval of drug)


50.0%



40.0%



30.0%



20.0%



10.0%



0.0%
        0   1   2      3       4       5       6       7       8       9       10        11    12   13   14   15   16
                                                      Age of drug (years)
                                                  Figure 4
                       Number of New Molecular Entities Approved by the FDA, 1986-1999


60



                                                                                                   53
50




40
                                                                                                             39
                                                                                                                               35

30                                              30                                                                     30
                                                                                         28
                                                        26            25
                                23      23                                      22
20      20      21      20



10



                                                                     Source: FDA Center for Drug Evaluation and Research
0
     1986    1987    1988    1989    1990    1991    1992          1993     1994      1995     1996      1997      1998     1999
                                                            Year
                                                   Figure 5
            Estimated reduction in innovator sales growth due to within- and between-patent entry
0.0%
        0   1      2     3      4       5           6    7       8      9     10   11   12   13   14   15   16

-1.0%



-2.0%



-3.0%



-4.0%



-5.0%
                              Within-patent entry
                              Between-patent entry
-6.0%



-7.0%



-8.0%



-9.0%
                                                        Age of drug (years)
                                                     Figure 6
                    Estimated percentage reductions in PDV of innovator sales resulting from
                           1-year, 3-year, and 5-year acceleration of patent expiration


14%


12%


10%


 8%


 6%

                                                                                                                                                                                           1-year
 4%                                                                                                                                                                                        3-year
                                                                                                                                                                                           5-year
  2%


  0%
          50% decrease


                         50% decrease




                                                                                                                                                                                  5-year
                                        50% decrease


                                                       50% decrease


                                                                      baseline




                                                                                                                                                                                3-year
                                                                                 baseline


                                                                                            baseline
              0%




                                                                        0%
                             3%




                                                                                                       baseline




                                                                                                                                                                              1-year
                                                                                   3%
                                            5%




                                                                                                                  50% increase
                                                                                              5%
                                                           7%




                                                                                                                                 50% increase
                                                                                                         7%




                                                                                                                                                50% increase


                                                                                                                                                               50% increase
                                                                                                                      0%


                                                                                                                                     3%


                                                                                                                                                    5%


                                                                                                                                                                   7%
      Between-patent entry estimate and interest rate
                              Table 1

Number of drugs approved in class, and number of applicants approved
              to market drug, by drug age, 1982-2001




Age of     No. of applicants approved No. of drugs approved in class
  drug    to market drug (log change (log change since FDA approval
(years)   since FDA approval of drug)            of drug)
   0                  0.0%                         0.0%
   1                  0.4%                         4.9%
   2                  0.7%                         9.0%
   3                  1.2%                        12.6%
   4                  2.7%                        15.7%
   5                  5.3%                        18.7%
   6                  9.5%                        20.9%
   7                 11.9%                        23.7%
   8                 15.0%                        26.2%
   9                 18.5%                        28.0%
   10                21.4%                        30.4%
   11                27.4%                        32.5%
   12                30.1%                        34.6%
   13                35.1%                        36.2%
   14                45.4%                        37.9%
   15                52.3%                        40.4%
   16                60.6%                        42.5%
                                 Table 2
        Summary Statistics from Medicaid State Drug Utilization Files

Year   Total reimbursed amount    No. of Rx's    Average price of Medicaid Rx's
1996        $9,681,165,484        312,238,853                $31.01
1997       $10,367,144,162        305,764,591                $33.91
1998       $12,418,148,656        320,235,551                $38.78
1999       $14,446,826,097        328,031,366                $44.04
                                  Table 3
 Number and average price of Medicaid and non-Medicaid prescriptions in 1996

                         no. of 1996 Rx's    % of 1996 Rx's     average price
       Medicaid             220,961,812           10.2%            $33.02
     non-Medicaid          1,944,887,113          89.8%            $32.86
         Total             2,165,848,925         100.0%            $32.88

Medicaid Rx's refer to Rx's in which there was any payment by Medicaid.
The average price is the average amount paid by all payers.
                                               Table 4
                                       Estimates of eq. (2)
                                   (t-statistics in parentheses)

      Column            1             2            3           4           5             6
                               Innovator drugs                       Non-innovator drugs

                      no. of       no. of        dollar     no. of       no. of
Dependent variable:    units    prescriptions    value       units    prescriptions   dollar value
Regressor:
ln N (between-
patent competitors)   -0.194       -0.190        -0.175    -0.104        -0.080         -0.077
                      (6.31)       (7.80)        (6.25)    (5.44)        (4.59)         (5.10)

ln n (within-patent
competitors)          -0.068       -0.077        -0.081    -0.240       -0.256         -0.248
                      (3.98)       (5.71)        (5.25)    (13.46)      (15.79)        (17.59)

No. of products     31,980
No. of observations 388,527
Quarterly data,
1996:2 - 1999:4
                                                    Appendix Table 1
                                        National Drug Code Directory Drug Classes

Drug Class Code   Drug Class Name
0117              ANESTHETICS, LOCAL
0118              ANESTHETICS, GENERAL
0119              ANESTHESIA, ADJUNCTS TO/ANALEPTICS
0120              MEDICINAL GASES
0121              ANESTHETICS, TOPICAL
0122              ANESTHETICS, OPHTHALMIC
0123              ANESTHETICS, RECTAL
0200              ANTIDOTES
0281              ANTIDOTES, SPECIFIC
0283              ANTIDOTES, GENERAL
0285              ANTITOXINS/ANTIVENINS
0286              ANAPHYLAXIS TREATMENT KIT
0300              ANTIMICROBIALS
0346              PENICILLINS
0347              CEPHALOSPORINS
0348              LINCOSAMIDES/MACROLIDES
0349              POLYMYXINS
0350              TETRACYCLINES
0351              CHLORAMPHENICOL/DERIVATIVES
0352              AMINOGLYCOSIDES
0353              SULFONAMIDES/RELATED COMPOUNDS
0354              ANTISEPTICS,URINARY TRACT
0355              ANTIBACTERIALS, MISCELLANEOUS
0356              ANTIMYCOBACTERIALS (INCL ANTI LEPROSY)
0357              QUINOLONES/DERIVATIVES
0358              ANTIFUNGALS
0388              ANTIVIRALS
0400              HEMATOLOGICS
0408              DEFICIENCY ANEMIAS
0409              ANTICOAGULANTS/THROMBOLYTICS
0410              BLOOD COMPONENTS/SUBSTITUTES
0411              HEMOSTATICS
0500              CARDIOVASCULAR-RENAL
0501              CARDIAC GLYCOSIDES
0502              ANTIARRHYTHMICS
0503              ANTIANGINALS
0504              VASCULAR DISORDERS, CEREBRAL/PERIPHERAL
0505              HYPOTENSION/SHOCK
0506              ANTIHYPERTENSIVES
0507              DIURETICS
0508              CORONARY VASODILATORS
0509              RELAXANTS/STIMULANTS, URINARY TRACT
0510              CALCIUM CHANNEL BLOCKERS
0511              CARBONIC ANHYDRASE INHIBITORS
0512              BETA BLOCKERS
0513              ALPHA AGONISTS/ALPHA BLOCKERS
0514   ACE INHIBITORS
0600   CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
0626   SEDATIVES/HYPNOTICS
0627   ANTIANXIETY
0628   ANTIPSYCHOTICS/ANTIMANICS
0630   ANTIDEPRESSANTS
0631   ANOREXIANTS/CNS STIMULANTS
0632   CNS, MISCELLANEOUS
0633   ALZHEIMER-TYPE DEMENTIA
0634   SLEEP AID PRODUCTS (OTC)
0635   ANTIEMETICS
0700   CONTRAST MEDIA/ RADIOPHARMACEUTICALS
0789   DIAGNOSTICS, RADIOPAQUE & NONRADIOACTIVE
0790   DIAGNOSTICS - RADIOPHARMACEUTICALS
0791   THERAPEUTICS - RADIOPHARMACEUTICALS
0792   DIAGNOSTICS, MISCELLANEOUS
0800   GASTROINTESTINALS
0874   DISORDERS, ACID/PEPTIC
0875   ANTIDIARRHEALS
0876   LAXATIVES
0877   GASTROINTESTINAL, MISCELLANEOUS
0878   ANTISPASMODICS/ANTICHOLINERGICS
0879   ANTACIDS
0900   METABOLICS/NUTRIENTS
0912   HYPERLIPIDEMIA
0913   VITAMINS/MINERALS
0914   NUTRITION, ENTERAL/PARENTERAL
0915   REPL/REGS OF ELECTROLYTES/WATER BALANCE
0916   CALCIUM METABOLISM
0917   HEMATOPOIETIC GROWTH FACTORS
1000   HORMONES/HORMONAL MECHANISMS
1032   ADRENAL CORTICOSTEROIDS
1033   ANDROGENS/ANABOLIC STEROIDS
1034   ESTROGENS/PROGESTINS
1035   ANTERIOR PITUITARY/HYPOTHALMIC FUNCTION
1036   BLOOD GLUCOSE REGULATORS
1037   THYROID/ANTITHYROID
1038   ANTIDIURETICS
1039   RELAXANTS/STIMULANTS,UTERINE
1040   CONTRACEPTIVES
1041   INFERTILITY
1042   DRUGS USED IN DISORDERS OF GROWTH HORMONE SECRETION
1100   IMMUNOLOGICS
1180   VACCINES/ANTISERA
1181   IMMUNOMODULATORS
1182   ALLERGENIC EXTRACTS
1183   IMMUNE SERUMS
1200   SKIN/MUCOUS MEMBRANES
1264   ANTISEPTICS/DISINFECTANTS
1265   DERMATOLOGICS
1266   KERATOLYTICS
1267   ANTIPERSPIRANTS
1268   TOPICAL STEROIDS
1269   BURN/SUNBURN, SUNSCREEN/SUNTAN PRODUCTS
1270   ACNE PRODUCTS
1271   TOPICAL ANTI-INFECTIVES
1272   ANORECTAL PRODUCTS
1273   PERSONAL CARE PRODUCTS (VAGINAL)
1274   DERMATITIS/ANTIPURETICS
1275   TOPICAL ANALGESICS
1300   NEUROLOGICS
1371   EXTRAPYRAMIDAL MOVEMENT DISORDERS
1372   MYASTHENIA GRAVIS
1373   SKELETAL MUSCLE HYPERACTIVITY
1374   ANTICONVULSANTS
1400   ONCOLYTICS
1479   ANTINEOPLASTICS
1480   HORMONAL/BIOLOGICAL RESPONSE MODIFIERS
1481   ANTIMETABOLITES
1482   ANTIBIOTICS, ALKALOIDS, AND ENZYMES
1483   DNA DAMAGING DRUGS
1500   OPHTHALMICS
1566   GLAUCOMA
1567   CYCLOPLEGICS/MYDRIATICS
1568   OCULAR ANTI-INFECTIVE/ANTI-INFLAMMATORY
1569   OPHTHALMICS, MISCELLANEOUS
1570   OPHTHALMICS-DECONGESTANTS/ANTIALLERGY AGENTS
1571   CONTACT LENS PRODUCTS
1600   OTICS
1670   OTICS, TOPICAL
1671   VERTIGO/MOTION SICKNESS/VOMITING
1700   RELIEF OF PAIN
1720   ANALGESICS, GENERAL
1721   ANALGESICS-NARCOTIC
1722   ANALGESICS-NON-NARCOTIC
1723   ANTIMIGRAINE/OTHER HEADACHES
1724   ANTIARTHRITICS
1725   ANTIGOUT
1726   CENTRAL PAIN SYNDROMES
1727   NSAID
1728   ANTIPYRETICS
1729   MENSTRUAL PRODUCTS
1800   ANTIPARASITICS
1860   ANTIPROTOZOALS
1862   ANTHELMINTICS
1863   SCABICIDES/PEDICULICIDES
1864   ANTIMALARIALS
1900   RESPIRATORY TRACT
1940   ANTIASTHMATICS/BRONCODILATORS
1941   NASAL DECONGESTANTS
1943   ANTITUSSIVES/EXPECTORANTS/MUCOLYTICS
1944   ANTIHISTAMINES
1945   COLD REMEDIES
1946   LOZENGE PRODUCTS
1947   CORTICOSTEROIDS-INHALATION/NASAL
2000   UNCLASSIFIED/MISCELLANEOUS
2087   UNCLASSIFIED
2095   PHARMACEUTICAL AIDS
2096   SURGICAL AIDS
2097   DENTAL PREPARATIONS
2098   DENTRIFICE/DENTURE PRODUCTS
2099   MOUTH PAIN, COLD SORE, CANKER SORE PRODUCTS
2100   HOMEOPATHIC PRODUCTS
