                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




     INSTITUTIONS RULE: THE PRIMACY OF INSTITUTIONS OVER GEOGRAPHY
               AND INTEGRATION IN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT


                                            Dani Rodrik
                                         Arvind Subramanian
                                          Francesco Trebbi


                                         Working Paper 9305
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9305


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




The views expressed in this paper are the authors’ own and not of the institutions with which they are
affiliated. We thank Chad Jones, James Robinson, Will Masters, and participants at the Harvard-MIT
development seminar and the Harvard econometrics workshop for their comments, Daron Acemoglu for
helpful conversations, and Aart Kraay for providing us with his data. Dani Rodrik gratefully acknowledges
support from the Carnegie Corporation of New York. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Dani Rodrik, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
Institutions Rule: The Primacy of Institutions over Geography and
Integration in Economic Development
Dani Rodrik, Arvind Subramanian, and Francesco Trebbi
NBER Working Paper No. 9305
October 2002
JEL No. O1, O4

                                             ABSTRACT

We estimate the respective contributions of institutions, geography, and trade in determining income
levels around the world, using recently developed instruments for institutions and trade. Our results
indicate that the quality of institutions "trumps" everything else. Once institutions are controlled for,
measures of geography have at best weak direct effects on incomes, although they have a strong
indirect effect by influencing the quality of institutions. Similarly, once institutions are controlled
for, trade is almost always insignificant, and often enters the income equation with the "wrong" (i.e.,
negative) sign, although trade too has a positive effect on institutional quality. We relate our results
to recent literature, and where differences exist, trace their origins to choices on samples,
specification, and instrumentation.




Dani Rodrik                                                     Arvind Subramanian
John F. Kennedy School of Government                            International Monetary Fund
Harvard University                                              700 19th Street, NW
Cambridge, MA 02138                                             Washington, DC 20431
and NBER


Francesco Trebbi
Department of Economics
Harvard University
Cambridge, MA 02138
Commerce and manufactures can seldom flourish long in any state which does not enjoy a regular
administration of justice, in which the people do not feel themselves secure in the possession of their property,
in which the faith of contracts is not supported by law, and in which the authority of the state is not supposed to
be regularly employed in enforcing the payment of debts from all those who are able to pay. Commerce and
manufactures, in short, can seldom flourish in any state in which there is not a certain degree of confidence in
the justice of government.

                                                                             -- Adam Smith, Wealth of Nations



                                               I. Introduction

Average income levels in the world’s richest and poorest nations differ by a factor of more
than 100. Sierra Leone, the poorest economy for which we have national income statistics,
has a per-capita GDP of $490, compared to Luxembourg’s $50,061.1 What accounts for
these differences, and what (if anything) can we do to reduce them? It is hard to think of any
question in economics that is of greater intellectual significance, or of greater relevance to
the vast majority of the word’s population.

In the voluminous literature on this subject, three strands of thoughts stand out. First, there is
a long and distinguished line of theorizing that places geography at the center of the story.
Geography is a key determinant of climate, endowment of natural resources, disease burden,
transport costs, and diffusion of knowledge and technology from more advanced areas. It
exerts therefore a strong influence on agricultural productivity and the quality of human
resources. Recent writings by Jared Diamond and Jeffrey Sachs are among the more notable
works in this tradition (see Diamond 1997; Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger 1998, and Sachs
2001).

A second camp emphasizes the role of international trade as a driver of productivity change.
We call this the integration view, as it gives market integration, and impediments thereof, a
starring role in fostering economic convergence between rich and poor regions of the world.
Notable recent research in this camp includes Frankel and Romer (FR,1999) and the pre-
geography work of Sachs (Sachs and Warner 1995).

Finally, a third group of explanations centers on institutions, and in particular the role of
property rights and the rule of law. In this view, what matters are the rules of the game in a
society and their conduciveness to desirable economic behavior. This view is associated
most strongly with Douglass North (1990). It has received careful econometric treatment
recently in Hall and Jones (1999), who focus on what they call “social infrastructure,” and in


1
  These are figures for 2000, and they are expressed in current “international” dollars,
adjusted for PPP differences. The source is the World Development Indicators CD-Rom of
the World Bank.
                                              2




Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (AJR, 2001), who focus on the expropriation risk that
current and potential investors face.

Growth theory has traditionally focused on physical and human capital accumulation, and, in
its endogenous growth variant, on technological change. But accumulation and technological
change are at best proximate causes of economic growth. No sooner have we ascertained the
impact of these two on growth—and with some luck their respective roles also—that we
want to ask: But why did some societies manage to accumulate and innovate more rapidly
than others? The three-fold classification offered above—geography, integration, and
institutions—allows us to organize our thoughts on the “deeper” determinants of economic
growth. These three are the factors that determine which societies will innovate and
accumulate, and therefore develop, and which will not.

Since long-term economic development is a complex phenomenon, the idea that any one (or
even all) of the above deep determinants can provide an adequate accounting of centuries of
economic history is, on the face of it, preposterous. Historians and many social scientists
prefer nuanced, layered explanations where these factors interact with human choices and
many other not-so-simple twists and turns of fate. But economists like parsimony. We want
to know how well these simple stories do, not only on their own or collectively, but more
importantly, vis-à-vis each other. How much of the astounding variation in cross-national
incomes around the world can geography, integration, and institutions explain? Do these
factors operate additively, or do they interact? Are they all equally important? Does one of
the explanations “trump” the other two?

The questions may be simple, but devising a reasonable empirical strategy for answering
them is far from straightforward. This is not because we do not have good empirical proxies
for each of these deep determinants. There are many reasonable measures of “geography,”
such as distance from the equator (our preferred measure), percentage land mass located in
the tropics, or average temperature. The intensity of an economy’s integration with the rest
of the world can be measured by flows of trade or the height of trade barriers. The quality of
institutions can be measured with a range of perceptions-based indicators of property rights
and the rule of law. The difficulty lies instead in sorting out the complex web of causality
that entangles these factors.

The extent to which an economy is integrated with the rest of the world and the quality of its
institutions are both endogenous, shaped potentially not just by each other and by geography,
but also by income levels. Problems of endogeneity and reverse causality plague any
empirical researcher trying to make sense of the relationships among these causal factors.
We illustrate this with the help of Figure 1, adapted from Rodrik (2003, forthcoming). The
plethora of arrows in the figure, going in both directions at once in many cases, exemplifies
the difficulty.

The task of demonstrating causality is perhaps easiest for the geographical determinists.
Geography is as exogenous a determinant as an economist can ever hope to get, and the main
burden here is to identify the main channel(s) through which geography influences economic
                                               3




performance. Geography may have a direct effect on incomes, through its effect on
agricultural productivity and morbidity. This is shown with arrow (1) in Figure 1. It can also
have an indirect effect through its impact on distance from markets and the extent of
integration (arrow [2]) or its impact on the quality of domestic institutions (arrow [3]). With
regard to the latter, economic historians have emphasized the disadvantageous consequences
for institutional development of certain patterns of factor endowments, which engender
extreme inequalities and enable the entrenchment of a small group of elites (e.g., Engerman
and Sokoloff, 1994). A similar explanation, linking ample endowment of natural resources
with stunted institutional development, also goes under the name of “resource curse.”

Trade fundamentalists and institutionalists have a considerably more difficult job to do, since
they have to demonstrate causality for their preferred determinant, as well as identify the
effective channel(s) through which it works. For the former, the task consists of showing
that arrows (4) and (5)—capturing the direct impact of integration on income and the indirect
impact through institutions, respectively—are the relevant ones, while arrows (6) and (7)—
reverse feedbacks from incomes and institutions, respectively—are relatively insignificant.
Reverse causality cannot be ruled out easily, since expanded trade and integration can be
mainly the result of increased productivity in the economy and/or improved domestic
institutions, rather than a cause thereof.

Institutionalists, meanwhile, have to worry about different kinds of reverse causality. They
need to show that improvements in property rights, the rule of law and other aspects of the
institutional environment are an independent determinant of incomes (arrow [8]), and are not
simply the consequence of higher incomes (arrow [9]) or of greater integration (arrow [5]).

In econometric terms, what we need to sort all this out are good instruments for integration
and institutions—sources of exogenous variation for the extent of integration and
institutional quality, respectively, that are uncorrelated with other plausible (and excluded)
determinants of income levels. Two recent papers help us make progress by providing
plausible instruments. FR (1999) suggests that we can instrument for actual trade/GDP ratios
by using trade/GDP shares constructed on the basis of a gravity equation for bilateral trade
flows. The FR approach consists of first regressing bilateral trade flows (as a share of a
country’s GDP) on measures of country mass, distance between the trade partners, and a few
other geographical variables, and then constructing a predicted aggregate trade share for each
country on the basis of the coefficients estimated. This constructed trade share is then used
as an instrument for actual trade shares in estimating the impact of trade on levels of income.

Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (AJR, 2001) use mortality rates of colonial settlers as an
instrument for institutional quality. They argue that settler mortality had an important effect
on the type of institutions that were built in lands that were colonized by the main European
powers. Where the colonizers encountered relatively few health hazards to European
settlement, they erected solid institutions that protected property rights and established the
rule of law. In other areas, their interests were limited to extracting as much resources as
quickly as possible, and they showed little interest in building high-quality institutions.
Under the added assumption that institutions change only gradually over time, AJR argue
                                                4




that settler mortality rates are therefore a good instrument for institutional quality. FR (1999)
and AJR (2001) use their respective instruments to demonstrate strong causal effects from
trade (in the case of FR) and institutions (in the case of AJR) to incomes. But neither paper
embeds their estimation in the broader framework laid out above. More specifically, AJR
control for geographical determinants, but do not check for the effects of integration. FR do
not control for institutions.

Our approach in this paper consists of using the FR and AJR instruments simultaneously to
estimate the structure shown in Figure 1. The idea is that these two instruments, having
passed what might be called the AER (American Economic Review)-test, are our best hope
at the moment of unraveling the tangle of cause-and-effect relationships involved. So we
systematically estimate a series of regressions in which incomes are related to measures of
geography, integration, and institutions, with the latter two instrumented using the FR and
AJR instruments. These regressions allow us to answer the question: what is the independent
contribution of these three sets of deep determinants to the cross-national variation in income
levels? The first stage of these regressions provides us in turn with information about the
causal links among the determinants.

This exercise yields some sharp and striking results. Most importantly, we find that the
quality of institutions trumps everything else. Once institutions are controlled for, integration
has no direct effect on incomes, while geography has at best weak direct effects. Trade often
enters the income regression with the “wrong” (i.e., negative) sign, as do many of the
geographical indicators. By contrast, our measure of property rights and the rule of law
always enters with the correct sign, and is statistically significant, often with t-statistics that
are very large.

On the links among determinants, we find that institutional quality has a positive and
significant effect on integration. Importantly, integration also has a (positive) impact on
institutional quality, suggesting that trade can have an indirect effect on incomes by
improving institutional quality. Our results also tend to confirm the findings of Easterly and
Levine (2002), namely that geography exerts a significant effect on the quality of institutions.

Our preferred specification “accounts” for about half of the variance in incomes across the
sample, with institutional quality (instrumented by settler mortality) doing most of the work.
Our estimates indicate that an increase in institutional quality of one standard deviation,
corresponding roughly to the difference between measured institutional quality in Bolivia
and South Korea, produces a 2 log-points rise in per-capita incomes, or a 6.4-fold difference-
-which, not coincidentally, is also roughly the income difference between the two countries.
In our preferred specification, trade and distance from the equator both exert a negative, but
insignificant effect on incomes (see Table 2, panel B, column 6).

Much of our paper is devoted to checking the robustness of our central results. In particular,
we estimate our model for three different samples: (a) the original 64-country sample used by
AJR; (b) an 80-country sample which is the largest sample we can use while still retaining
the AJR instrument; and (c) a 140-country sample that maximizes the number of countries at
                                               5




the cost of replacing the AJR instrument with two more widely available instruments
(fractions of the population speaking English and Western European languages as the first
language, from Hall and Jones, 1999.) We also use a large number of alternative indicators
of geography, integration, and institutions. In all cases, institutional quality emerges as the
clear winner of the “horse race” among the three. Finally, we compare and contrast our
results to those in some recent papers that have undertaken exercises of a similar sort. Where
there are differences in results, we identify and discuss the source of the differences and
explain why we believe our approach is superior on conceptual or empirical grounds.

The plan of the paper is as follows. Section II presents the benchmark results. Section III
discusses related recent work and compares it to ours. Section IV provides a more in-depth
interpretation of our results and lays out a research agenda.


                                   II. Benchmark Results

A. Data and Descriptive Statistics
Table 1 provides descriptive statistics for the key variables of interest. The first column
covers the sample of 80 countries for which data on settler mortality have been compiled by
AJR.2 Given the demonstrated attractiveness of this variable as an instrument that can help
illuminate causality, this will constitute our preferred sample. The second column contains
summary statistics for a larger sample of 140 countries for which we have data on alternative
instruments for institutions (fractions of the population speaking English and other European
languages). Data for the FR instrument on trade, on which we will rely heavily, are also
available for this larger sample.

GDP per capita on a PPP basis for 1995 will be our measure of economic performance. For
both samples, there is substantial variation in GDP per capita: for the 80-country sample,
mean GDP in 1995 is $3020, the standard deviation of log GDP is 1.05, with the poorest
country’s (Congo, DRC) GDP being $321 and that of the richest (Singapore) $ 28,039. For
the larger sample, mean income is $4452, the standard deviation is 1.14, with the richest
country (Luxembourg) enjoying an income level of $34,698.

The institutional quality measure that we use is due to Kaufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton
(2002). This is a composite indicator of a number of elements that capture the protection
afforded to property rights as well as the strength of the rule of law.3 This is a standardized


2
 AJR actually compiled data on settler mortality for 81 countries, but data on per capita PPP
GDP for 1995 are unavailable for Afghanistan.
3
 AJR use an index of protection against expropriation compiled by Political Risk Services.
The advantage of the rule of law measure used in this paper is that it is available for a larger
sample of countries, and in principle captures more elements that go toward determining
                                                                                     (continued)
                                                6




measure that varies between -2.5 (weakest institutions) and 2.5 (strongest institutions). In
our sample of 80 countries, the mean score is -0.25, with Zaire (score of -2.09) having the
weakest institutions and Singapore (score of 1.85) the strongest.

Integration, measured using the ratio of trade to GDP, also varies substantially in our sample.
The average ratio is 51.5 percent, with the least “open” country (India) posting a ratio of 13
percent and the most “open” (Singapore) a ratio of 324 percent. Our preferred measure of
geography is a country’s distance from the equator (measured in degrees). The typical
country is about 15.2 degrees away from the equator.

B. OLS and IV Results in the core specifications
Our paper represents an attempt to estimate the following equation:

                       log yi = µ + αINSi + β INTi + γ GEOi + εi                              (1)

where yi is income per capita in country i, INSi, INTi, and GEOi are respectively measures
for institutions, integration, and geography, and εi is the random error term. Throughout the
paper, we will be interested in the size, sign, and significance of the three coefficients α, β,
and γ. We will use standardized measures of INSi, INTi, and GEOi in our core regressions,
so that the estimated coefficients can be directly compared.

Before we discuss the benchmark results, it is useful to look at the simple, bivariate
relationships between income and each of the “deep determinants.” Figure 2 shows these
scatter plots, with the three panels on the left hand side corresponding to the sample of 80
countries and the three panels on the right to the larger sample of 140 countries. All the plots
show a clear and unambiguously positive relationship between income and its possible
determinants. Thus, any or all of them have the potential to explain levels of income. This
positive relationship is confirmed by the simple OLS regression of equation (1) reported in
Panel A of Table 2. The signs of institution, openness, and geography are as expected and
statistically significant or close to being so. Countries with stronger institutions, more open
economies, and more distant from the equator are likely to have higher levels of income.

To get a sense of the magnitude of the potential impacts, we can compare two countries, say
Nigeria and Mauritius, both in Africa. If the OLS relationship is indeed causal, the
coefficients in column (6) of Panel A in Table 2 would suggest that Mauritius’s per capita
GDP should be 5.2 times that of Nigeria, of which 21 percent would be due to better
institutions, 65 percent due to greater openness, and 14 percent due to better location. In
practice, Mauritius’s income ($11,400) is 14.8 times that of Nigeria ($770).



institutional quality. In any case, measures of institutional quality are highly correlated: in
our 80-country sample, the two measures have a simple correlation of 0.78.
                                               7




Of course, for a number of reasons described extensively in the literature—reverse causality,
omitted variables bias, and measurement error—the above relationship cannot be interpreted
as causal or accurate. To address these problems, we employ a two-stage least squares
estimation procedure. The identification strategy is to use the AJR settler mortality measure
as an instrument for institutions and the FR measure of constructed trade shares as an
instrument for integration. In the first-stage regressions, INSi and INTi are regressed on all
the exogenous variables. Thus:

                       INSi = λ + δ SMi + φ CONSTi + ψ GEOi + εINSi                          (2)

                       INTi = θ + σ CONSTi + τ SMi + ω GEOi + εINTi                          (3)

where SMi refers to settler mortality and CONSTi to the FR instrument for trade/GDP. The
exclusion restrictions are that SMi and CONSTi do not appear in equation 1.

Equations (1)-(3) are our core specification. This specification represents, we believe, the
most natural framework for estimating the respective impacts of our three deep determinants.
It is general, yet simple, and treats each of the three deep determinants symmetrically, giving
them all an equal chance. Our proxies for institutions, integration, and geography are the
ones that the advocates of each approach have used. Our instruments for institutions and
integration are sensible, and have already been demonstrated to “work” in the sense of
producing strong second-stage results (albeit in estimations not embedded in our broader
framework).

Panel B of Table 2 reports the two-stage least squares estimates of the three coefficients of
interest. The estimation is done for three samples of countries: (i) for the sample of 64
countries analyzed by AJR; (ii) for an extended sample of 80 countries for which AJR had
compiled data on settler mortality; and (iii) for a larger sample of 140 countries that includes
those that were not colonized. In AJR, the quality of institutions was measured by an index
of protection against expropriation. We use a rule of law index because it is available for a
larger sample. The IV estimates of the coefficient on institutions in the first three columns of
Panel B are very similar to those in AJR, confirming that these two indexes are capturing
broadly similar aspects of institutions, and allowing us to use the larger sample for which
data on settler mortality are available.

Columns (4)-(6) report our estimates for the extended AJR sample (which as we shall explain
below will be our preferred sample in this paper). Columns (5) and (6) confirm the
importance of institutions in explaining the cross-country variation in development. Once
the institutional variable is added, geography and openness do not have any additional power
in explaining development. Institutions trump geography and openness. In our preferred
specification (column (6)), not only are institutions significant, their impact is large, and the
estimated coefficients on geography and openness have the “wrong” sign! The coefficient on
institutions in the IV estimation is nearly three times as large as in the corresponding OLS
estimation (2 versus 0.7), suggesting that the attenuation bias from measurement error in the
                                                8




institution variables swamps the reverse causality bias that would tend to make the OLS
estimates greater than the IV estimates.

The results are similar for the larger sample of countries (Panel B, columns (6) to (9)). In
this sample, we follow Hall and Jones (1998) and Dollar and Kraay (2002) in using the
following two variables as instruments for institutional quality (in lieu of settler mortality):
ENGFRAC, fraction of the population speaking English, and EURFRAC, fraction of the
population speaking other European languages. Once again, institutions trump geography
and openness, although the size of the estimated coefficient is smaller than that for the
smaller sample. Figure 3 plots the conditional relationship between income and each of the
three determinants for the 80-country (left panels) and 140-country (right panels) samples. In
contrast to Figure 2, which showed a positive partial relationship between income and all its
determinants, Figure 3 shows that only institutions have a significant and positive effect on
income once the endogenous determinants are instrumented.

The first-stage regressions (reported in Panel C) are also interesting. In our preferred
specification, settler mortality has a significant effect on integration: the coefficient is
correctly signed and significant at the 1 percent level. This result holds for the range of
specifications that we estimate as part of the robustness checks reported below. The
geography variable has a significant impact in determining the quality of institutions as does
integration, although its coefficient is significant only at the 5 percent level.

While all three samples provide qualitatively similar results, our preferred sample will be the
80-country sample: obviously this sample Pareto-dominates the 64-country sample. We also
prefer this sample to the 140-country sample because settler mortality appears to be a
superior instrument to those used in the 140-country sample (ENGFRAC and EURFRAC).
Panel B shows that the instruments for the IV regressions in the 140-country sample fail to
pass the over-identification tests despite the well-known problems of these tests having low
power. Indeed, this turns out to be true not just for the core specifications in Table 2, but for
many of the robustness tests that we discuss below. This raises questions about the results in
Hall and Jones (1998) and in Dollar and Kraay (2002), which are based on the use of
ENGFRAC and EURFRAC as instruments for institutions. Thus, while it is reassuring that
the main result regarding the primacy of institutions also holds in the larger sample, we will
focus mainly on the 80-country sample in the rest of the paper (referring to results for the
larger sample in passing). We shall examine the robustness of our main results in the next
section.

Columns (10) and (11) show the inter-relationships between integration and institutions in
the 80-country sample. We regress trade and institutional quality separately on geography
and on each other (instrumenting the endogenous variables in the manner discussed
previously). The IV regressions show that each of these exerts a positive impact on the other,
with the larger quantitative impact being that of institutional quality on trade. A unit increase
in institutional quality increases the trade share by 0.77 units, while a unit increase in trade
increases institutional quality by 0.23 units. Hence these estimates suggest that integration
can have an indirect effect on incomes via its effect on institutional quality.
                                                 9




Taking these indirect effects into account, we can calculate the total impacts on incomes of
these two determinants by combining the estimated parameters. Our estimates of α and β
(the direct effects) in our preferred sample and specification are 2.00 and –0.30, respectively
(column 6). We can solve the system of equations implied by the additional results in
columns (10) and (11) to calculate the total effects on log incomes of “shocks” to the error
terms in the institutions and trade equations.

The results are as follows. If we consider the point estimates in equation (6) as our best
estimate of the various effects, a unit (positive) shock to the institutional quality equation
ultimately produces an increase in log incomes of 2.15; a unit (positive) shock to the trade
equation ultimately produces an increase in log incomes of 0.2. This is a ten-fold difference.
Alternatively, we could consider the direct impact of trade on income to be nil, since the
relevant estimate (β) is statistically indistinguishable from zero. Under this assumption, a
unit shock to the institutional quality equation ultimately produces an increase in log incomes
of 2, while a unit shock to the trade equation produces an increase in log incomes of 0.46.
Institutions trump integration by a factor of 4.4.

The much greater impact of institutions is the consequence of three factors: (i) the estimated
direct effect of institutions on incomes is positive and large; (ii) the estimated direct effect of
trade on incomes is negative (but statistically insignificant); and (iii) the estimated effect of
trade on institutions is positive, but small.

The proximate determinants of economic growth are accumulation (physical and human) and
productivity change. How do the deep determinants influence these channels? To answer
this question, we regressed income per worker and its three proximate determinants, physical
capital per worker, human capital per worker, and total factor productivity (strictly speaking
a labor-augmenting technological progress parameter) on the deep determinants. Data for the
left hand side variables for these regressions (i.e. income, physical, and human capital per
worker, and factor productivity are taken from Hall and Jones (1998). These results are
reported in Table 3 for both the 80-country sample (columns 1-4) and the 140-country
sample (columns 5-9).4 Three features stand out.

First, the regression for income per worker is very similar to the regressions for per capita
income reported in Table 2, with institutions exerting a positive and significant effect on
income, while integration and geography remain insignificant. Second, and interestingly, the
same pattern holds broadly for the accumulation and productivity regressions; that is,
institutions are an important determinant of both accumulation and productivity, while
integration and geography are not influential in determining either accumulation or


4
 Sample sizes are reduced because of the unavailability of the independent variables for all
countries.
                                               10




productivity.5 Finally, it is interesting to note that institutions have a quantitatively larger
impact on physical accumulation than on human capital accumulation or productivity; for
example, in the 80-country sample the coefficient on physical capital accumulation is about
six times greater than on human capital accumulation and about 3.2 times greater than on
productivity. One possible interpretation is that these results emphasize the particularly
important role that institutions play in preventing expropriability of property which serves as
a powerful incentive to invest and accumulate physical capital.

C. Robustness checks
Tables 4, 5, and 6 present our robustness checks. In Table 4 we test whether our results are
driven by certain influential observations or by the 4 neo-European countries in our sample
(Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and Australia), which are arguably different from the rest
of the countries included. We also check to see whether the inclusion of regional dummies
affects the results.

In columns (1)* and (1)** of Table 4 we use the Belsey-Kuh-Welsch (1980) test to check
whether individual observations exert unusual leverage on the coefficient estimates,
discarding those which do so. In the specification without regional dummies ((1)*), two
observations—Ethiopia and Singapore—are influential. Once these are dropped, the
coefficient estimate for institutions not only remains statistically unaffected, but increases in
magnitude. In the equation with regional dummies, the test requires the observation for
Ethiopia to be omitted, and the revised specification yields results very similar to the baseline
specification, with the coefficient estimate on institutions remaining strong and significant.
The inclusion of regional dummies for Latin America, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Asia tends to
lower somewhat the estimated coefficient on institutions, but its significance level remains
unaffected. Note also that none of the regional dummies enters significantly, which is
reassuring regarding the soundness of our parsimonious specification.

The tests for influential observations suggest that there is no statistical basis for discarding
neo-European countries. Nevertheless to confirm that these countries are not driving the
results, we re-estimated the baseline specification without these observations. As the column
labeled (1)*** confirms, the coefficient estimates are unaffected; indeed, once again the size
of the coefficient on institutions rises substantially, suggesting the greater importance of
institutions for the non-neo-European colonized countries. The remaining columns confirm
that our results are robust also for the larger sample of countries.

We then check whether our results are robust to the inclusion of dummies for legal origin
(column (3)), for the identity of colonizer (column (4)), and religion (column (5)). La Porta
et. al. (1999) argue that the type of legal system historically adopted in a country or imported

5
 In the larger sample, integration has a negative and significant effect on income and
accumulation but this result is not robust to the inclusion of additional variables such as land
and area.
                                               11




through colonization has an important bearing on the development of institutions and hence
on income levels. Similar claims are made on behalf of the other variables. In all cases,
while these variables themselves tend to be individually and in some cases jointly significant,
their inclusion does not affect the core results about the importance of institutions and the
lack of any direct impact of geography and integration on incomes. Indeed, controlling for
these other variables, the coefficient of the institutions variable increases: for example, in the
80-country sample, this coefficient increases from 2 in the baseline to 2.38 when the legal
origin dummies are included.6

In Table 5 we check whether our particular choice of measure for geography (distance from
the equator) influences our results. We successively substitute in our baseline specification a
number of measures of geography used in the literature. These measures include percent of a
country’s land area in the tropics (TROPICS), access to the sea (ACCESS), number of frost
days per month in winter (FROSTDAYS), the area covered by frost (FROSTAREA),
whether a country is an oil exporter (OIL), prevalence of malaria (MALFAL94), and mean
temperature (MEAN TEMPERATURE). The variables FROSTDAYS and FROSTAREA are
taken from Masters and McMillan (2001), who argue that the key disadvantage faced by
tropical countries is the absence of winter frost. (Frost kills pests, pathogens and parasites,
thereby improving human health and agricultural productivity.) We find that none of these
variables, with the exception of the oil dummy, is statistically significant in determining
incomes. Equally importantly, they do not change qualitatively our estimates of the
institution variable, which remains significant, nor of the integration variable, which remains
insignificant and “wrongly” signed.7

In columns (9), (10), and (11), we test whether geography has an impact through a
combination of effects captured by the different geography variables. In equation (9), we
control jointly for distance from equator and the malaria variable. The p-value for the joint
significance of the two geographical variables is well below one percent. The same happens
when this specification is expanded to include the number of frost days per month in winter




6
  We do not report the results for the larger sample but they are very similar. For the 80-
country sample, interesting results are obtained for some of the individual legal origin and
other variables. For example, as in AJR (2001), the French legal origin dummy has a
positive total effect on incomes; the total impact of having been colonized by the UK is
negative and statistically significant even though former UK-colonies have better quality of
institutions on average. As for religion, well, suffice it to say that Weber is not vindicated!
7
 In six of the eight regressions (excluding the one with the oil dummy), the geography
variable is a significant determinant of institutions in the first stage regressions.
                                               12




(column (10)). The F-test for joint significance of the geography pool rejects the null of no
significant effect in the second stage.8

However, when we slightly enlarge the pool to include the other two geography variables,
tropical area and mean temperature, all the individual effects become insignificant as does
the joint significance of all the geography variables (the corresponding p-value is 15 percent).
As for individual effects, in columns (9) and (10), malaria seems to be important in
explaining income differences and enters significantly at the 5 or 10 percent level.9 But its
coefficient is about 4 times smaller than that for institutions. Finally, we experimented with a
series of specifications (not reported) that involved interacting the different geography
variables with each other as well as introducing different functional forms (for example,
exponential) for them. These did not provide evidence in favor of significant direct effects of
geography on income. Overall, we conclude that there seems to be some, albeit modest,
support for the direct impact of geography on income. The first stage regressions, however,
point clearly in favor of an important indirect role of geography via institutions.

In Table 6, we check whether our results are sensitive to our omission of market size
variables, or our measures of and instruments for openness. Frankel and Romer (1999) argue
that smaller countries tend to trade more, and that one should therefore control for country
size when looking for the effect of trade on incomes. The column labeled (1) in Table 6
includes two measures of country size—area and population. These variables do not have
additional explanatory power in the income equation, which is different from the results in
Frankel and Romer (1999). The size and significance of the coefficient on institutions are
unaffected. The coefficient on openness becomes positive, but is highly insignificant.
Column (3) replicates this exercise for the larger sample. The coefficient on institutions does
not change qualitatively (but the standard error is sharply reduced as is the coefficient
estimates), while the coefficient on openness is still negatively signed.

Alcalá and Ciccone (AC, 2002) argue that “real openness”, measured as the ratio of trade to
PPP GDP is a better measure of integration than the simple ratio of trade to GDP that FR and
we favor. In the next section, we examine in greater detail the merits of their argument, but
here we test empirically whether this alternative measure affects our results. Column (5)
presents the results. Once again, this integration measure is wrongly signed and
insignificant, while the coefficient on institutions increases in size and remains significant,
albeit at the 5 percent level.

8
  In the corresponding first stage regressions, settler mortality continues to be important even
after controlling for malaria prevalence, with F-statistics above 12 in both equations (9)and
(10).
9
  We note, however, that it is difficult to treat malaria incidence as an exogenous variable; as
the successful eradication of malaria from Mauritius, Singapore, and Southern Italy
demonstrates, it is obviously influenced by institutions.
                                              13




Columns (2), (4) and (6) replicate the three robustness checks described above but with an
instrument for openness that is slightly different from that in Frankel and Romer (1999). To
obtain their instruments, FR estimated a gravity equation with the dependent variable defined
as trade to PPP GDP. Strictly speaking therefore, theirs was an appropriate instrument for
AC’s “real openness.” We re-estimated the gravity equation on the original FR sample of 63
countries, with trade to GDP as the dependent variable. We then used the coefficients from
this gravity equation to construct the instrument for openness for all the 140 countries in our
larger sample. The results in columns (2), (4), and (6) are very similar to those using the
original FR instruments. The choice of instruments thus does not affect our main results.

Finally, in column (7) we substitute a “policy” measure for the trade variable. For reasons
explained later, we believe that it is not appropriate to use policy variables in level
regressions. We nevertheless sought to test the robustness of our results to one of the most-
widely used measures in the trade and growth literature due to Sachs and Warner (1995),
which has been endorsed recently by Krueger and Berg (2002).10 The results show that the
institutional variable remains significant at the 5 percent level and the Sachs-Warner measure
is itself wrongly signed like the other openness measures.


                                 III. Recent Related Work

The present paper represents in our view the most systematic attempt to date to estimate the
relationship between integration, institutions, and geography, on the one hand, and income,
on the other. Recently a few other papers have carried out somewhat similar analyses and
deserve discussion. The three papers we focus on are Easterly and Levine (EL, 2002), Alcalá
and Ciccone (AC, 2002), and Dollar and Kraay (DK, 2002).11 Our reading of EL is that it is
largely consistent with our results, although, as we shall discuss, the interpretations are
somewhat different. The results reported in AC and DK are at variance with ours to a much
greater extent, but in different ways. AC claim trade and institutions are both significant,
while DK claim that the instrumented income-level regressions exhibit too much collinearity
between the two determinants for their respective contributions to be ascertained. We will
identify in this section the specific departures from the framework we laid out in this paper
that account for the divergent results that these authors have found. In particular, we will
show that the differences derive from choices on samples, specification, or instruments that

10
  The shortcomings of the Sachs-Warner index as a measure of trade policy are discussed at
length in Rodriguez and Rodrik (2001).
11
  See also Frankel and Rose (2002), which builds on FR. This paper is critiqued by Rodrik
(2000), who argues that the results are not robust to the exclusion of two highly influential
variables (Hong Kong and Singapore) and the inclusion of institutional quality and
geography as additional regressors.
                                               14




we think are arbitrary. But the point of identifying the origin of the difference is to allow the
reader to make up his/her own mind.

A. Easterly and Levine (EL, 2002)
The EL approach is in some ways very similar to that in this paper. EL estimate regressions
of the levels of income on various measures of endowments, institutions, and “policies.”
They find that institutions exert an important effect on development, while endowments do
not, other than through their effect on institutions. Policies also do not exert any independent
effect on development. The main differences between our paper and EL are the following.

First, we use a larger sample of countries (80 and 140) to run the “horse” race between the
three possible determinants. The EL sample is restricted to 72 countries. Second, EL do not
test in any detail whether integration has an effect on development. For them, integration or
open trade policy is part of a wider set of government policies that can affect development.
Testing for the effect of policies in level regressions is, however, problematic as discussed in
greater detail below. Policies pursued over a short time span, say 30-40 years, are like a flow
variable, whereas development, the result of a much longer cumulative historical process, is
more akin to a stock variable. Thus, level regressions that use policies as regressors conflate
stocks and flows. Testing for integration is less vulnerable to this critique because of the
instrumentation strategy for measuring integration, which relies essentially on geography
variables that are time-invariant.

Finally, we also differ from EL in the interpretation of the results. EL tend to a deterministic
view of institutions, interpreting settler mortality, which is essentially an econometric
instrument for capturing the exogenous source of variation in institutions, as a causal
geographical determinant of institutions. As we show below, this would render institutions
more immutable than they have actually proven to be.

B. Alcalá and Ciccone (AC, 2002)
The key innovation in AC is the advocacy and justification of what they call “real openness”
as a better measure for integration. They first note that the FR result on the significance of
trade in determining income is not robust to the inclusion of distance from equator in the
income equation.12 They then argue that part of the problem is that the conventional measure
of openness that FR and others use—nominal trade divided by nominal GDP—can yield an
estimate of trade on productivity that is biased downwards. The logic is as follows. Suppose
that an increase in trade raises productivity, but that it does so predominantly in the tradables
12
   The estimated coefficient (t-statistic) on openness in the second stage FR equation drops
from 1.97 (1.99) to 0.34 (0.41) when distance is added. See Rodriguez and Rodrik (2001,
Table 7) and Irwin and Trevio (2000). Note that FR (1999, 389) reported in their robustness
checks that their results were unaffected by the inclusion of distance from equator. However,
this statement seems to have been erroneous, as the “distance” variable used in the FR
regression was apparently latitude rather than the appropriate transformation abs(latitude)/90.
                                               15




sector. Unless non-tradables are inferior in demand, this will raise the relative price of non-
tradables. This will in turn tend to depress the ratio of trade to nominal GDP. The result is
that the initial increase in the openness ratio will be attenuated. AC therefore prefer to use
what they call “real openness,” nominal trade divided by PPP GDP.

AC find a relationship between “real openness” and income within their empirical framework
that they claim is more robust than when the conventional measure of openness is used. This
seems to be the case even when institutional quality is entered, which shows up significantly
in their regressions as well. Since we were unable to obtain their data set, we could not
replicate their results exactly. However, as columns 5 and 6 of Table 6 illustrate, the use of
“real openness” within our empirical specification does not alter the central results of our
paper, namely the importance of institutions and the insignificance of openness.

Moreover, the AC argument strikes us as being misleading. To see why, first note that the
use of “real openness” can yield in fact an opposite, and potentially more severe, bias. What
AC do not recognize is that the actual null hypothesis that is tested is that trade does not
cause productivity. Under that null, AC’s real openness measure generates a positive
correlation between income and openness that is entirely spurious. In effect, the AC
adjustment has the consequence that any and all increases in the productivity of tradables,
regardless of source, can produce a rise in their measure of openness. Any increase in
tradables productivity, whether driven by trade or not, will raise nontradables prices at home
and the price level of an economy relative to others. “Adjusting” for this by using PPP GDP
as the denominator drives up measured openness. The conventional measure of openness
does not suffer from that shortcoming, and hence is preferable. We explain and illustrate this
point in Appendix A using a simple model. We show, under fairly innocuous assumptions,
that conventional openness will yield less biased results than real openness when productivity
in the tradables sector is driven by non-trade factors.

The empirical counterpart of this point is that the AC measure of openness is much more
strongly correlated with income levels than the conventional measure of openness. Note that
real openness (Ropen) and openness (Open) are linked by the identity log Ropen = log Open
+ log P, where P is a country’s price level. We know from the Balassa-Samuelson argument
that P has a close relationship to a country’s income/productivity level. This is confirmed by
the scatter plot in Figure (4), which shows the difference between these two measures (i.e.,
log openness – log “real openness”) plotted against income. The correlation is extremely
high (ρ = 0.75). Under the null hypothesis that trade does not cause productivity, this
association is spurious. And even under the null that trade does cause productivity, the
observed association would be biased upwards unless the only cause of productivity changes
is trade (see Appendix A).13
13
   Indeed the AC argument that the true relationship between trade and productivity can be
ascertained only by holding the price level constant suggests estimating a more general
framework of the kind: log y = α + β1 log Open + β2 log P + v. When we do so, using an
instrument set close to that in AC, we find that the coefficient on openness is negative and
                                                                                    (continued)
                                               16




Our second point relates to the choice between real openness and openness on econometric
grounds. Recall that the authors’ original argument on behalf of Ropen is based on the idea
that there is reverse causality from productivity to Open, via the price level. If the Frankel-
Romer constructed trade share is a valid instrument, in the sense of being uncorrelated with
productivity through any channel other than trade, any type of reverse causality—positive or
negative—is already taken care of. The reverse causality that AC worry about should be
handled by the instrument as well! For the authors’ argument to be valid, instrumentation
should fail when Open is used, but work when Ropen is used (even though the same
instruments are used in both cases). The authors do not provide any justification for this, and
it is unclear to us that any justification could be produced.

Moreover, it is possible that the AC strategy does exactly the reverse and that it weakens the
instrument. As we mentioned above, we were unable to obtain AC’s data and could not
replicate their results exactly. But in our attempted replications of their baseline
specification, we repeatedly found that the first-stage F statistics were lower, sometimes
substantially so, when real openness was used in lieu of openness. In fact, the F-statistic was
typically below 10 when real openness was used (and always above 10 when openness was
used).14 On this ground alone, then, the AC strategy introduces an additional distortion to the
estimation.15

In sum, we do not find the case for “real openness” particularly compelling. We worry that
the “more robust” results that AC claim for it derive from the interaction of strong reverse
causality with imperfections of the instrument.

insignificant, and that on the price level positive and highly significant. The comparable
equation estimated with real openness yields a coefficient that is positive and significant.
Whatever effect Ropen has on productivity, it seems to be operating via P, not via Open. So
this more general framework yields little evidence that there is a significant causal effect
from openness to productivity, holding the price level constant. Indeed, if we are to interpret
these results literally, they suggest that causality runs from the price level to productivity.
14
  Staiger and Stock (1997) recommend a threshold value of 10 for the F-statistic to be
confident that the instruments retain their validity. These results are available upon request.
15
  A little exploration reveals why the instruments work much better with openness than with
real openness. The first stage regressions associated with estimating the equation described in
footnote 13, which is based on the decomposition of real openness into openness and price,
show that the first-stage for the price level equation has an F-statistic of 1.92. Apparently,
the instruments do much worse with real openness because of the very weak correlation
between the instrument set and the price level. Another issue is why AC use such an odd
instrument list, entering the levels of population and land area, as well as their logs, whereas
the second-stage equation has only the logs. It is hard to defend the idea that the level of land
area, say, can be safely excluded from the second stage when its log belongs in it.
                                                17




C. Dollar and Kraay (DK, 2002)
Recently DK have analyzed the interaction between institutions, trade, and growth.16 They do
so by estimating both level regressions and regressions where the dependent variable is the
change in the growth rate of income. Their main argument for undertaking the second
approach is the alleged multicollinearity between instruments for institutions and trade that
militates against a proper disentangling of the two effects. That is, although institutions and
trade are jointly significant in level regressions, it is difficult to identify the strength of the
individual effects. Since our own results do not suggest multicollinearity to be a problem, we
discuss the reasons for the difference.

Level regressions: Equation (1) in Table 7, which reproduces equation 12 in table 1 of DK, is
the prime exhibit for their contention that the individual effects of trade and institutions
cannot be disentangled. The estimated coefficients on institutions and trade are both
insignificant which is allegedly a reflection of multicollinearity. (But notice that the
coefficient on openness is negative!) It should be noted that DK follow AC by measuring
integration as “real openness.” In the subsequent columns labeled with asterisks, we show
how non-robust this finding is, and conversely how robust is the finding relating to the
primacy of institutions. Either deleting population from the DK specification (which is
insignificant in any case) as in column (1) * or replacing “real openness” with openness
(columns (1)**, (1)***, and (1)****) restores the importance of institutions (and with a
vengeance as the very high t-values indicate), while openness remains insignificant. Also
from Table 6, we know that our preferred specification is unaffected by inclusion of
geography variables and by the use of “real openness.”

Moreover, DK’s own results with their larger, 134-country sample are fully consistent with
ours: institutions are significant, “real openness” is not. This is shown in equation (2) in
Table 7, which reproduces column (6) in DK’s Table 1. DK argue that that the significance
of the institutions variable in this larger sample is not robust to the exclusion of the 4 neo-
European countries. (See equation (3) in Table 6, which corresponds to DK’s column (7) in
Table 1). DK provide no justification for why it is appropriate to exclude the neo-European
countries from this sample. We have already established for our preferred sample (Table 3)
that: (i) our results are robust to the exclusion of influential observations; (ii) there is no
statistical reason to exclude the neo-European countries; and (iii) nevertheless, excluding
them leaves our results unchanged. The columns with asterisks in Table 7 confirm this. In the
larger sample with neo-Europes (columns (2)*, (2)**, and (2)***) as well as in the sample
without neo-Europes (columns (3)* and (3)**) institutions trump integration if the DK
equations are estimated without population or if openness is used to replace “real openness”.
Thus, the case that multicollinearity blurs the individual effects of trade and institutions is a
hard one to make: it requires us to favor a problematic specification with an arbitrarily
selected sample over all others, and to disregard much evidence to the contrary.

16
     Unlike EL, FR and our paper, DK place less emphasis on geography.
                                               18




Change regressions: The DK change regressions are difficult to understand. The measures
for institutional quality are puzzling and arbitrary, and the identification strategy not clearly
justified. In Panel B of Table 7, we reproduce regressions involving each of their institutional
variables. In each case, we re-estimate the equation adding time-region dummies. In every
instance, the coefficients on real openness cease to be significant. What the results
essentially indicate is that the 1980s were a lousy decade for Africa and Latin America and a
good decade for Asia; there is no other information in these regressions beyond that.17


                                IV. What Does It All Mean?

In this section, we evaluate and interpret our results further. This also gives us an
opportunity to make some additional comments on the related literature. We group the
comments under three headings. First, we argue that an instrumentation strategy should not
be confused with building and testing theories. Second, we relate our discussion on
institutions to the discussion on “policies.” Third, we discuss the operational implications of
the results.

A. An instrument does not a theory make
Insofar as our results emphasize the supremacy of institutions, they are very close to those in
AJR. Note that we have gone beyond AJR by using larger sample sizes, and by including
measures of integration in our estimation. We want to highlight another possible difference,
having to do with the interpretation of the results. In particular, we want to emphasize the
distinction between using an instrument to identify an exogenous source of variation in the
independent variable of interest and laying out a full theory of cause and effect. In our view,
this distinction is not made adequately clear in AJR and is arguably blurred by Easterly and
Levine (2002).

One reading of the AJR paper, and the one strongly suggested by their title—“The Colonial
Origins of Comparative Development”—is that they regard experience under the early period
of colonization as a fundamental determinant of current income levels. While the AJR paper
is certainly suggestive on this score, in our view this interpretation of the paper’s central

17
  More broadly, as Lant Pritchett has pointed out in his comments on the paper, the DK
regressions are simply uninformative. That is, running these particular regressions with these
instrument sets provides little information that would alter one’s priors one way or the other.
The appropriateness of some of the measures of institutional quality used by DK—
revolutions and coups and war deaths, for example—is not clear, and it is highly doubtful
that these are adequate instruments for measuring institutional change over time. Even
leaving aside the insignificance of trade once time-region dummies are included, the
instruments for institutions are simply too weak in these decadal regressions for the results to
be of much use.
                                               19




message would not be entirely correct. One problem is that AJR do not carry out a direct test
of the impact of colonial policies and institutions. Furthermore, if colonial experience were
the key determinant of income levels, how would we account for the variation in incomes
among countries that had never been colonized by the Europeans?

To illustrate the second point, Figure 5 presents histograms of per-capita incomes for 163
countries for which we have data on per-capita GDP in 1995. The sample is split into two
groups, a group of 103 countries that were colonized by one of the major Western European
powers sometime before the twentieth century, and a group of 60 countries that were not
colonized. The latter group includes some very high-income countries such as Finland and
Luxembourg as well very poor countries such as Ethiopia,18 Yemen, and Mongolia.
(Afghanistan is another low-income non-colonized country, but we do not have income data
for it.) As the figure reveals, the dispersion of incomes within the colonized sample is not
hugely different than that in the non-colonized sample. The standard deviations of log
income per capita are 1.01 and 0.89 for the colonized and non-colonized samples,
respectively. The income gaps that separate Ethiopia from Turkey, or China from
Luxembourg are huge, and can obviously not be explained by any of these countries’
colonial experience.

Where the AJR paper is successful is in the use of a plausible instrument to identify the
causal relationship between institutional quality and income levels. An instrument is
something that simply has some desirable statistical properties. It need not be a large part of
the causal story. To illustrate the distinction between a theory and an instrument, here is an
analogy that draws on a well-known paper by Angrist and Krueger (1991).

Angrist and Krueger (1991) use quarter of birth as an instrument for the level of educational
attainment, to disentangle the effects of schooling on personal earnings from those of
unobserved attributes (such as “ability”). The story is that compulsory schooling
requirements, requiring schooling until age 16 or 17, interacting with school-entry
requirements, imply variation in the level of schooling that is correlated with quarter of birth
but not with other personal attributes. The authors show for example that students born in
the first quarter of the year have a systematically lower level of average schooling in the
population. This is a plausible strategy for identification, but it obviously does not imply a




18
   Ethiopia was included in the AJR sample of colonies, even though this country has never
been colonized. (It was occupied for a period of several years by Italy during 1936-1941, but
this neither counts as colonization, nor could have had much to do with the settler mortality
rates from the 19th century.) Excluding Ethiopia from the AJR sample makes no difference
to the basic AJR results—and in fact it improves these results, as eyeballing AJR’s Figure 1
and 2 would indicate.
                                                20




quarter-of-birth theory of earnings. Similarly, the AJR strategy does not amount to a direct
test of a colonial-origins theory of development.19

Easterly and Levine (2002) also assign a causal role to the settler mortality instrument and
interpret it as a geographical determinant of institutions such as “crops and germs,” rather
than viewing it as a device to capture the exogenous source of variation in institutions.
Indeed, although they stress the role of institutions, they appear to come close to a geography
theory of development. Thus, both AJR and EL tend to elevate settler mortality beyond its
status as an instrument, with AJR favoring a colonial view of development and EL a
geography-based theory of development.

B. The primacy of institutional quality does not imply policy ineffectiveness
Easterly and Levine (2002) assert that (macroeconomic) policies do not have an effect on
incomes, once institutions are controlled for. Our view on the effectiveness of policy is
similar to that expressed in AJR (1999, 1395): there are “substantial economic gains from
improving institutions, for example as in the case of Japan during the Meiji Restoration or
South Korea during the 1960s” or, one may add, China since the late 1970s. The distinction
between institutions and policies is murky, as these examples illustrate. The reforms that
Japan, South Korea, and China undertook were policy innovations that eventually resulted in
a fundamental change in the institutional underpinning of their economies.

We find it helpful to think of policy as a flow variable, in contrast to institutions, which is a
stock variable. We can view institutions as the cumulative outcome of past policy actions.
Letting pi denote policy on dimension i (i = fiscal, trade, monetary, etc.), I institutional
quality, and δ the rate at which institutional quality decays absent countervailing action, the
evolution of institutional quality over time can be written as I& = ∑ α i pi − δI , where αi
denotes the impact of policy i on institutional quality.

This suggests that it is inappropriate to regress income levels on institutional quality and
policies, as Easterly and Levine (2002) do. The problem is not just that incomes move
slowly while policies can take sudden turns. In principle this could be addressed by taking
long-term averages of policies. (Easterly and Levine average their policy measures over a

19
  AJR themselves are somewhat ambiguous about this. They motivate settler mortality as an
instrument, but then their account gravitates towards a colonial origins theory of institutional
development. And their title strongly suggests that they consider the contribution of their
paper to have been a theory as opposed to an identification strategy. In personal
communication, one of the authors has explained that the colonial experience allows them to
exploit the exogenous source of variation in institutions and not all the variation. The fit of
the first-stage regressions of about 25 percent leaves room for most of the variation to be
explained by factors other than colonization.
                                               21




number of decades.) It is that measures of institutional quality already contain all the
relevant information about the impact of policies. If the appropriate specification for income
is ln y = βI + u, the effect of policies should be sought in a regression of the form dln y/ dt =
 βI& + v = α 0 + β ∑ α i pi + v . In other words, one should look for the effect of policies in a
regression of growth of income on policies.

Moreover, a geography theory of institutions can understate the impact that policies can play
in changing them over time. As an empirical matter, institutions have changed remarkably in
the last three decades. For example, one indicator of institutional quality—the index
measuring the constraint on the executive in the Gurr Polity IV dataset, which is available on
a consistent basis for several decades—shows a marked improvement between the 1970s and
1990s. For 71 countries in our core sample, this index had a mean value of 3.21 in the 1970s,
3.52 in the 1980s, and 4.37 in the 1990s. A purely geographical theory of institutions would
have difficulty in accounting for these changes. Indeed, if the first stage regressions reported
in Panel C of Table 2 are run over the last three decades, the coefficient on settler mortality,
declines from 0.94 in the 1970s to 0.87 in the 1980s and 0.71 in the 1990s, illustrating the
mutability of institutions, and the declining importance of history (on the AJR interpretation
of settler mortality) or geography (on the EL interpretation of settler mortality) in explaining
the cross-national variation in institutions.

C. The hard work is still ahead
How much guidance do our results provide to policymakers who want to improve the
performance of their economies? Not much at all. Sure, it is helpful to know that geography
is not destiny, or that focusing on increasing the economy’s links with world markets is
unlikely to yield convergence. But the operational guidance that our central result on the
primacy of institutional quality yields is extremely meager.

Our indicators of institutional quality are investors’ and other observers’ ratings of the
institutional environment. They quantify these observers’ views as to the likelihood that
investors will retain the fruits of their investments, the chances that the state will expropriate
them, or that the legal system will protect their property rights. While it is important to know
that these ratings matter—and matter a great deal in fact—it remains unclear how the
underlying evaluations and perceptions can be altered. In terms of the formulation developed
above, what we have estimated is β, while what policy makers need to know are the αi
(policy impacts) for the policies at their disposal. In fact, since our identification strategies
rely on exogenous sources of variation in these evaluations, they are doubly unhelpful from a
policy perspective.

We illustrate the difficulty of extracting policy-relevant information from our findings using
the example of property rights. Obviously, the presence of clear property rights for investors
is a key, if not the key, element in the institutional environment that shapes economic
performance. Our findings indicate that when investors believe their property rights are
protected, the economy ends up richer. But nothing is implied about the actual form that
property rights should take. We cannot even necessarily deduce that enacting a private
                                               22




property-rights regime would produce superior results compared to alternative forms of
property rights.

If this seems stretching things too far, consider the experiences of China and Russia. China
still retains a socialist legal system, while Russia has a regime of private property rights in
place. Despite the absence of formal private property rights, Chinese entrepreneurs have felt
sufficiently secure to make large investments, making that country the world’s fastest
growing economy over the last two decades. In Russia, by contrast, investors have felt
insecure, and private investment has remained low. Our institutional quality indicators bear
this out, with Russia scoring considerably lower than China despite a formal legal regime
that is much more in line with European norms than China’s. Credibly signaling that
property rights will be protected is apparently more important than enacting them into law as
a formal private property rights regime.

So our findings do not map into a determinate set of policy desiderata. Indeed, there is
growing evidence that desirable institutional arrangements have a large element of context
specificity, arising from differences in historical trajectories, geography, political economy,
or other initial conditions. As argued in Mukand and Rodrik (2002), this could help explain
why successful developing countries—China, South Korea, and Taiwan among others—have
almost always combined unorthodox elements with orthodox policies. It could also account
for why important institutional differences persist among the advanced countries of North
America, Western Europe, and Japan—in the role of the public sector, the nature of the legal
systems, corporate governance, financial markets, labor markets, and social insurance
mechanisms, among others.

It is important to underscore that this does not mean economic principles work differently in
different places. We need to make a distinction between economic principles and their
institutional embodiment. Most first-order economic principles come institution-free.
Economic ideas such as incentives, competition, hard-budget constraints, sound money,
fiscal sustainability, property rights do not map directly into institutional forms. Property
rights can be implemented through common law, civil law, or, for that matter, Chinese-type
socialism. Competition can be maintained through a combination of free entry and laissez-
faire, or through a well-functioning regulatory authority. Macroeconomic stability can be
achieved under a variety of fiscal institutions. Institutional solutions that perform well in one
setting may be inappropriate in other setting without the supporting norms and
complementary institutions. In the words of Douglass North:

       “economies that adopt the formal rules of another economy will have very different
       performance characteristics than the first economy because of different informal
       norms and enforcement. The implication is that transferring the formal political and
       economic rules of successful Western economies to third-world and Eastern European
       economies is not a sufficient condition for good economic performance.” (North
       1994, 366)
                                             23




In addition, since policy makers always operate in second-best environments, optimal reform
trajectories—even in apparently straightforward cases such as price reform—cannot be
designed without regard to prevailing conditions and without weighting the consequences for
multiple distorted margins.

Consequently, there is much to be learned still about what improving institutional quality
means on the ground. This, we would like to suggest, is a wide open area of research.
Cross-national studies of the present type are just a beginning that point us in the right
direction.
              Figure 1: The “deep” determinants of income



                               income level



                                     (4)         (7)   (8)         (9)




                                                                              - 24 -
                   (1)                                   (5)
endogenous                        integration                  institutions
                                                         (6)


                         (2)               (3)




             geography
exogenous
Figure 2: Simple Correlations between Income and its Determinants.
(Sample of 80 countries for (a), (b), and (c); sample of 140 countries for (d), (e), and (f))
                                                            Log Real GDP per capita in 1995                                   Linear prediction                                                                                            Log Real GDP per capita in 1995                           Linear prediction
                                                                                                                                                                   USA   SGP                                                                                                                                                        LUX
                                  10.2414                                                                                                                    HKG                                                  10.4544
                                                                                                                                                                     CAN
                                                                                                                                                                     AUS                                                                                                                                                     USA SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        HKG     NOR  CHE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  KWT        JPNDNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               AUS
                                                                                                                                            BHS                      NZL                                                                                                                                 ITA    QAT FRABEL DEU NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            BHSCYP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ISROMN        IRL NZL
                                                                                                                                      MLT           BRB                                                                                                                                                            ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TWN
Log Real GDP per capita in 1995




                                                                                                                                                                                Log Real GDP per capita in 1995
                                                                                                                                                 MUS                                                                                                                                                  CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BHRKORMLT PRT BRB
                                                                                                             ARG                                                                                                                                                                             SAU      GRC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MUS
                                                                                                                  TTO URY
                                                                                                                MYS                                    CHL                                                                                                                                   ARG            SYC
                                                                                              GAB
                                                                                               MEXBRA ZAF                                                                                                                                                                                        TTO URYHUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MYS                 CHL
                                                                                    VEN                                 BLZ                                                                                                                                     RUS        GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MEX        ZAF          POL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  THA
                                                                                     COL FJI
                                                                                   PRY                PAN             CRI TUN                                                                                                                                     VEN              TUR BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 BRA                     BLZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   COL FJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 PRY                PANLBN SWZ         BWATUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CRI
                                                                                DZA      SLVPER                                                                                                                                                                              IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CUB     ROM
                                                                               GTM              JAM                                                                                                                                                           DZA     SLVPER                           JOR           NAM
                                                                                  IDNECU          PNG    DOM EGY MAR                                                                                                                                         GTM          SYRJAM        DOMCPV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             EGY MAR
                                                                                                  LKA                                                                                                                                                           IDNECU          PNG
                                                                                                           GUY                                                                                                                                                       ALB PHL LKA
                                                                                          GIN BOL                                                                                                                                                                                          GUY
                                                                                                     DJI                                                                                                                                                      ZWE       GIN BOL   CHN
                                                                             HND
                                                                              MMR PAKNIC                                                                                                                                                                                           DJI
                                                                                                              IND
                                                                              CMR           CIV                                                                                                                                                             MMR NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           HND
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    PAK CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  LSO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        COM IND
                                                                   HTI                    VNM                                                                                                                                                               CMR
                                                                            COG       LAOSUR
                                                                                     BGD              SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 HTI                    VNM
                                                                                          MRT                                                                                                                                                             COG       LAOSUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BGD
                                                                  AGO     KEN SDN                      GHA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              AGO       GNQ             MRT KHM SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NPL            GHA         MNG
                                                                                          BEN            GMB
                                                                                                         CAF                                                                                                                                            KEN SDN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BEN             GMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        CAF
                                                                  GNB             TCDBFA        SLE                                                                                                                                                             TCDBFA         MOZ
                                                                          RWA
                                                                           NER     TGO  UGA
                                                                                        MLI                                                                                                                                                   GNB                TGOMDG      SLE
                                                                             BDI       MDG                                                                                                                                                              RWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          YEM         MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      UGA   ZMB
                                                                            NGA                                                                                                                                                                            BDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              MWI
                                                                                                             ETH                                                                                                                                                                 ETH
                                                                                                                      TZA                                                                                                                                                                   TZA


                                               ZAR                                                                                                                                                                            ZAR
                                  5.77144                                                                                                                                                                         5.77144
                                        -2.16573                                                                                                                   1.84514                                              -2.08859                                                                                                    1.90945
                                                                                                       Rule of Law                                                                                                                                                             Rule of Law
                                                                                                  (a)                                                                                                                                                                      (d)
                                                            Log Real GDP per capita in 1995                                   Linear prediction                                                                                            Log Real GDP per capita in 1995                           Linear prediction
                                                USA                                                                                                                      SGP                                                                                                                                        LUX
                                  10.2414                                                                                                                HKG                                                      10.4544
                                                                                    AUS          CAN                                                                                                                            USA                                                                                                       SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CHE                                    HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JPN             AUS        CAN SWE DNKNOR          KWT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  NLDBEL
                                                                                                       NZL                                                                                                                                                                 DEU         ISL
                                                                                                               BHS                                                                                                                                              FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ITA          FIN AUT QAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               NZL    BHSOMN CYP IRL
                                                                                                                                     BRB                 MLT                                                                                             ESP                          ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TWN
Log Real GDP per capita in 1995




                                                                                                                                                                                Log Real GDP per capita in 1995
                                                                                                                            MUS                                                                                                                                          KOR PRT                     CZE BRB              BHR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GRC                                                            MLT
                                               ARG                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SAU MUS
                                                                                    URY CHL                                    MYS
                                                                                                                             TTO                                                                                               ARG                                                                    SYC
                                                                                                                             GAB                                                                                                                               URY CHL                   HUN         MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TTO
                                                      BRA               MEX                            ZAF
                                                                                             VEN                                     BLZ                                                                                                               MEX                 THAZAF RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         POL                       GAB
                                                                              COL                                     PAN                                                                                                             BRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        TUR                               VEN                   BGR
                                                                                           PRY         TUN
                                                                                                       CRI                    FJI                                                                                                                                                                          BLZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           COL         PRY          TUN      PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               BWA                      SWZ
                                                                                     PER         SLV
                                                                                                   DZA                                                                                                                                                             IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ROM         CUB CRI         LBNFJI
                                                                                     GTM                               JAM                                                                                                                                       PER           SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                DZA             NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 JOR
                                                                                         IDNECU
                                                                                             MARDOM
                                                                                               EGY                  PNG                                                                                                                                          GTM                           JAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ECUSYR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             DOM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            EGY  CPV
                                                                                                                   LKA                                                                                                                                               IDN MAR                PNG
                                                                                                                                      GUY                                                                                                                              PHL            ALBLKA
                                                                                                 GINBOL                                                                                                                                                                                                     GUY
                                                                                                                              DJI                                                                                             CHN                                          GINBOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               ZWE
                                                             MMR                                             NIC
                                                                                                             HND                                                                                                                                                                                     DJI
                                              IND                              PAK                         CIV                                                                                                                                                                    NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  HND                    LSO
                                                                                                  CMR                                                                                                                         IND             MMR            PAK                 COM CIV
                                                                                          HTI             VNM                                                                                                                                                              CMR
                                                            BGD                                          LAO                   SUR
                                                                                                                             COG                                                                                                                                   HTI               VNM
                                                                                                       SEN            MRT                                                                                                                  BGD                                      LAO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SEN             COG SUR
                                                                                           GHA          AGO
                                                                                                        KEN                                                                                                                                                          GHA                     MRTMNG
                                                                          SDN                                                 GMB                                                                                                                       NPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SDN                    KHMAGO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KEN             GNQ
                                                                                                   BENCAF                                                                                                                                                                    BENCAF                 GMB
                                                                                  BFA SLE
                                                                                      TCDGNB                                                                                                                                                                    BFA SLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    TCD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MOZ
                                                                              RWA UGANERMLI                            TGO                                                                                                                                 RWA UGA      GNB YEM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MLI                    TGO
                                                                               BDI MDG
                                                                                     NGA                                                                                                                                                                     BDI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NER
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  MDG                         ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 MWI
                                                              ETH                                                                                                                                                                             ETH
                                                                                     TZA                                                                                                                                                                         TZA


                                                                                      ZAR                                                                                                                                                                          ZAR
                                  5.77144                                                                                                                                                                         5.77144
                                            2.55341                                                                                                                5.77982                                                  2.55341                                                                                                 5.77982
                                                                                                   Log Openness                                                                                                                                                              Log Openness
                                                                                                  (b)                                                                                                                                                                      (e)
                                                            Log Real GDP per capita in 1995                                   Linear prediction                                                                                            Log Real GDP per capita in 1995                           Linear prediction
                                                SGP                                                                                                      USA                                                                                                                                                      LUX
                                  10.2414                                                                    HKG                                                                                                  10.4544
                                                                                                                                                 AUS                     CAN                                                   SGP                                                             USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    HKG                                   CHE                     NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                KWT      JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         AUS             CAN           DNK
                                                                                                                    BHS                                        NZL                                                                                                    QAT                        ITA         AUTBEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             FRA  NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  DEU
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GBR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    OMN                 CYP     NZL                 IRL
                                                                                BRB                                                              MLT                                                                                                                               ISR         ESP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      TWN
Log Real GDP per capita in 1995




                                                                                                                                                                                Log Real GDP per capita in 1995




                                                                                                       MUS                                                                                                                                             BRB              BHR                KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            PRT                 CZE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MLTGRC
                                                                                                                                            ARG                                                                                                                  MUS SAU
                                                      MYS                TTO                                                                 URY
                                                                                                                                           CHL                                                                                       SYC                                               ARG
                                              GAB                                                                                                                                                                                   MYS     TTO                                        URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CHL        HUN
                                                                                      BRA           MEX              ZAF
                                                                       VEN                      BLZ                                                                                                                           GAB                        MEX     ZAF                                                    POL RUS
                                                       COL         PAN
                                                                     CRI                          FJI               PRY                            TUN                                                                                     VEN THABRABLZ                              TUR BGR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     COL PAN                      SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                BWA               TUN
                                                                                 SLV
                                                                               PER                                                                 DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CRI           FJI   CUBPRY         LBNIRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             ROM
                                                                                   GTM           JAM                                                                                                                                             SLV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               PER           NAM          JOR     DZA
                                              ECU            IDN    PNG                          DOM                          EGY          MAR                                                                                                    GTM  JAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ECU                 CPV DOM                   SYR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       EGY MAR
                                                             LKA                                                                                                                                                                      IDN PNG
                                                             GUY                                                                                                                                                                      LKA         PHL                                    ALB
                                                                GIN           BOL                                                                                                                                                     GUY GIN
                                                                    DJI                                                                                                                                                                               ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     BOL                              CHN
                                                                      NIC HND MMR                                                                                                                                                             DJI
                                                                                                                             IND           PAK                                                                                                 NICHND                  LSO
                                                    CMR CIV                                                                                                                                                                                  COM     MMR             IND    PAK
                                                        SUR
                                                                                  HTI                     VNM BGD                                                                                                                 CMRCIV                HTI VNM
                                                      COG                 SEN LAO MRT                                                                                                                                               SUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   COG            SEN LAO     BGD
                                                KEN     GHA AGO                                                                                                                                                                     GHA AGO KHM        MRT
                                                      CAF BEN           GMB SDN                                                                                                                                                KENGNQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                GMBSDN              NPL                          MNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   CAFBEN
                                                              SLE GNBBFA
                                                                     TCD                                                                                                                                                                       BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               TCD               MOZ
                                              UGA
                                               RWA        TGO         MLI
                                                                        NER                                                                                                                                                           TGOSLE GNB
                                                    BDI                           MDG                                                                                                                                         UGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RWA             MLI ZMB MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                NERYEM
                                                                NGA                                                                                                                                                               BDI     NGA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                MWI
                                                                    ETH                                                                                                                                                                   ETH
                                                             TZA                                                                                                                                                                      TZA


                                                       ZAR                                                                                                                                                                           ZAR
                                  5.77144                                                                                                                                                                         5.77144
                                               0                                                                                                                           45                                                  0                                                                                                          64
                                                                                                Distance from Equator                                                                                                                                                    Distance from Equator
                                                                                                  (c)                                                                                                                                                                       (f)
Figure 3: Conditional Correlations between Income and its Determinants.
(Sample of 80 countries for (a), (b), and (c); sample of 140 countries for (d), (e), and (f))
                                                                      Residuals                                                   Linear prediction                                                                                                                  Residuals                                               Linear prediction
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    LUX
                                             2.63362                                                                                                             CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2.75239
                                                                                                                                                                                      MLT
e( lcgdp95 | X,RuleLawHat ) + b*RuleLawHat




                                                                                                                                                                                            e( lcgdp95 | X,RuleLawHat ) + b*RuleLawHat
                                                                                                                                               USA HKG                    NZL
                                                                                                                                                     AUS                                                                                                                                                                        NOR
                                                                                                                                  BHS                                                                                                                                                                                          DNK
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                CHEBEL   ISL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SGP                HKG      KWT                    NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              SWEFIN AUT
                                                                                                                       SGP                                                                                                                                                                           QAT             USA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              FRA DEU                      GBRIRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         JPN            ITA CYP
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          ISR          AUS CAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BHS NZL
                                                                                                                       BRB               URY
                                                                                                                                       MUS                                                                                                                                                   OMN                   MLTCZE
                                                                                                                               ARG                                                                                                                                                                    BHR
                                                                                                                                CHL                TUN                                                                                                                                  TWN        KOR GRC ESP PRTBRB
                                                                                                                        BLZ                                                                                                                                                           SAU       MUS                  HUN
                                                                                                                                        ZAF
                                                                                                                                        DZA                                                                                                                                     SYC
                                                                                                           TTO                                                                                                                                                                                     ARG          URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TTOBGR POLBLZ
                                                                                                                       PRY        MAR       FJI                                                                                                               MYSGAB                                  CHL
                                                                                                    MEX   MYS                  EGY                                                                                                                                                   ZAF            SWZTUNRUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   TUR       LBN
                                                                                                           SLV
                                                                                                     CRI DOM                                                                                                                                                        THA          MEX       BWA              JORROM
                                                                                GAB            PAN       JAM
                                                                                                VEN
                                                                                              BRA         GTM                                                                                                                                                             BRA VENFJIPRY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CRINAM IRN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CUBDZA SYR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             SLV
                                                                                                                                      DJIPAK                                                                                                                         COL                       CPV                 JAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   ALB
                                                                                        COLPER                                                                                                                                                                          PER           GTMEGY MAR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               DOM
                                                                                                      GUY
                                                                                                       HND                                                                                                                                                      PNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                ECUPHL
                                                                                    GINPNGLKANIC BOL
                                                                                                     HTI  IND                                                                                                                                         IDN      LKA      GIN ZWE        DJI         GUY
                                                                                       ECU           LAO MMR
                                                                                                         BGD                                                                                                                                                                BOL COM  CHN       LSO
                                                                          IDN                 MRTVNM                                                                                                                                                                                  NIC   HND
                                                                                             SEN       SUR                                                                                                                                                              MMR                PAK
                                                                              GMB                                                                                                                                                                               CIV SUR IND        HTI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   LAO
                                                                      CIV CMR COG               SDN                                                                                                                                                          CMR              VNM                              MNG
                                                                                      BEN       GNB                                                                                                                                                                COG       SEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           GNQ   BGD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   MRT  NPL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 GHA SDN KHM         GMB
                                                                      GHA    AGO                                                                                                                                                                               AGO         BEN
                                                                               SLE
                                                                             TGO   BFA
                                                                                  TCD                                                                                                                                                                     KEN CAF
                                                                           CAF
                                                                            KEN MDG
                                                                               NER                                                                                                                                                                                        TGO GNBMOZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         SLE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      BFA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     TCD    YEM
                                                               MLI          RWA
                                                                              BDI                                                                                                                                                                              RWABDI MLI ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      NERMDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         UGA
                                                          NGA         UGA                          ETH                                                                                                                                                        NGA     MWI
                                                                              TZA                                                                                                                                                                                  ETH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  TZA


                                                                          ZAR                                                                                                                                                                               ZAR
                                             -3.43054                                                                                                                                                                                    -2.73599
                                                    -1.34806                                                                                                                 1.2388                                                             -1.12117                                                                                                  1.99278
                                                                                                     Predicted Rule of Law                                                                                                                                                                      Predicted Rule of Law
                                                                                                       (a)                                                                                                                                                                                           (d)
                                                                      Residuals                                                   Linear prediction                                                                                                                  Residuals                                               Linear prediction
                                                          USA                                                                   GAB                                                                                                                                                                                            SGP
                                             -.534702       BRA                                                                                                                                                                          1.38119
e( lcgdp95 | X,LogOpenHat ) + b*LogOpenHat




                                                                                                                                                                                            e( lcgdp95 | X,LogOpenHat ) + b*LogOpenHat
                                                                     IDN
                                                                       MEX
                                                                        ARG
                                                                                            COL
                                                                                              VEN                                      BHS                             SGP                                                                                                  JPN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       MYS             HKG
                                                                         CAN MCHL                                       PAN
                                                                          AUS LI              PNG    CIV                                                   BRB
                                                                      NGA                                        GIN                  TTO                                                                                                                                                                           GAB
                                                                                      PER                                                                                                                                                                                                THA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          IDN                        TWN
                                                                                                                                                     HKG                                                                                                                                         SAU                  OMNKWT
                                                                                              PRY        ECU                                                                                                                                            BRA
                                                                                                         URY
                                                                                                       GHA                     CRI                                                                                                                                                             ITA                                   QAT SYC
                                                                                                        CMR                     MYS                                                                                                                                           COL
                                                                                                                                         MUS                                                                                                                        MEX
                                                                                                                 JAM                                                BLZ                                                                                              USA         VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ZAF PNG KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        ECU
                                                                                           NZL               LKA DOM                                                                                                                                                          PER                LKA            MUS            ISR
                                                                                        AGO                                     GMB
                                                                                                                                  SLV                                                                                                                                                                                                BHR
                                                                                     BOL                                                                                                                                                                                ARG          PHLPRY             FJI                   CYP
                                                                                                                        GTM                                                                                                                                                   AUS                              GRC
                                                                                              ZAFCAF
                                                                                             DZA
                                                                                           EGY                        NIC                                                                                                                                                              ESP
                                                                                MDG              KEN                    COG                                                                                                                                                  CAN                         CRIPAN  DNK
                                                                                           MARUGA                                                                                                                                                                           CHL                          NOR BWA
                                                               IND                  VNMNER                           TUN                                                                                                                                                                           SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CIV
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       CZE    GIN NLD
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              CHE
                                                                                        TCD                          SLE                                                                                                                                                         BOL IRN  FRA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         TUR              NAM                             MLT
                                                                                             BFA                 MRT          TGO                                                                                                                                                          ZWEKEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                PRT     FIN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        GTM                                                   LUX
                                                                                                                 SEN                                                                                                                                              RUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  IND               CUBMMR EGYDEU                          BEL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      CHN                                                    SLV                SWZ
                                                                                                                  HTI    RWA                                                                                                                                                                  URY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            AGO
                                                                                                                       BDI        BEN                                                                                                                                                       NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MARDZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                UGACAF GHA  TUN AUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              HUN ISLSUR     TTOBHS       BRB
                                                                                                  SDN                         HND GUY                                                                                                                                                                 DOM               CPV
                                                                                              TZA     MMR                 LAO FJI                                                                                                                                                     VNMSDN                      BGR
                                                                                               BGD                                                                                    MLT                                                                                                    POL                            COMLBN DJI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          KHM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     ROMSEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          NIC
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        BGDTCD           HTI     RWA SYR
                                                                                       PAK                                                                                                                                                                                        PAKNGA         BFA             LAO
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   GNQ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               MLI       LSOHND BDI        BEN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             NER        GBR  MRT  SLE
                                                                                       ZAR                                                                                                                                                                                          ETH         ZMB                      GUY                  BLZ
                                                                                                                                            GNB                                                                                                                                        MDG TZANPL    YEM                  TGO
                                                                                                                                              SUR                                                                                                                                             MWI                          IRL GMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MOZ                           JAMALB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          GNB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      ZAR
                                                                                                                                                                                DJI


                                                                                                     ETH                                                                                                                                                                                       MNG
                                             -4.03614                                                                                                                                                                                    -2.94622
                                                        2.97981                                                                                                            5.13125                                                                  2.90992                                                                                               5.38426
                                                                                                    Predicted Log Openness                                                                                                                                                                     Predicted Log Openness
                                                                                                       (b)                                                                                                                                                                                           (e)
                                                                      Residuals                                                   Linear prediction                                                                                                                  Residuals                                               Linear prediction
                                                          GAB                                                                                                                                                                                          SGP
                                             1.65837                                                                                                                                                                                     2.62421
                                                            SGP



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            HKG
e( lcgdp95 | X,disteq ) + b*disteq




                                                                                                                                                                                            e( lcgdp95 | X,disteq ) + b*disteq




                                                                 COL IDN PAN       BRB                                                                                                                                                                GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 JPN
                                                                   CIV       TTO                                                                                                                                                                             SYC
                                                          ECU                VEN                                                                                                                                                                                                THA            OMN     KWT
                                                               MYS         GIN                                                                                                                                                                                     IDN                           TWN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 QAT
                                                                           PNG         BRA                                                                                                                                                                                                      SAU
                                                               CMR GHA     CRI                                           BHS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           COL
                                                                                 MLI
                                                                           NGA PER             MEX                                                                                                                                                    ECU                  BRA                                   ITA
                                                                     LKA                   BLZ        HKG                                                                                                                                                     LKA PNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   VEN            MUS     BHR     ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PER        MEX     ZAF               KOR
                                                                 COG                                                                                                                                                                                                            FJI                     CYP
                                                            KEN CAF
                                                          UGA                      SLV
                                                                                   GMB            MUS                                                                                                                                                           PAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  CRI     PHL            PRY                USA
                                                                         AGO                                                                                                                                                                                                                               GRC
                                                           RWA       TGO             GTM     JAM                                                                                                                                                         CMRCIV   GIN                   BWA
                                                                                 NIC         DOM                                                              USA                                                                                                                                     ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       AUS
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        MLT    ESP         LUX
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       KEN
                                                               BDI   BEN SLE
                                                                     GUY                                                                           ARG                                                                                                                    GTM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     NAM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     CHL               CHE     NLD DNK
                                                                                                                         PRY
                                                                                                                                                  CHL                                                                                                      COG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            SUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            GHA    TTO BRB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        SLV BOL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            MMR           SWZ
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         BHS                          CAN    CZE                      NOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      SWE
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              TUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        IRN PRT           FRABEL
                                                                                         BOL
                                                                                                                                                      AUS                                                                                             UGA CAF AGO DJI CPV             CUB      EGY
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        FIN
                                                                                 TCD
                                                                                   NER
                                                                                 BFA                                                                URY                                                                                                              COM       DOM                    URY TUN
                                                                                     SEN                                                                                                                                                                 GNQ                                 IND                          AUT  DEU
                                                                                     HND     MRT                                                                                                                                                       RWA           KHM
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       NICSEN                        LBN DZA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     MAR         NZL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  BGR    HUN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ISL
                                                                     TZA                     MDG                                                                                                                                                                           SDN                                CHN                   RUS
                                                                   SUR                        HTI                        ZAF                                                                                                                             BDI BEN NGA TCD        HTI VNM           JOR
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SYR
                                                                                           LAOFJI  VNM                                                                                CAN                                                                    GUYSLE BFAHND LAOBLZ     BGD                                      POL
                                                                               GNB     SDN                                        EGY                                                                                                                        TGO       MLI
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        NER    MRT                                   ROM
                                                                               DJI       MMR                                                                                                                                                                            GMB                    LSO PAK
                                                                 ZAR                                                                                                                                                                                          TZA ETHGNB   ZMB
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           YEM
                                                                                                                                                  MAR MLT
                                                                                                                                                        TUN            NZL                                                                                              MWI    MDG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               JAM          NPL                               GBR
                                                                                                                                                        DZA                                                                                                                                                                      IRL
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ZAR                           MOZ                     ALB
                                                                                                                   BGD           IND


                                                                                ETH
                                                                                                                                                  PAK                                                                                                                                                                                MNG
                                             -2.64448                                                                                                                                                                                    -2.24563
                                                           0                                                                                                                          45                                                               0                                                                                                      64
                                                                                                     Distance from Equator                                                                                                                                                                      Distance from Equator
                                                                                                       (c)                                                                                                                                                                                           (f)



Note: The slopes of the linear prediction in (a), (b), and (c) above correspond to the
(unstandardized) coefficients in column (6) of Table 2, while those in (d), (e), and (f) correspond
to the (unstandardized) coefficients in column (9) of Table 2.
      Figure 4: “Real Openness,” Openness, and Income
(Difference between logs of “real openness” and openness on the vertical axis
             and log per capita PPP GDP on the horizontal axis)
                                     Figure 5: Distribution of incomes for colonized and non-colonized countries


                                  10.3875
Log Real GDP per capita in 1995




                                  5.83834
                                                    0                                      1
                                                                  colonized by Europeans
                                  Table 1. Descriptive Statistics

                  Panel A: Mean and Standard Deviations of Key Variables

                                                           Extended AJR           Large Sample
                                                              Sample
                                                           (80 countries)         (140 countries)
Log GDP per capita (PPP) in 1995 (LCGDP95)                      8.01                     8.40
                                                                1.05                     1.14

Rule of law (RULE)                                              -0.25                     0.89
                                                                0.85                      0.94

Log openness (LCOPEN)                                            3.94                     4.01
                                                                 0.60                     0.57

Distance from equator in degrees (DISTEQ)                       15.23                    23.60
                                                                11.16                    16.29

Log European settler mortality (LOGEM4)                          4.66                       ..
(deaths per annum per 1000 population)                           1.22                       ..

Log constructed openness (LOGFRANKROM)                           2.76                     2.92
                                                                 0.76                     0.80

Fraction of population speaking                                  0.30                     0.24
other European language (EURFRAC)                                0.41                     0.39

Fraction of population speaking                                  0.11                     0.08
English (ENGFRAC)                                                0.29                     0.24

Notes: Standard deviations are reported below the means. Rule of law ranges between -2.5 and +2.5. Openness is measured as the
ratio of trade to GDP. Constructed openness—the instrument for openness—is the predicted trade share and is from Frankel
and Romer (1999). Appendix B describes in detail all the data and their sources.
                                                    Panel B: Pairwise Correlations
                                                       (Sample of 80 countries)

                        LCGDP95        RULE        LCOPEN LOGFRANKROM DISTEQ LOGEM4                     EURFRAC       ENGFRAC
LCGDP95                       1

RULE                          0.763            1
                              0.000

LCOPEN                        0.260       0.263             1
                              0.020       0.018

LOGFRANKROM                  -0.043       0.026        0.734                      1
                              0.703       0.821        0.000

DISTEQ                        0.513       0.520       -0.207                -0.292        1
                              0.000       0.000        0.065                 0.009

LOGEM4                       -0.685      -0.540       -0.093                 0.155    -0.491       1
                              0.000       0.000        0.410                 0.169     0.000

EURFRAC                       0.612       0.438       -0.071                -0.128    0.276    -0.344             1
                              0.000       0.000        0.530                 0.258    0.013     0.002

ENGFRAC                       0.491       0.544        0.153                 0.018    0.303    -0.325       0.575           1
                              0.000       0.000        0.175                 0.876    0.006     0.003       0.000

Notes: p-values reported below the coefficients. Variables described in Appendix B.
Table 2: Determinants of Development: Core Specifications

                                                   AJR sample                                                 Extended AJR sample                                                          Large sample                              Extended AJR sample

                              log           log                    log                         log          log                         log                            log         log                         log
                             GDP           GDP                    GDP                         GDP          GDP                         GDP                            GDP         GDP                         GDP
Dependent variable
                             per           per                    per                          per          per                         per                           per         per                         per
                            capita        capita                 capita                       capita       capita                      capita                        capita      capita                      capita
                            1995          1995                   1995                         1995         1995                        1995                          1995        1995                        1995                    RULE           LCOPEN
                               (1)           (2)                     (3)                        (4)            (5)                      (6)                 (7)                      (8)                        (9)                   (10)            (11)
                                                                                                                            Panel A. Ordinary least squares

Geography (DISTEQ)           0.74         0.20                      0.32                      0.81         0.25                           0.36                       0.76         0.21                        0.24                    0.82            -0.72
                             (4.48)   *   (1.34)                    (1.85) **                 (5.35)   *   (1.85)     ***                 (2.37)     **              (10.59) *    (2.75) *                    (2.9)                   (5.71)    *     (-3.47) *
Institutions ( RULE)                      0.78                      0.69                                   0.79                           0.70                                    0.80                        0.77                                     0.57
                                          (7.56)     *              (6.07) *                               (8.96) *                       (6.86)     *                           (12.41) *                   (10.71) *                                (4.14) *
Integration (LCOPEN)                                                0.16                                                                  0.15                                                                0.08                    0.34
                                                                    (1.48)                                                                (1.61)                                                              (1.31)                  (3.37)    *
                                                                                                                            Panel B. Two-stage least squares

Geography (DISTEQ)             0.74        -0.42                     -0.56                     0.81         -0.44                          -0.70                      0.76       -0.05                        -0.14                     0.78          -0.86




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              - 31 -
                              (4.48) *     (-1.19)                  (-1.23)                    (5.35) *     (-1.22)                        (-1.34)                   (10.59) *    (-0.4)                      (-0.91)                  (5.64) *       (-3.09) *
Institutions ( RULE)                        1.67                     1.78                                    1.76                           2.00                                  1.19                         1.32                                    0.77
                                            (4.29) *                 (3.78) *                                 (4.4) *                      (3.55) *                               (7.91) *                     (6.77) *                               (2.33) **
Integration (LCOPEN)                                                 -0.18                                                                -0.302                                                              -0.17                     0.23
                                                                    (-1.23)                                                                (-1.07)                                                            (-1.35)                  (2.04) **
No. of observations               64         64                        64                        80            80                             80           140         140      140            80                                                        80
R-square                       0.25        0.54                     0.562                     0.264          0.51                           0.52          0.50       0.417     0.55          0.54                                                      0.38
Test for over-identifying restrictions (p-value)                                                                                                      (0.0071)             (0.0365)
                                                                                  Panel C: First Stage for Endogenous Variables (Institutions (RULE) and Integration (LCOPEN))
Dependent variable                         RULE             RULE                LCOPEN                  RULE         RULE        LCOPEN                    RULE          RULE       LCOPEN LCOPEN                                                    RULE

Geography (DISTEQ)                          0.41         0.47                   -0.25                        0.46              0.53                      -0.19                    0.65            0.64                    -0.04         0.01           0.46
                                             (2.8) *     (3.21) *               (-1.99) ***                 (3.25) *          (3.76) *                   (-1.42)                 (10.35) *       (10.92) *                (-0.75)      (0.09)         (3.25) *
Settler mortality (LOGEM4)                 -0.39         -0.40                  -0.30                       -0.34             -0.34                      -0.27                                                                                        -0.28
                                           (-3.87) *     (-4.1) *               (-3.49) *                   (-3.63) *         (-3.75) *                   (-3.2) *                                                                                    (-3.63) *
Population speaking                                                                                                                                                               0.19            0.18                     0.17
English (ENGFRAC)                                                                                                                                                                 (2.69) *        (2.69) *                (2.66) *
Population speaking other                                                                                                                                                         0.12            0.16                    -0.11
European langages (EURFRAC)                                                                                                                                                       (1.74) ***      (2.43) **               (-1.65)
Constructed openness                                     0.20                    0.90                                          0.19                       0.80                                    0.25                     0.70         0.80
(LOGFRANKROM)                                            (1.95) **              (10.28) *                                     (2.16) **                   (9.68) *                                (4.37) *                (12.4) *     (9.10) *
F-statistic               n.a.               22.9         17.2                    41.7         n.a.           23.3              17.8                       37.2       n.a.         46.3              44                       42         45.0           23.3
R-square                                    0.41         0.44                    0.66                        0.36              0.39                       0.58                    0.49            0.55                     0.54         0.53           0.36
Notes: The dependent variable in Panels A and B are per capita GDP in 1995, PPP basis. There are three samples for which the core regressions are run: (i) the first three columns
correspond to the sample of 64 countries in Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001; AJR); (ii) columns (4) to (6) use a sample of 80 countries for which data on settler mortality
(LOGEM4) have been compiled by AJR; and (iii) columns (7) to (9) use a larger sample of 140 countries for which the instrument for institutions is that in Dollar and Kraay (2002;
DK) but is also similar to that in Hall and Jones (1998). The regressors in Panels A and B are: (i) DISTEQ, the variable for geography, which is measured as the absolute value of
latitude of a country; (ii) Rule of law (RULE), which is the measure for institutions; and (iii) LCOPEN, the variable for integration, which is measured as the ratio of nominal trade
to nominal GDP. All regressors are scaled in the sense that they represent deviations from the mean divided by the standard deviation. The dependent variables in Panel C are
measures of institutions (RULE) and/or integration (LCOPEN) depending on the specification. The regressors in Panel C are: (i) DISTEQ described above; (ii) settler mortality
(LOGEM4) in the first six columns; (iii) the proportion of the population of a country that speaks English (ENGFRAC) and the proportion of the population that speaks any
European language (EURFRAC) in the last three columns; (iv) instrument for openness (LOGFRANKROM) obtained from Frankel and Romer (1999). All regressors, except
DISTEQ and RULE, in the three panels are in logs. See Appendix B for more detailed variable definitions and sources. Standard errors are corrected, using the procedure described
in Frankel and Romer (1999), to take into account the fact that the openness instrument is estimated. T-statistics are reported under coefficient estimates. Significance at the 1
percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels are denoted respectively by “*”, “**”, and “***”.




                                                                                                                                                                                         - 32 -
                                                 Table 3. Determinants of Development: Channels of Influence

                                                  Extended AJR sample                                                          Larger sample
Dependent variable          Income per      Capital per   Human capital            Total factor      Income per       Capital per     Human capital         Total factor
                              worker         worker         per worker             productivity        worker          worker          per worker           productivity

Geography (DISTEQ)               -0.94            -1.68               -0.25               -0.32          -0.26             -0.39                -0.05             -0.14
                                 (-1.47)          (-1.59)             (-1.5)              (-0.97)        (-1.15)           (-1.11)              (-0.91)           (-0.89)
Institutions ( RULE)              2.22             3.41               0.57                 1.06           1.36              1.95                 0.35                 0.72
                                 (3.29) *         (3.01) *            (3.14) *            (3.08) *        (5.01) *           (4.5) *            (5.21) *              (3.7) *
Integration (LCOPEN)             -0.41            -0.68               -0.15               -0.13          -0.36             -0.53                -0.12             -0.15
                                 (-1.31)          (-1.26)            (-1.84) ***          (-0.79)        (-2.27) **        (-2.34) **           (-3.19) *         (-1.27)


R-square                          0.60             0.52               0.52                 0.45           0.58              0.54                 0.59                 0.35
No. of observations                 74               74                 74                   74            122               122                  122                  122

Notes: The four dependent variables—income per worker, capital per worker, human capital per worker, and the level of total factor productivity--are expressed
in natural logarithms and are from Hall and Jones (1999). IV estimates for the AJR sample use settler mortality (LOGEM4) as the instrument for institutions and
EURFRAC and ENGFRAC as the instrument for the larger sample. All regressors, except RULE, are in logarithms and are scaled. Standard errors are corrected,




                                                                                                                                                                           - 33 -
using the procedure described in Frankel and Romer (1999), to take into account the fact that the openness instrument is estimated. T-statistics are reported under
coefficient estimates. Significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels are denoted respectively by “*”, “**”, and “***”.
Table 4. Determinants of Development: Robustness to "Influential" Observations, Neoeuropes, Legal Systems, Origin of Colonizer, and Religion

                           Baseline 1           (1)*         (1)**        (1)***           (1)****       Baseline 2     (2)*         (2)**        (2)***         (3)          (4)            (5)

                                          Two-stage least squares: Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995

Geography (DISTEQ)            -0.70           -1.34         -0.66           -0.90          -0.58           -0.14       -0.14         0.02         -0.36         -0.96         -0.67          -0.81
                              (-1.34)         (-1.08)       (-1.38)         (-1.14)        (-0.81)         (-0.91)     (-0.91)       (0.17)       (-2.12) **    (-1.45)      (-0.98)        (-1.27)


Institutions (RULE)            2.00            2.68          1.82            2.82           1.97            1.32        1.32         0.90          1.69          2.43          2.22           2.13
                               (3.55) *        (3.03) *     (3.31) *        (2.43) **       (1.67) ***      (6.77) *   (6.77) *      (8.47) *     (4.87) *       (3.09) *    (2.56)    *    (2.97)     *


Integration (LCOPEN)         -0.302           -0.44         -0.31           -0.75          -0.42           -0.17       -0.17         0.03         -0.36         -0.41         -0.23          -0.32
                              (-1.07)         (-1.68)       (-1.23)         (-1.30)        (-0.81)         (-1.35)     (-1.35)       (0.25)       (-1.46)       (-1.50)      (-0.79)        (-1.12)


REGIONAL DUMMIES
 Latin America (LAAM)                                        0.44                           0.17                                     0.25
                                                            (1.25)                          (0.33)                                  (1.655) ***
 Sub-Saharan Africa (SAFRICA)                               -0.19                          -0.43                                    -0.63
                                                            (-0.51)                        (-1.11)                                  (-3.79) *
 East Asia (ASIAE)                                           0.24                           0.07                                     0.12
                                                            (0.56)                          (0.14)                                   (0.62)




                                                                                                                                                                                                      - 34 -
Legal origin                                                                                                                                                   [0.133]

Identity of colonizer                                                                                                                                                       [0.058] ***

Religion                                                                                                                                                                                   [0.019] **

R-square                       0.52            0.56          0.65            0.44           0.63            0.55        0.55         0.67          0.55          0.53          0.56           0.59
No. of observations              80              78            79              76             76             140        140           137           136            80            80             80

Omitted observations          None          Singapore     Ethiopia     Australia        Australia          None        None       Cuba       Australia          None          None           None
                                            Ethiopia                   Canada           Canada                                    Czech Rep. Canada
                                                                       New Zealand      New Zealand                               Germany    New Zealand
                                                                       USA              USA                                                  USA

Notes: The dependent variable is per capita GDP in 1995, PPP basis. Baseline 1 corresponds to the specification in column (6) of Table 2. Baseline 2 corresponds to the
specification in column (9) of Table 2. In columns labeled with 1 and 2 asterisks, influential observations are defined according to the Belsey, Kuh, and Welsch (1980) DFITS
statistic, which requires omitting those observations for which DFITS exceeds 2(k/n)^(1/2), where k is the number of regressors and n is the sample size. In columns labeled with
three or four asterisks, observations for Australia, Canada, New Zealand, and Canada (Neoeuropes) are omitted. Standard errors are corrected, using the procedure described in
Frankel and Romer (1999), to take into account the fact that the openness instrument is estimated. T-statistics are reported under coefficient estimates. For legal origin, identity of
colonizer, and religion, p-values for joint significance of the underlying variables (LEGFR and LEGSO for legal origin, COLUK and COLFR for colonizer’s identity, and CATH,
PROT, and MUSL for religion) are reported. Significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels are denoted respectively by “*”, “**”, and “***”. All regressors are
scaled as described in the notes to Table 2.
Table 5. Determinants of Development: Robustness to Alternative Measures of Geography


                                                                          Two-stage least squares: Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995
                               Baseline        (1)          (2)           (3)        (4)         (5)       (6)          (7)        (8)          (9)                (10)            (11)
Institutions (RULE)              2.00          1.45        2.03           1.47      1.48        2.01      1.94          1.12      1.84          1.41                 1.43            2.27
                                  (3.55) *     (3.01) *    (3.54) *      (6.08) *     (6.96) *      (3.34) *    (2.95) *     (3.80) *     (4.19) *     (-5.95) *    (2.28) **       (2.04) **
Integration (LCOPEN)             -0.30        -0.18       -0.35          -0.10        0.00         -0.43         0.01        -0.01        -0.25        -0.09        -0.23          -0.61
                                 (-1.07)      (-0.89)     (-0.99)        (-0.51)      (0.01)       (-1.10)      (0.04)       (-0.11)      (-0.65)      (-0.46)      (-0.70)        (-0.96)
Geography (DISTEQ)               -0.70        -0.38                                                                                                                 -0.48          -0.75
                                 (-1.34)      (-0.94)                                                                                                               (-1.53)        (-1.47)
REGIONAL DUMMIES
 Latin America (LAAM)                          0.44
                                               (1.63)
 Sub-Saharan Africa (SAFRICA)                 -0.33
                                              (-1.03)
 East Asia (ASIAE)                             0.30
                                               (0.87)
Area under tropics (TROPICS)                               0.65                                                                                                                     0.35
                                                           (1.46)                                                                                                                   (0.79)
Access to sea (ACCESS)                                                   -0.06




                                                                                                                                                                                             - 35 -
                                                                         (-0.19)
Major oil exporter (OIL)                                                              0.24
                                                                                      (2.17) **
Days under frost (FROSTDAYS)                                                                       -1.11                                                            -0.26          -0.79
                                                                                                   (-1.48)                                                          (-0.53)        (-0.92)
Area under frost (FROSTAREA)                                                                                    -0.65
                                                                                                                (-1.17)
Malaria (MALFAL94)                                                                                                           -0.24                                  -0.32          -0.14
                                                                                                                             (-1.49)                                (-1.73) ***    (-0.48)
Temperature (MEANTEMP)                                                                                                                     0.53                                    -0.26
                                                                                                                                          (1.29)                                   (-0.53)
R-square                           0.52        0.63        0.54           0.53        0.54          0.53         0.51         0.66         0.65                      0.70           0.73
No. of observations                  80          80          77             77          68            77           67           72           70           72           72             68

Notes: The dependent variable is per capita GDP in 1995, PPP basis. Baseline corresponds to the specification in column (6) of Table 2. Standard errors are corrected, using the
procedure described in Frankel and Romer (1999), to take into account the fact that the openness instrument is estimated. t-statistics are reported under coefficient estimates.
Significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels are denoted respectively by “*”, “**”, and “***”.
Table 6. Determinants of Development: Robustness to Alternative Measures of and Instruments for Integration

Two-stage least squares: Dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995
                                       Baseline            (1)              (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)              (6)               (7)

Geography (DISTEQ))                      -0.70             -0.49           -0.58              0.08                0.07              -1.11             -1.19            -0.85
                                         (-1.34)          (-0.71)          (-0.79)            (0.28)             (0.25)             (-1.24)           (-1.14)          (-1.15)
Institutions (RULE)                       2.00              1.79            1.88              1.06                1.07               2.68              2.81             2.59
                                          (3.55) *         (2.51) **        (2.51) **         (3.07) *           (3.17) *            (2.16) **         (1.87) ***       (2.10) **
Integration (LCOPEN)                     -0.30              0.20            0.04             -0.71               -0.70
                                         (-1.07)           (0.17)           (0.04)           (-0.92)            (-1.00)
Land area (AREA)                                            0.25            0.21             -0.32               -0.32
                                                           (0.68)           (0.56)           (-1.00)            (-1.05)
Population (POP)                                            0.21            0.13             -0.29               -0.28
                                                           (0.29)           (0.17)           (-0.53)            (-0.56)
"Real openness" (LNOPEN)                                                                                                            -0.74             -0.89
                                                                                                                                    (-0.81)           (-0.70)




                                                                                                                                                                                             - 36 -
"Policy openness" (SW)                                                                                                                                                 -2.09
                                                                                                                                                                       (-1.06)
R-square                                  0.52               0.61            0.62              0.59                0.59               0.56              0.55             0.61
No. of observations                         80                80               80              139                139                   72               72                70

Notes: The dependent variable is per capita GDP in 1995, PPP basis. All regressors, except DISTEQ, RULE, and SW, are expressed in logs. Baseline corresponds to the
specification in column (6) of Table 2. In columns (1), (3) and (5) the instrument for openness (LOGFRANKROM) is from Frankel and Romer (1999). In columns (2), (4) and (6),
the instrument for openness (LOGFRANKROMR) is derived by re-estimating the gravity equation in Frankel and Romer (1999) with the left-hand side variable defined as nominal
bilateral trade to nominal GDP. In FR, the left hand side variable was defined as nominal trade divided by PPP GDP. Standard errors are corrected, using the procedure described in
Frankel and Romer (1999), to take into account the fact that the openness instrument is estimated. t-statistics are reported under coefficient estimates. Significance at the 1 percent, 5
percent, and 10 percent levels are denoted respectively by “*”, “**”, and “***”. All regressors are scaled as described in the notes to Table 2.
                                                                               - 37 -




Table 7. Robustness of the Dollar-Kray Results

                                   Panel A. Two-stage least squares: dependent variable is log GDP per capita in 1995


                                             (1)        (1)*      (1)**     (1)***       (1)****         (2)        (2)*      (2)**        (3)           (3)*         (3)**

Institutions (RULE)                        2.14        1.73       1.52       1.56         1.64         1.26        1.54      1.38         3.52         2.83          1.56
                                           (0.77)     (4.71) *   (7.92) *   (7.41) *      (6.16) *      (3.6) *   (4.32)    (11.65) *     (1.18)        (2.2) **    (8.31) *
"Real openness" (LNOPEN)                  -1.37       -0.53                                            0.18       -0.36                   -3.40       -1.81
                                          (-0.23)     (-0.85)                                           (0.3)     (-0.84)                (-0.71)      (-1.26)
Integration (LCOPEN)                                             -0.21      -0.27        -0.45                              -0.32                                   -0.83
                                                                 (-0.44)    (-0.65)       (-0.9)                            (-0.91)                                  (-1.5)
Population (POP)                          -0.25                   0.04       0.00        -0.05         0.13                 -0.01         -0.53                     -0.08
                                          (-0.16)                  (0.3)    (0.02)        (-0.4)      (1.08)                (-0.05)      (-0.56)                    (-0.59)
No. of observations                          63          63         63         68           78          134        134        151          130          130          130

                                Panel B. Two-stage least squares: Dependent variable is decadal average real per capita GDP growth

                                             (1)      (1)*         (2)        (2)*         (3)          (3)*        (4)        (4)*        (5)           (5)*

Average real per capita GDP                0.64        1.84       0.89       0.40         0.97         1.37        3.31     -0.52         0.73         0.43
growth in previous decade                  (0.88)     (0.34)     (2.34) *   (0.83)        (2.58) *    (0.76)      (0.21)    (-0.51)       (3.15) *     (1.14)
Changes over previous decade
in average:
    Log real openness                      0.23        0.52       0.29       0.13         0.38         0.64        0.16     -0.13         0.21         0.11
                                            (2.2) *   (0.35)     (2.69) *   (0.84)        (3.14) *    (0.77)      (0.12)    (-0.23)       (2.15) **    (0.82)
   Institutions
       Contract-intensive money (CIM)     -0.17        1.52
                                          (-0.12)     (-0.23)
       Revolutions                                                0.18       0.13
                                                                   (0.8)      (0.7)
       Freedom house rating (FREEDOM)                                                     0.00         0.00
                                                                                         (0.002)      (0.03)
       Rule of law (ICRG)                                                                                          0.56     -0.73
                                                                                                                    (0.2)   (-0.55)
       War deaths                                                                                                                        25.20        19.83
                                                                                                                                          (0.54)       (0.57)


1980s dummy                                           -0.16                 -0.01                     -0.02                                           -0.11
                                                      (-1.42)               (-2.92) *                  (-0.7)                                         (-3.09) *
1990s dummy                                            0.02                  0.00                                                                      0.00
                                                        (0.2)               (0.47)                                                                      (0.5)
1980s Asia dummy                                       0.00                  0.14                      0.00                                            0.01
                                                      (0.01)                (1.78) ***                (0.16)                                           (1.89) ***
1980s Africa dummy                                    -0.02                 -0.02                      0.00                                           -0.02
                                                      (-0.15)               (-2.26) **                (0.08)                                          (-1.66) ***
1980s Latin America dummy                             -0.01                 -0.02                     -0.01                                           -0.02
                                                      (-0.11)               (-3.25) *                 (-0.58)                                         (-3.32) *
1990s Asia dummy                                      -0.02                  0.00                     -0.01                  0.03                      0.01
                                                      (-0.24)                 (0.3)                   (-0.39)                (0.97)                    (0.79)
1990s Africa dummy                                     0.03                 -0.01                      0.02                 -0.04                     -0.01
                                                        (0.2)               (-0.84)                   (0.39)                (-0.98)                   (-0.76)
1990s Latin America dummy                              0.01                  0.00                      0.01                 -0.02                      0.00
                                                      (0.26)                (0.07)                    (0.54)                (-0.87)                    (0.41)

No. of observations                        193      193      243      243        189                   189           79        79          264          264
Decades                                  70s, 80s 70s, 80s 70s, 80s 70s, 80s 80s, 90s                80s, 90s       90s       90s       70s, 80s      70s, 80s
                                         and 90s and 90s and 90s and 90s                                                                and 90s       and 90s


Notes: Panel A relates to the level regressions in Table 1 and Panel B to the decadal growth regressions in Table 4 of DK.
All variables are as defined in that paper. In Panel A, equations (1), (2), and (3) without asterisks reproduce, respectively,
equations (12), (7), and (6) in Table 1. Equations with asterisks represent variations on the equations without asterisks. All
regressors, except RULE, are in logarithms and are not scaled as in Tables (2)-(5) to facilitate comparison with the original
equations. In Panel B, equations (1) –(5) without asterisks correspond respectively to equations (4), (6), (8), (10), and (12)
in Table 4 of DK. Equations with asterisks add time and region dummies to the un-asterisked equation. T-statistics are
reported under coefficient estimates. Significance at the 1 percent, 5 percent, and 10 percent levels are denoted respectively
by “*”, “**”, and “***”.
                                          - 38 -




                Appendix A: The Inappropriateness of “Real Openness”

Technology and trade. Imagine a symmetric world populated with a large number of small
endowment economies. Each economy i has a fixed endowment of nontraded and traded
goods, denoted by Ni and Ti respectively. Let each country produce a different traded good
(the Armington assumption), but consume all the varieties of traded goods produced around
the world. If there is a very large number of countries, each country’s consumption of its
own endowment of the traded good will be negligible: (almost) all of its traded good will be
exported in exchange for imports of the traded goods produced elsewhere. Let PNi stand for
the price of nontraded goods in country i and let the prices of all traded goods be fixed at
unity. Since the sum of exports and imports are given by 2Ti, conventionally measured
openness in a country i can then be expressed as ONi = 2Ti/(PNi*Ni + Ti).

Preferences. Assume that preferences in each country take the Cobb-Douglas form, such that
nontraded goods and traded goods (in aggregate) have fixed budget shares. Under this
assumption, 2Ti/(PNi*Ni + Ti) will be constant and independent of a country’s endowments
of T and N. (This is because dPNi/PNi = dTi/Ti - dNi/Ni.) Cross-country differences in
conventionally measured openness, ONi, will arise solely from differences in Cobb-Douglas
budget shares.

Cross-national income differences. Now assume that differences in the endowment of the
traded good are the only source of cross-country differences in income. That is, all countries
have identical Ni but varying Ti. Countries with larger Ti are richer.

Cross-sectional relationship between openness and income. Under the above assumptions,
there is no causal relationship that goes from trade to incomes. Cross-country differences in
income are due entirely to differences in endowments. And if we run a regression of income
on openness, we will get nothing. Trade shares either do not vary across countries, or they
vary “randomly” with the Cobb-Douglas parameter. They have no systematic relationship to
levels of income. So the econometrics will provide a good guide to the underlying reality.

The AC adjustment. Now suppose that we follow AC, and construct their real openness
measure, ORi. This adjustment consists of expressing the value of i’s nontraded production
at some benchmark country’s prices, PB, instead of domestic prices, PNi. The AC measure
of real openness is therefore ORi = 2Ti/(PB*Ni + Ti). Note that ORi is increasing in Ti. When
we correlate ORi with incomes across countries, we will get a positive relationship. This is a
spurious relationship, since the only source of productivity differences in this model is
differences in endowments.

Remarks. In this benchmark model, the conventional measure of openness does exactly what
we would like a measure of openness to do under the null hypothesis that trade does not
cause productivity. The AC variant, meanwhile, imparts a positive bias to the estimated
trade-income relationship. A key feature of the model above is that the elasticity of
substitution in demand between T and N is unity. This ensures that the rise in PN is just
enough to keep (conventional) openness invariant to changes in the endowment (or
                                          - 39 -




productivity) of tradables. When the elasticity of substitution differs from one, conventional
openness does not always deliver such a helpful result, but the bias is not unidirectional. So
with an elasticity of substitution greater than one, a regression of income on conventional
openness will yield (misleadingly) a positive coefficient, while with an elasticity less than
one, the regression will yield (misleadingly) a negative coefficient. However, the AC real
openness measure is invariant to the elasticity of substitution and hence is always positively
biased.
                                         - 40 -




                             Appendix B: Data and Sources

AFRICA = Dummy variable taking value 1 if a country belongs to Africa, 0 otherwise.

ASIA = Dummy variable taking value 1 if a country belongs to Asia, 0 otherwise.

ACCESS = Dummy variable taking value 1 for countries without access to the sea, 0
otherwise.

AREA = Land area (thousands sq. mt.) Source: Frankel and Romer (1999).

ASIAE = Dummy variable taking value 1 if a country belongs to South-East Asia, 0
otherwise.

CATH = Dummy variable taking value 1 if the country’s population is predominantly
catholic.

CIM = Contract Intensive Money. Source: World Bank (2002).

COLFR = Dummy variable taking value 1 if the colonizer was France.

COLUK = Dummy variable taking value 1 if the colonizer was England.

DISTEQ = Distance from Equator of capital city measured as abs(Latitude)/90. Source:
World Bank (2002). 20

ENGFRAC = Fraction of the population speaking English. Source: Hall and Jones (1999).

EURFRAC = Fraction of the population speaking one of the major languages of Western
Europe: English, French, German, Portuguese, or Spanish. Source: Hall and Jones (1999).

FREEDOM = Political rights index. Freedom House, various issues.

FROSTAREA = Proportion of land with >5 frost-days per month in winter. Source: Masters
and McMillan (2001).

FROSTDAYS = Average number of frost-days per month in winter. Source: CID Harvard
University (2002) from Masters and McMillan (2001).


20
  Note: World Bank (2002) refers to the data set used in Dollar and Kraay (2002), which was
kindly provided by Aart Kraay.
                                         - 41 -




ICRG = Rule of law index. Source: International Country Risk Guide, various issues.

LAAM = Dummy variable taking value 1 if a country belongs to Latin America or the
Caribbean, 0 otherwise.

LCGDP95 = Natural logarithm of per capita GDP in Purchasing-Power-Parity US dollars
(PPP GDP) in 1995. Source: Penn World Tables, Mark 6.

LCOPEN = Natural logarithm of openness. Openness is given by the ratio of (nominal)
imports plus exports to GDP (in nominal US dollars). Source: Penn World Tables, Mark 6.
Average over all 1950-98 available data.

LFR = Dummy variable taking a value of 1 if a country has a legal system deriving from that
in France.

LNOPEN = Natural logarithm of “real” openness. Real openness is given by the ratio of
nominal imports plus exports to GDP in Purchasing-Power-Parity US dollars (PPP GDP).
Source: Penn World Tables, Mark 5.6 and World Bank (2002).

LOGA = Labor-augmenting technological progress parameter in 1998. Source: Hall and
Jones (1998)

LOGEM4 = Natural logarithm of estimated European settlers’ mortality rate. Source:
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001)

LOGFRANKROM = Natural logarithm of predicted trade shares computed following
Frankel and Romer (1999) from a bilateral trade equation with “pure geography” variables.
Source: Frankel and Romer (1999).

LOGFRANKROMR = Natural logarithm of predicted trade shares computed as for
LOGFRANKROM except that the dependent variable in the bilateral trade (gravity) equation
is nominal trade divided by nominal GDP (both in US dollars). Source: Authors’ estimates.

LOGHL = Natural logarithm of human capital per worker in 1988. Source:Hall and Jones
(1998).

LOGKL = Natural logarithm of physical capital per worker in 1988. Source:Hall and Jones
(1998).

LOGYL = Natural logarithm of GDP in Purchasing-Power-Parity US dollars (PPP GDP) per
worker in 1988. Source:Hall and Jones (1998).

LSO = Dummy variable taking a value of 1 if a country has a socialist legal system.

MALFAL94 = Malaria index, year 1994. Source: Gallup and Sachs (1998).
                                        - 42 -




MEANTEMP = Average temperature (Celsius). Source: CID Harvard University (2002).

MUSL = Dummy variable taking value 1 if the country’s population is predominantly
muslim.

OIL = Dummy variable taking value 1 for a country being major oil exporter, 0 otherwise.

POP = Population. Source: World Bank (2002).

PROT = Dummy variable taking value 1 if the country’s population is predominantly
protestant.

REVOLUTIONS = Number of revolutions per year. Source: World Bank (2002)

RULE = Rule of Law index. Refers to 2001 and approximates for 1990’s institutions Source:
Kaufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton (2002)

SAFRICA = Dummy variable taking value 1 if a country belongs to Sub-Saharan Africa, 0
otherwise.

SW = Dummy variable taking value 0 if the country had BMP = 1, MON = 1, SOC = 1, TAR
> 0.4, or NTB > 0.4; 1 otherwise. Source: Sachs and Warner (1995)

TROPICS = Percentage of tropical land area. Source: Gallup and Sachs (1998).

WARDEATHS = Fraction of population killed in wars. Source: World Bank (2002)

XCONST1970 = Constraint on the executive in the 1970s. Source: Polity IV dataset.
                                        - 43 -




                                    REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, "The Colonial Origins of
Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation," American Economic Review, 91, 5,
December 2001, 1369-1401.

Alcalá, F., and A. Ciccone, “Trade and Productivity,” Paper presented at the NBER Summer
Institute, June 2002.

Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger, “Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect
Schooling and Earnings?” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol. 106, no. 4. Nov., 1991,
pp. 979-1014.

Belsey, D.A., E. Kuh, and R.E. Welsch, Regression Diagnostics. New York: John Wiley and
Sons, 1980.

Diamond, Jared , Guns, Germs, and Steel, New York: W.W. Norton & Co., 1997.

Dollar, D., and A. Kraay, “Institutions, Trade, and Growth,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference
Series on Public Policy, forthcoming, 2002.

Easterly, W., and R. Levine, “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence
Economic Development,” mimeo, Center for Global Development and Institute for
International Economics, 2002.

Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and
Differential Paths of Growth Among New World Economies: A View from Economic
Historians of the United States,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
H0066, December 1994.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and David Romer, "Does Trade Cause Growth?" American Economic
Review, June 1999, 89(3), 379-399.

Gallup, John L. and Jeffrey D. Sachs, “The Economic Burden of Malaria,” Center for
International Development, Harvard University, 1998.

Gallup, John Luke, Jeffrey D. Sachs, and Andrew D. Mellinger, “Geography and Economic
Development,” NBER Working Paper No. w6849, December 1998.

Hall, Robert, and Chad I. Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More Output
per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 1, February 1999, 83-116.

Irwin, D.A.,and M.Tervio, "Does Trade Raise Income? Evidence from the Twentieth
Century," NBER Working Paper No. w7745, June 2000.
                                         - 44 -




Kaufmann, D., A.Kraay, and P. Zoido-Lobatón, “Governance Matters II—Updated
Indicators for 2000/01,” World Bank Policy Research Deaprtment Working Paper No. 2772,
Washington D.C., 2002.

Krueger, A., and A. Berg, "Trade, Growth, and Poverty," Paper presented at the 2002 World
Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics, Washington D.C., 2002.

La Porta, Rafael, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R.W. Vishny, “The Quality of
Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, Vol. 15(1), pp. 1113-55.

Masters, William A., and Margaret S. McMillan, “Climate and Scale in Economic Growth,”
Journal of Economic Growth 6 (3): 167-186, September 2001.

Mukand, Sharun, and Dani Rodrik, “In Search of the Holy Grail: Policy Convergence,
Experimentation, and Economic Performance,” Harvard University, July 2002.

North, Douglass C., Institutions, Institutional Change and Economic Performance, New
York, Cambridge University Press, 1990.

North, Douglass C., “Economic Performance Through Time,” The American Economic
Review, Vol. 84, No. 3. (Jun., 1994), pp. 359-368.

Rodríguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik, "Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic's
Guide to the Cross-National Evidence," Macroeconomics Annual 2000, eds. Ben Bernanke
and Kenneth S. Rogoff, MIT Press for NBER, Cambridge,MA, 2001.

Rodrik, Dani “Comments on Frankel and Rose, ‘Estimating the Effects of Currency Unions
on Trade and Output’,” October 2000.

Rodrik, Dani, “Institutions, Integration, and Geography: In Search of the Deep Determinants
of Economic Growth,” in Rodrik, ed., In Search of Prosperity: Analytic Country Studies on
Growth, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 2003, forthcoming.

Sachs, Jeffrey D., “Tropical Underdevelopment,” NBER Working Paper No. w8119,
February 2001.

Sachs, Jeffrey, and Andrew Warner, “Economic Reform and the Process of Global
Integration,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1995:1, 1-118.

Staiger Douglas and J.H. Stock, “Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
Instruments,” Econometrica, 65:3, Pp. 557-86, 1997.
