NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IS THERE A ROLE FOR DISCRETIONARY FISCAL POLICY?
Alan J. Auerbach
Working Paper 9306
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9306
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
October 2002

This paper was presented at a conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City
on Rethinking Stabilization Policy, held in Jackson Hole, WY, August 29-31, 2002. I am grateful
to my discussants, Martin Feldstein and Fumio Hayashi, other conference participants, and Darrel
Cohen for comments on an earlier draft, to Kristy Piccinini for research assistance, and to the
Robert D. Burch Center for Tax Policy and Public Finance for financial support. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Alan J. Auerbach. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Is There a Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy
Alan J. Auerbach
NBER Working Paper No. 9306
October 2002
JEL No. E62, H62
ABSTRACT
This paper reviews the state of discretionary fiscal policy. Among its findings are:
(1) In recent years, U.S. discretionary fiscal policy appears to have become more active in response to
both cyclical conditions and a simple measure of budget balance.
(2) Considerable uncertainty remains about how large an impact discretionary fiscal policy has on output.
(3) There is little evidence that discretionary fiscal policy has played an important stabilization role during
recent decades.
(4) Budgetary pressure may weaken the efficacy of expansionary fiscal policy. Conversely,
contractionary fiscal policy might have a salutary effect on output. This possibility may be relevant for
understanding the impact of fiscal policy in the 1990s, although the mechanism is unclear.
(5) The automatic stabilizers embedded in the fiscal system have experienced little net change since the
1960s and have contributed to cushioning cyclical fluctuations. But the tax system has many attributes
that weaken its potential role as an automatic stabilizer, particularly with respect to investment.
(6) The government's reported fiscal position, to which fiscal policy appears responsive, represents a very
poor measure of underlying fiscal balance.
Alan J. Auerbach
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall, #3880
University of California, Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
auerbach@econ.berkeley.edu

Introduction
On March 9, 2002, President Bush signed the Job Creation and Worker Assistance Act.
The Act included a temporary increase in depreciation allowances for business spending on
equipment and software, in the form of 30 percent partial expensing, and a temporary extension
of unemployment benefits. At the time, the motivation of the Act was that it would provide
fiscal stimulus that could help the economy recover from the first recession in a decade. Yet,
whether the economy was still officially in recession at the time was not known, because the
NBER dating of the recession trough had not yet occurred. Indeed, there was a clear possibility
that the recession might be over. On February 28, the Bureau of Economic Analysis had
released “preliminary” estimates showing that real GDP had grown at an annual rate of 1.4
percent in the fourth quarter of 2001, following a real decline of 1.3 percent in the third quarter, a
decline substantially associated with the economic disruptions caused by the September 11
attacks. This preliminary estimate updated the “advance” estimate of 0.2 percent fourth quarter
growth released January 301.
The difficulty of practicing countercyclical fiscal policy has been a staple of
macroeconomics textbooks for decades. With the typical postwar recession lasting less than a
year and discretionary fiscal changes subject to information, political and economic lags,
knowledgeable policy makers have understood the daunting task they faced. But the strong
support for this most recent “stimulus package” reminds us that policy makers may go where
economists fear to tread. No politician wishes to be cast in the title role of It’s the Economy,
Stupid.
1

The fourth-quarter 2001 growth rate was again revised upward, to 1.7 percent, when its “final” estimate was
released on March 28. A month later, an advance first-quarter 2002 growth estimate of 5.8 percent was issued. As
of this writing, both of these numbers have already been revised again.

Even as the practice of countercyclical fiscal policy has survived, the period since the
golden days of “fine tuning” has provided further caveats about its use, dating from Lucas’
celebrated critique in the 1970s, emphasizing that activist policy must take account of its effects
on the expectations of firms and households, to the more recent argument that tax cuts may fail
to be expansionary in circumstances of budgetary duress. With the recent recession and
legislative action, it is a good time to review the state of discretionary fiscal policy, considering
the extent of its use, its successes and failures, and the extent to which alternative policies have
been or might be available. Rather than attempting a comprehensive survey, I consider several
of the issues that have arisen recently in consideration of the efficacy of fiscal policy.

How Active Has U.S. Fiscal Policy Been in Recent Decades?
In embarking on a study of U.S. discretionary fiscal policy, it makes sense to ask how
active policy has been, and whether the degree of activism has changed over the years. While
these are simple and straightforward questions, their answers are not. One cannot simply look at
quarterly or annual changes in federal taxes and spending.
Cyclical Adjustment
The most obvious problem with looking at fluctuations in tax revenues, spending, or their
difference—the budget surplus—is that each of these aggregates—especially tax revenues—is
sensitive to the economic cycle. Changes occur without any active policy decisions. Indeed, as
discussed further below, these changes may serve as automatic stabilizers, but they need to be
left aside in attempting to measure active policy changes.
The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) computes a cyclically adjusted, quarterly
measure of the federal budget surplus, based on the National Income and Product Account

2

(NIPA) seasonally adjusted quarterly surplus measure.2 This “full-employment” surplus series,
available from the first quarter of 1956, provides a measure of how policy has changed at the
quarterly frequency; it is helpful to examine fiscal behavior at this frequency in studying
countercyclical policy, given that the period of the typical recession is less than one year.3
Table 1 presents regressions relating the change in the full-employment budget surplus to
the lagged measure of the full-employment GDP gap, with both measures divided by the level of
full-employment GDP. The first column presents the simple regression relating these two
variables over the full sample period. The negative coefficient indicates that the fullemployment surplus has fallen in response to a rise in the GDP gap, consistent with the use of
discretionary countercyclical fiscal policy. The relationship, however, is weak and not
statistically significant. But there are, of course, other determinants of fiscal policy. As many
authors have emphasized4, U.S. fiscal policy over the years has had the property that increased
levels of national debt lead to higher subsequent budget surpluses. In first differences, this
implies that a higher deficit in the past should cause a tightening of policy—an increase in the
current surplus. Adding the lagged budget surplus to the regression, in the second column of
Table 1, confirms this prediction. The higher is the lagged budget surplus, the larger is the fall in
the current full-employment surplus. This relationship is statistically significant; so too, now, is
the effect of the lagged output gap.
Has the responsiveness of policy to the cycle and to the degree of fiscal balance changed
over time? The final three columns of Table 1 address this question by repeating the estimation
2

In addition, there is an adjustment that removes the NIPA effect of the allied contributions for Operation Desert
Storm. I am grateful to Frank Russek of CBO for making these unpublished data available and explaining their
construction.

3

The NIPA measure of the budget deficit differs from that actually used in the Federal budget, but there is no
quarterly measure of the latter available.

4

See, for example, Bohn (1998).

3

of column 2 for three subsamples. Column 5 covers the period since the second quarter of 1993,
roughly corresponding to the beginning of the Clinton Administration. Column 4 covers a
period of equal length immediately preceding this, and column 3 covers the balance of the
sample period, through the second quarter of 1984. For this initial period, the relationship is
comparable to that of the full period shown in column 2. For the subperiod extending from 1984
to 1993, though, the estimates indicate that policy was more responsive both to the cycle and to
the prior budget surplus. The sensitivity to the surplus, in particular, shows a marked increase
during this period that followed the large Reagan tax cuts phased in beginning in 1981 that,
along with the contemporaneous defense build-up and other factors, led to a sharp expansion in
national debt and deficits relative to GDP. During the final period, covering the Clinton years
and the beginning of the current Bush administration, the influence of the budget surplus and,
especially, the output gap, increases again. The coefficient on the output gap predicts that the
full-employment surplus falls by over a third of the previous quarter’s output gap.
To put this last coefficient estimate in context, consider the implied effect of an increase
of one percentage point in the unemployment rate. Based on the recent Okun’s law relationship,
this implies a roughly 2 percent drop in output relative to its full-employment level. The
coefficient of -.358 on the output gap implies a corresponding rise in the full-employment deficit
of -.72 percent in the next quarter—about $75 billion on an annual basis at the current level of
GDP.
In summary, based on the estimates in Table 1, U.S. fiscal policy, as measured by
changes in the full-employment deficit, appears to have been responsive to both cyclical and
budgetary conditions, with the sensitivity to each factor increasing over time.

4

Timing and Measurement of Response
Even purged of automatic cyclical changes in revenues and spending, there are a number
of reasons why the current full-employment deficit may not offer an ideal measure of the state of
fiscal policy. First, there may be changes occurring over time that have nothing to do with
policy actions. For example, increasing dispersion of the income distribution, as occurred during
the 1980s and 1990s, led to increased tax revenues through the progressivity of the individual
income tax. To the extent that such changes occur smoothly over time, they will be picked up by
the constant in Table 1’s regression model, but their patterns may be more complex than this.5
Second, a change in the full-employment surplus, even if resulting from a policy change,
is not necessarily due to a contemporaneous policy change. Several major pieces of tax
legislation in recent decades have included phase-in provisions that confound interpretation of
changes in the full-employment deficit. Consider the sequence of events in the early 1980s.
After the massive tax cut embodied in the Economic Recovery Tax Act of 1981, there were
smaller but still significant tax increases passed in the years immediately following. The net
impact, though, was still a phased reduction in taxes. As the 1981 legislation included tax cut
provisions that took effect as late as 1985 (when bracket indexation became effective), the net
changes during the early ‘80s might have appeared expansionary even as restrictive legislation
was being passed. A similar situation exists now, as a result of the 2001 passage of the
Economic Growth and Tax Relief Reconciliation Act (EGTRRA). That legislation’s provisions
are scheduled to be phased in over a ten-year period. Should these future changes occur during
periods of recession, they might appear to reflect the use of countercyclical discretionary policy
even though they were enacted long before such conditions existed or were even contemplated.
5

Allowing for nonlinear changes over time, through the addition of a time trend, generally increases the coefficients
in Table 1, but does not change the picture of sharply increasing sensitivity over time.

5

Finally, as has long been noted, changes in particular components of the surplus—most
obviously, changes in spending as opposed to changes in revenues—should have different effects
on aggregate demand. Thus, the change in the deficit, even cyclically adjusted, is inadequate to
convey the magnitude of stimulus to aggregate demand. For all three of these reasons—noncyclical autonomous changes, timing, and composition, an alternative measure of fiscal policy,
based on explicit policy changes, may be preferred. For this purpose, one may construct a series
using the periodic fiscal updates published by the CBO.
For many years, CBO has provided frequent updates of its baseline revenue and
expenditure forecasts for the federal budget, covering the current fiscal year and several future
fiscal years. With each update, it allocates changes in forecast revenues and expenditures to
legislative or policy actions, on the one hand, and economic factors on the other (which it breaks
down further into “economic”—macroeconomic—and “technical” sources, such as those
associated with shifts in the income distribution). CBO typically publishes two major revisions
incorporating updated economic forecasts during each year, the Economic and Budget Outlook in
late January or early February, and the Economic and Budget Outlook Update during the
summer. By accumulating changes between each of these forecasts (including intermediate
revisions, such as those typically made in response to the release of the President’s budget), one
may derive a roughly semiannual series of forecast changes in revenues and expenditures. In the
past, I have used the resulting series to evaluate CBO’s forecasting record, focusing primarily on
the revisions not related to policy (Auerbach 1994, 1999), but also focusing, as here, on the
determinants of policy, albeit at an annual frequency (Auerbach 2000).
Data from CBO forecast revisions are available since summer, 1984, as the pattern of
semiannual forecasts begins with the winter, 1984 Budget Outlook. For each observation, I

6

measure the policy change with respect revenues, expenditures6, or their difference—the
surplus—as the discounted sum of policy changes adopted during the interval for the current and
subsequent five fiscal years (relative to each year’s corresponding measure of potential GDP),
with the six weights normalized to sum to 17. Based on a simple goodness-of-fit measure (the
regression’s R 2 ) in a search over different values, I choose a discount factor of .5, meaning that
each succeeding fiscal year’s policy change is accorded half the weight of the previous one.8 To
facilitate comparison with the results in Table 1, I relate these fiscal policy changes to lagged
values of the full-employment GDP gap from the prior quarter, and the previous fiscal year
surplus.9 Table 2 presents the results of these regressions, for the three dependent variables, for
the full sample period and the first and second halves of the sample period, which approximately
correspond to the last two subperiods examined in Table 1.
The results in Table 2 are generally consistent with those in Table 1. Over the full
sample period, both the GDP gap and the budget surplus exert a significant, negative impact on
surplus-enhancing policy actions, with both revenues and outlays responding in a consistent
manner. The strength and precision of the effects are smaller for the overall surplus during the
first half of the sample period than in the second, as was the case for these two periods in Table
1. As can be seen from the breakdown between revenues and outlays, though, this strengthened

6

I exclude from changes in expenditures induced changes in debt service, as these are attributable to both revenue
and expenditure policy changes and a breakdown is not available.

7

Because policy revisions between the winter and summer take effect starting midway through the current fiscal
year, I reduce the weight on the current fiscal year by one-half and increase weights on subsequent years
correspondingly. That is, if δ is the discount factor, the weights applied to revisions between summer and winter are
x, xδ, xδ2,…, xδ5, while the weights applied to revisions between winter and summer are .5y, .5(y+yδ),
.5(yδ+yδ2),…, .5(yδ4+yδ5), where x and y are determined so that the weights for the six fiscal years sum to 1.
8

The results for alternative discount factors, ranging from .1 to .67, are qualitatively similar to those presented in
Table 2.

9

I use the annual surplus measure, rather than the quarterly NIPA surplus used in Table 1, to maintain consistency
with the surplus, revenue and expenditure policy measures here, which are based on the actual federal budget.

7

responsiveness since 1993 is due to behavior on the revenue side, as outlay responses are
relatively similar (and not statistically different) during the two halves of the sample period.
The responsiveness of revenues to the budget surplus since 1993 is quite consistent with
the pattern of major tax legislation, with the tax increase of 1993, occurring at a time of large
budget deficits, being followed by a small tax cut in 1997, when the deficit was much smaller,
and a large tax cut in 2001, when the budget was in surplus. What is, perhaps, more surprising is
that this same increased sensitivity does not also show up on the outlay side. After a period of
effective downward pressure on discretionary spending, associated with the multi-year spending
caps initiated by the Budget Enforcement Act in 1990 and extended by legislation in 1993 and
1997, the decade closed with a surge in “emergency” spending in 1999 and 2000, meant to
override the spending caps, with the caps simply being ignored thereafter, even before the postSeptember 11 surge in national security spending.
Part of the explanation for this lack of the expected empirical finding may be the
behavior of entitlement spending, which has been growing in importance over the years, or the
conventions used to determine when spending policy has “changed.” This is typically a more
difficult task than is faced on the revenue side, where policy changes primarily just track actual
legislative changes. To address each of these concerns, I consider, in Table 3, the behavior of
discretionary spending over the years. These data are available since fiscal year 1962, so the first
observed change in fiscal year spending is for 1963. The table relates actual year-to-year
changes in discretionary spending to the prior year’s GDP gap10 and budget surplus, all relative
to full-employment GDP. This exercise has two advantages over the examination of outlays in
Table 2: it focuses only on discretionary spending, and considers actual spending changes, rather
10

The results were similar using the GDP gap for the last quarter prior to the fiscal year, rather than for the previous
fiscal year.

8

than changes in forecast spending. It also has the disadvantages of being at an annual frequency,
making an evaluation of countercyclical responses problematic, and including changes in
spending that might be the automatic result of cyclical factors. This second problem should not
be a major concern, though, given that the focus is on discretionary spending.
For the full sample, in Table 3’s first column, the coefficients of the GDP gap and the
budget surplus both have the predicted sign, but both are small and neither is estimated precisely.
In all specifications and time periods, the GDP gap was quite insignificant, suggesting a weak
relationship at the annual frequency. Thus, the remaining columns present estimates excluding
this variable, for the full sample period and three subperiods, the last two, 1984-92 and 19932001, corresponding to the two recent sample periods examined in Tables 1 and 2. The results in
these columns do suggest a recent increase in the responsiveness of discretionary spending to the
budget surplus, with this relationship being statistically significant since 1993. But, with only
nine observations for this period, one should not make too much of these results. There may,
indeed, have been a recent breakdown in fiscal discipline, but it is difficult to quantify the
importance of this phenomenon using standard statistical techniques.
Summary: How Active Has Policy Been?
The results presented thus far are subject to a collection of empirical limitations, which
have been discussed in the context of their presentation. But, taken together, they suggest that
fiscal policy has been responsive both to cyclical factors and conditions of fiscal balance during
recent decades. The cyclical responsiveness may be something of a surprise, given a general
perception that attempts at countercyclical fiscal policy have been poorly timed. Indeed, one can
cite instances in which timing has been poor, but there are other cases, for example the advance
tax reduction checks sent during the late summer of 2001, when fiscal changes occurred at the

9

right time, even if, as seems likely for the 2001 tax cut, the countercyclical thrust occurred by
coincidence at least as much as by design.
Still, the magnitude and timing of discretionary responses is only part of the story
concerning the efficacy of fiscal policy as a tool for macroeconomic stabilization. An important
additional step involves the link from fiscal changes to behavioral responses, an issue about
which there has been much recent debate and to which I return below. Also, the automatic
responses of the budget to the economic cycle, purged from consideration above in order to
measure the strength of discretionary policy actions, are nonetheless a component of stabilization
policy and worthy of consideration, particularly if skepticism remains about the viability of
discretionary policy. I turn to this issue next.

Automatic Stabilizers
As economic activity fluctuates, so does federal spending and, especially, federal tax
revenues. Traditionally, these fiscal changes have been seen as automatic stabilizers, stimulating
aggregate demand as income falls and reigning in demand and income rises. But changes in the
composition of revenues and spending over the postwar period have been substantial. What
impact have these changes had on the strength of automatic stabilizers in the United States?
One method of measuring the strength of automatic stabilizers is to relate the gap
between the full-employment surplus and the unadjusted surplus to the contemporaneous gap
between GDP and full employment GDP. The coefficient of this relationship indicates the
magnitude of the response of the surplus to GDP that is embodied in the CBO’s calculation of
the full-employment surplus. For the full sample of quarterly data used above in Table 1, this
coefficient (in a regression not shown) is .350, indicating that fluctuations in the federal budget
surplus are equal in magnitude (and of opposite sign) to around one-third of contemporaneous

10

output fluctuations. One can also look at the coefficient for individual years to see how this
relationship has changed over time. As these annual estimates are somewhat unstable, one can
get some idea of the evolution of the coefficient by looking at a five-year weighted moving
average of individual year estimates. This series of smoothed coefficients is shown in Figure 1.11
The figure shows fluctuations in the relationship over time, but no obvious trend, other than
perhaps a drop from the high values of the 1950s. But this approach based on aggregate
measures of the output and surplus gaps does not allow one to determine whether these
fluctuations relate to actual changes in the tax structure or automatic spending rules or to the
position in the cycle or other factors for which one might wish to control. To learn more, it is
helpful to use a more micro-level approach, estimating how, based on tax and spending rules, the
liabilities of taxpayers and the level of government spending would have changed in each year in
response to a change in output.
Auerbach and Feenberg (2000) used this latter approach to estimate the impact of output
fluctuations on individual tax payments. Figure 2 updates the main results of that study, using
the same methodology with minor adjustments and extended to include later years. The figure
includes calculations for even years between 1960 and 1966, and every year thereafter through
1997.12 For each year, the calculation is based on that year’s NBER TAXSIM model based on a
file of individual income tax returns, using a “tax calculator” to estimate the impact on tax
liability of changes in tax-return components of income and deductions. To calculate the value
for a particular year, one carries out a hypothetical experiment in which all income and incomerelated deduction items on each tax return in that year are increased by 1 percent, meant to simulate

11

The moving average weights are (1/9, 2/9, 1/3, 2/9, 1/9); the figure also excludes 1991, because of the anomalies
associated with Operation Desert Storm.

12

I am extremely grateful to Dan Feenberg for providing these estimates and those presented below in Figure 3.

11

a 1-percent change in aggregate income spread neutrally across the population. Then, all the
individual tax changes are added together and divided by the sum of assumed income changes for
that year. The result is the ratio of the aggregate change in taxes to the aggregate change in income.
The first series of Figure 2 presents estimates of this ratio for the income tax, excluding
the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC). We might expect this ratio to have fallen during the
1960s and 1970s, with the general decline (at least until the 1990s) of top marginal tax rates
associated with major legislation in 1964, 1981, and 1986. However, the two years in which the
ratio is highest are 1980 and 1981. The explanation lies in the high inflation of the 1970s and
early 1980s, with bracket creep (not eliminated from the tax system until 1985) pushing
taxpayers into higher brackets. The trend reverses beginning with the 1981 tax cut, as the ratio
declines gradually into the early-1990s.
The second series in Figure 2 repeats the exercise of the first series, but holds the
distribution of income constant at that of the 1980 tax year, to determine whether changes in the
responsiveness of the tax system over time are associated with the well-documented shifts in the
income distribution. One implements this hypothetical experiment by applying the tax law for each
respective year to the 1980 sample, with incomes and income-related deductions adjusted to reflect
the ratio of that year’s aggregate adjusted gross income to the adjusted gross income for 1980. We
might expect this series to exhibit less sensitivity to the cycle in recent years by giving less weight
to income in higher marginal tax brackets, but the impact of this adjustment is trivial.
The third series in the figure is a reprise of the first, with varying income distribution, but
now the EITC and payroll tax are added. Adding the EITC alone (not shown) has no effect until its
1975 enactment, and a very small effect for the remainder of the period, never adding more than 1
percentage point to the overall response for the aggregate taxpaying population considered in this

12

figure. The payroll tax adjustment accounts for only the employee portion, consistent with the
assumption that the fluctuation in before-tax income does not affect the relative incidence of the
payroll tax on employer and employee.13 The effect of the payroll tax over time incorporates two
factors, both of which increase its magnitude. First, the payroll tax has risen over time. Second, the
rapidly rising payroll tax ceiling has made more taxpayers subject to the payroll tax on marginal
income changes. Overall, the payroll tax increases the tax response substantially, particularly in
later years, when it accounts for roughly one-sixth of the overall tax response.
The final series shown in Figure 2 takes into account the indirect effects of inflation on tax
payments. The existence of a short-run Phillips curve implies that a decline in the rate of economic
activity, as represented by a rise in the unemployment rate, will be associated with a fall in the
inflation rate. As discussed above, inflation raised the real value of taxes paid before 1985, so a
reduction in the rate of inflation would have decreased this effect, adding to the stabilizing impact of
the tax system. This effect is incorporated in the calculation by assuming that the same uniform 1percent shock to real income induces a 0.5-percent shock to the price level, for a total increase in
each individual’s nominal income of 1.5 percent. The impact of this additional effect is, as expected,
to raise the tax response in the years prior to 1985.
Regardless of which of the series in Figure 2 that one considers, 1981 stands as the year in
which the individual tax system absorbed the highest share of marginal income changes. The
payroll tax imparts an upward trend from the early 1980s on, while the lack of indexing raises
values for the period prior to 1985. The overall picture is one of very little net change over the full
period, as the effects of particular changes have tended to cancel each other out. The tax response in
1997 is roughly what it was in 1960.
13

In principle, the change in the employer portion should also act as a cushion, but the impact would be more
indirect, akin to that of other business tax payments.

13

These results offer a somewhat different pattern than those in Figure 1, although that figure
also shows a relative peak around 1981, a rise in the early 1990s, and relatively little trend in
responsiveness over time. One important source of the difference between the figures is coverage:
the personal income and payroll taxes covered in Figure 2 represent the most important automatic
stabilizers in the United States, but there are other components that are omitted. Figure 1 covers the
business and excise taxes excluded from calculations for Figure 2, as well as expenditure side
responses, notably unemployment compensation. Also, the data used to produce Figure 1 take into
account changes in the size of the taxpaying population, while those used for Figure 2 do not. These
differences explain why the fiscal responses in Figure 2 are smaller than those in Figure 114, and
may also explain differences in year-to-year movements. Still, both figures suggest that the
potential role of the fiscal system as an automatic stabilizer is not markedly different than it was
decades ago.
The magnitude of these automatic fiscal adjustments, though, indicates only a potential
for stabilization. The actual impact on aggregate demand of these fiscal changes, like the impact
of the discretionary changes discussed above, depends on behavioral responses, in this case of
household consumption expenditures. There has been considerable discussion in the literature
about the responsiveness of households to temporary tax changes, starting with the recognition
that consumption responses to temporary changes should be smaller than those to permanent
changes—perhaps extremely small—among households with long-term planning horizons.
Indeed, Shapiro and Slemrod (2001) found in a survey that a small minority of
households (22 percent) planned to spend the advance tax refunds sent in 2001. On the other
hand, econometric studies of responses to predictable changes in social security taxes and tax
14

Figure 1 presents tax offsets as a share of GDP, while those in Figure 2 are relative to the tax-return concept of
Adjusted Gross Income (AGI), which is about 60 percent of GDP. Thus, an offset in Figure 2 represents an absolute
response that is about 60 percent the size of an equal percentage offset in Figure 1.

14

refunds (Parker 1999 and Souleles 1999, respectively) find a larger consumption response, and a
still larger consumption response—as high as 90 percent—has been estimated for the phased-in
Reagan tax cuts of the early 1980s (Souleles 2002). The data used for these studies typically are
inadequate to determine whether the consumption response would be different for the highincome individuals who pay such a large share of income taxes and hence would bear a large
share of tax fluctuations. One might expect a much lower response among this group than
among the general population, if liquidity constraints were causing the large consumption
response. But the literature has not provided a strong link between excess consumption
sensitivity and liquidity constraints, nor has it provided clear evidence of a smaller consumption
response at higher incomes. Thus, although theory suggests that the overall impact on
consumption could be substantially less than the automatic tax adjustments shown in Figure 2,
some recent estimates indicate large consumption responses. But the reasons for such large
estimated responses are not well understood, and hence it is unclear whether they would also
apply to changes in tax payments induced by cyclical fluctuations.15
However, there is another potential way in which the tax system can act as an automatic
stabilizer that has generally been overlooked. Automatic stabilizers have typically been
conceived in relation to aggregate demand but, to the extent that employment levels are also
determined by labor supply conditions, a tax system with rates rising with respect to income might
also serve to stabilize output. Falling output, in reducing marginal tax rates, could encourage
greater labor supply, with rising output and marginal tax rates having the opposite effect. Moreover,
the temporary nature of the change in income, which works against the effectiveness of demand15

Kniesner and Ziliak (2002) come closer to answering this question by estimating a large consumption response
directly to variations in individual disposable income. However, they do not estimate the response to tax payments
separately, and the variations in disposable income they consider are conditional on aggregate consumption and
hence purged of cyclical movements.

15

side stabilization, reinforces the supply-side impact. If leisure is a normal good, permanent
increases in the after-tax wage have an income effect that discourages labor supply and works
against the substitution effect of the wage change. But this offsetting income effect is largely absent
from temporary changes.
How large an effect might such marginal tax rate changes have? If we focus only on firstround effects (i.e., ignoring subsequent effects of the induced increase in labor supply on the
before-tax wage and marginal tax rate), the net stabilization effect will equal the product of two
terms: the impact of the initial change in output on the after-tax wage rate though the changing
marginal tax rate, and the change in labor income from the induced labor supply response. As
shown in Auerbach and Feenberg (2000), this product is roughly equal to the product of the
change in the marginal tax rate with respect to a unit proportional change in income, dt/d ln Y,
and a relevant labor supply elasticity, sayη, that may be relatively large, reflecting not only the
absence of an income effect but also the possibility of intertemporal labor substitution.
Figure 3 presents estimates of the impact of income changes on marginal tax rates,
averaged over the population in proportion to labor income. Like the series in Figure 2, these are
extensions of results presented in Auerbach and Feenberg (2000). The series in the figure
correspond to two of those in Figure 2, for the income tax alone without the EITC, and for the
income tax with the EITC plus the payroll tax. As one would expect, the patterns in this figure
are similar to those in Figure 2, with the sensitivity of marginal tax rates peaking around 1981,
when marginal rates peaked, falling thereafter and again after 1986, as a result of the legislated
flattening of the marginal rate distributions in those years. The EITC effect (not shown
separately from that of the payroll tax) is small, slightly reducing the marginal tax rate sensitivity
(due to individuals passing out of the phase-out range with rising income). The impact of the

16

payroll tax is more significant and counter to its impact on the demand side. Here, it reduces the
tax system’s impact; around the payroll tax ceiling, the marginal tax rate falls sharply as income
rises.1617
Overall, the potential stabilizing impact through marginal tax rate changes has fallen
considerably since the early 1980s. Even now, though, the implied effect is about .07 times the
labor supply elasticity, potentially close in magnitude to the consumption response just
estimated. Thus, to the extent that cyclical fluctuations in employment are an equilibrium
phenomenon—generated not simply by changes in labor demand, but by interactions of supply
and demand—one should not ignore the role of marginal tax rates in stabilizing output.
In summary, automatic stabilizers have long been suggested to be an effective tool for
overcoming the lags of discretionary policy. According to the traditional approach to estimating
the tax system’s capacity for automatic stabilization, the U.S. tax system is roughly as effective
as in the 1960s, though less effective than it was two decades ago. But there is an additional
issue that must be confronted regarding automatic stabilizers, that their ability to stimulate
aggregate demand depends on the transmission of temporary after-tax income shocks to
consumption. Despite recent contributions to the literature, the strength of this consumption
effect is still not clear. On the other hand, there may be an impact on the supply side that has
typically been ignored, that provides a stronger impact on output, particularly in the case of
temporary tax shocks. The relative importance of automatic stabilizers on the demand and
supply sides remains to be determined.

The measured effect may be somewhat overstated, because it does not take into account the present value of
benefits generated by marginal payroll taxes. But this offset would be far from complete for households near the
payroll tax ceiling, given the progressivity and other features of the benefit formula.
16

17

As discussed in Auerbach and Feenberg (2000) incorporating the added change in nominal income due to inflation
magnifies the measured effect before 1985.

17

How Effective Has Fiscal Policy Been?
Above, I presented evidence on the cyclical responsiveness of discretionary fiscal policy,
as measured by changes in spending and tax revenues effected through explicit policy changes.
This evidence suggests that these fiscal changes have been countercyclical, making them
potentially helpful to the cause of macroeconomic stabilization. Indeed, the cyclical
responsiveness appears to have increased during the past decade.
As the discussion of the previous section on automatic stabilizers reminds us, though, one
must look beyond simple changes in revenues and spending to the impacts on output. This is
especially important on the revenue side, for revenue changes, in themselves, have no impact on
GDP—they work only through the behavioral responses they elicit. In terms of household
consumption—the main response considered thus far—the primary issue is how large the
response will be. But, for the other component of private domestic spending—investment—the
issues are more complicated.
Stabilization and Investment
Although spending on durable investment goods may depend to a certain extent on
current after-tax cash flow, it also depends on expectations of future profitability and,
importantly, future tax policy. The issue of intertemporal substitution, raised above in the
discussion of the potential labor supply response, is even more relevant here, in considering the
purchase of long-lived durable investment goods. Changes—or expected changes—in the
effective price of durable goods potentially can exert a powerful impact on investment spending,
in a manner that is not well captured by concurrent changes in business tax collections.
A good illustration of this distinction is afforded by the 2002 stimulus bill’s change in
investment incentives. The primary change was the introduction of expensing (instead of regular

18

depreciation) for 30 percent of purchases of investment goods with tax lifetimes of 20 years or
less, for a period of three years. As a form of accelerated depreciation, this policy, mechanically,
would have a larger revenue effect in the short run than in the long run, even if it were enacted
permanently. The additional deductions for future investment would be offset by the smaller
deductions on prior investment that had already been partially expensed. Thus, the annual
revenue losses would not provide an accurate picture of the tax incentives for capital investment,
which would remain constant after enactment. As enacted, though, the provision is more
complicated to analyze, for it makes capital less attractive to have after three years, but also
encourages a shift in the timing of investment to occur within the three-year window. The
plausibility of the provision’s three-year life span is also at issue in determining whether firms
treat this “temporary” incentive as permanent. Actual behavior will reflect expectations about
the future, not statutory language, and the past practice of countercyclical investment incentives
will influence the formation of these expectations.
The role of current tax provisions and expectations can be described using the standard
Hall-Jorgenson user of cost of capital, which provides a measure of the required gross, before-tax
return to capital and hence a measure of the incentive to use capital in production. For a constant
tax system, the user cost is:

(1)

c=

q
∆q  1 − k − τz
 ρ + δ −

p
q  1 − τ

where p is the price of output, q is the price of new capital goods, ρ is the nominal discount rate,

δ is the exponential rate at which capital actually depreciates, k is the investment tax credit, τ is
the corporate tax rate, and z is the present value of depreciation allowances per dollar of capital

19

purchased. According to this theory, taxation affects the incentive to invest in a straightforward
manner, with increases in the corporate tax rate raising the cost of capital (assuming that z<1)
and increases in the investment tax credit or the present value of depreciation allowances
lowering the cost of capital. If one modifies the assumptions to incorporate changes in tax
policy, the user cost of capital becomes (see Auerbach 1983):

c=

(2)

q
∆[ q(1 − Γ)]  1 − Γ q 
∆q  1 − Γ q ∆Γ
=  ρ + δ −
+
 ρ + δ −


p
q(1 − Γ)  1 − τ
p
q  1 − τ
p 1−τ

where Γ equals the sum of the investment tax credit and the present value of tax savings from
depreciation deductions.18
According to expression (2), the price of capital goods is effectively the underlying price,
q, multiplied by a factor that accounts for the tax benefits associated with the purchase of capital,
Γ. The presence of the additional term on the right-hand side of (2) means that there are now
two ways in which tax policy may affect investment. First, as already discussed, it can affect the
overall level of desired capital, given a constant tax regime. Second, if the regime is expected to
change, it may encourage firms to alter the timing of their capital purchases. Indeed, a change
such as the expected elimination of an investment tax credit has a powerful effect on the user
cost as computed from expression (2), for it induces a huge capital gain at the time of the credit’s
elimination.
To study these timing effects, though, a model that assumes instantaneous capital stock
adjustment is inadequate. Theoretical models that incorporate adjustment costs commonly
18

This sum equals k+τz if τ is constant over time. If τ is expected to change over time, then the present value of tax
savings from depreciation deductions is not the simple product of the current value of τ and the present value of
depreciation deductions, z.

20

assume that the cost of adjustment rises at an increasing rate with the level of capital
expenditures, implying that it is desirable for the firm to spread the expenditures over time.
Moreover, expectations of future changes in the incentive to use capital in production lead to
immediate changes in investment, in order to minimize the adjustment costs incurred in closing
the gap between the current and future desired capital stocks.
As shown in Auerbach (1989) and Auerbach and Hassett (1992), optimal investment
behavior in the presence of convex adjustment costs, which gives rise to Tobin’s q theory of
investment (e.g., Hayashi 1982), may also be characterized by a partial adjustment investment
process in which the desired capital stock at date t varies inversely with the weighted average of
the current and expected future user costs of capital based on expression (2):
c t* = E t ∑ w s −t c s

(3)

s≥t

where the weights, wi, sum to unity and decline exponentially, at a rate that is inversely related to
the size of adjustment costs; the more sluggish the investment response, the more the future
matters.
Expression (3) for the weighted sum of user costs has some straightforward implications.
If the user cost suddenly changed today—for example, because of a change in tax law designed
to deliver the economy from recession—and this change were expected to last indefinitely, then
the weighted average is simply the new current value (because the weights add to unity).
However, if today’s change in the user cost is not expected to persist—for example, because the
change in tax law is expected to be temporary—then the user cost relevant for current investment
must reflect this anticipation. Generally, this will encourage even more current investment than
if the incentive were expected to be permanent.

21

The possible effects of temporary incentives can be illustrated with the new U.S. law.
Table 4 summarizes the immediate fiscal stimulus for a representative asset for a variety of
assumptions about the weight placed on future capital costs and the permanence of the tax
change. The weights on future capital costs reflect a plausible range, based on the estimates in
Auerbach and Hassett (1992). As the table suggests, there is a wide range of possible effects,
depending on the technology of investment adjustment and the nature of expectations; and it is
reasonable to assume that expectations would account for more than the statutory language,
given the degree of policy activism in the past.
In a regression based on annual data for the period 1953-85, Auerbach and Hines (1988)
found that the key variable in the user cost expression (2),

Γ
, was significantly affected by
1−τ

the unemployment rate, the rate of GNP growth, and the real interest rate. Some of the signs
were consistent with countercyclical policy timing, but others were not, making the net
stabilizing impact unclear. Further, one must also take into account the impact that such frequent
policy changes had on investment in periods when stimulus was not being applied—when the
expectation of an investment incentive might have depressed investment. Based on their
empirical estimates of investment behavior, Auerbach and Hassett (1992) concluded that, over
the period 1953-88, actual tax policy had destabilized business fixed investment. The period
since then, until this year, has been one of quietude with respect to investment-oriented changes
in the law, but not with respect to proposed changes, including a similar provision to that enacted
this year proposed by the first President Bush in 1992, and the possibility of an incremental
investment tax credit floated during the first year of the Clinton administration. Presumably,
some of the investment fluctuations of the past decade represented reactions to tax changes that
never occurred.

22

While discretionary fiscal policy has proved problematic for stimulating investment,
there are also problems associated with automatic stabilizers. As portrayed by the neoclassical
investment theory, forward-looking investment behavior need not respond strongly to current
cash-flow conditions. This prediction remains controversial, as the literature—motivated by
theories of capital market imperfections and asymmetric information—continues to debate the
importance of current cash-flow conditions for investment. To whatever extent cash flow does
matter, income tax fluctuations, especially fluctuations in the corporate income tax, can cushion
investment fluctuations, for they rise and fall with current profitability. But there are important
limits to this cushion on the down side imposed by tax law asymmetries, notably the limits on the
deductibility of losses and the corporate Alternative Minimum Tax (AMT).
The inability of corporations to get refunds for losses can loom very large in recessions.
During the deep recession in the early 1980s, for example, Altshuler and Auerbach (1990) found
that roughly one-fifth (weighted by assets) of the non-financial corporate sector was constrained
in this manner, with an even larger number of firms not fully able to utilize investment tax
credits for which some investment qualified at the time. Such restrictions have a mixed effect on
the forward-looking incentive to invest, as the inability to deduct depreciation and other up-front
incentives today is offset by the possibility that profits will be shielded by future losses. But, for
cash-constrained firms, the negative effect is clear. Thus, the 2002 stimulus package also
included a temporary, two-year provision that extended the number of prior years to which
current losses could be “carried back” to offset past profits and get an immediate deduction for
losses.
The corporate AMT has an effect similar to the limit on losses. It is more likely to bind
(i.e., exceed a firm’s regular tax liability) in periods of low profitability, as a firm’s AMT

23

liability is less sensitive to profit fluctuations than its regular tax liability. Like the limit on
losses, the AMT represents a deviation from symmetric taxation that reduces cash flows during
periods of low profitability. There are other asymmetries present in the tax code, working in the
same direction, such as the limit on the use of foreign tax credits.
These various tax law asymmetries—which may have little economic justification and in
any event have generally been enacted without consideration of economic effects—have, as the
2002 legislation illustrates, transferred a potential automatic stabilizer into the realm of
discretionary policy. As the limits of discretionary policy are recognized, it certainly makes
sense to give some serious thought to reforming these provisions permanently.
Measuring Fiscal Policy’s Quantitative Effects
Taking account of all the channels through which discretionary fiscal policy has operated,
is it possible to measure how effective it has been? In a recent investigation using time series
methods, Blanchard and Perotti (1999) find that discretionary fiscal policy “works” in the sense
that positive innovations to government spending increase subsequent output, as do negative
innovations to tax revenues. In particular, tax reductions increase consumption. This means that
discretionary policy could work, in that it has some effect on output and its components.
Also using time series methods, Romer and Romer (1994) conclude that actual
discretionary fiscal policy worked in the right direction, which is consistent with the regressions
above showing that discretionary policy has responded to the GDP gap. But they also estimate
that discretionary fiscal policy’s overall impact was minimal, compared to that of monetary
policy. They infer from the size and timing of automatic fiscal stabilizers that these have had a
more important impact than discretionary policy, but it is difficult to estimate the impact of
automatic stabilizers directly, precisely because they are directly tied to output fluctuations. That

24

is, while there may have been “natural experiments” for discretionary policy that can be used to
estimate such policy’s economic impacts, automatic stabilizers are, by their nature, driven by
output fluctuations, so we will see little independent variation in them.
As discussed above, the current level of tax revenues is an inadequate summary measure
of the expansionary thrust of fiscal policy. Even adjusting for the cycle, revenues can rise or fall
as a consequence of extraneous factors (such as changes in the income distribution), and their
composition and future path should also affect current consumption and investment decisions.
Thus, estimates that cyclically adjusted tax revenues have tended to fall with increases in the
output gap are not inconsistent with the conclusion that discretionary tax policy has destabilized
investment, and estimates that discretionary policy has had a weak overall effect on output may
reflect a combination of negative and positive impacts. Taken together, the evidence suggests
that discretionary fiscal policy has effects but leaves us with little evidence that these effects
have provided a significant contribution to economic stabilization, if in fact they have worked in
the right direction at all.

Discretionary Fiscal Policy and the Long-Run Budget Constraint
The review above has emphasized that the efficacy of fiscal policy as a stabilization tool
depends both on the government’s ability to time policy changes and on the impact of these
changes on aggregate activity. For consumption and investment, the impact of policy on current
activity depends on expectations about the future as well. Tax cuts perceived to be temporary
may undercut consumption responses; temporary investment incentives may work in the
opposite direction, strengthening the immediate response (but also, potentially, weakening prior
investment). As yet, I have not discussed how the fiscal environment may influence these
expectations about the future. Recent contributions to the theoretical literature, and indeed

25

recent policy arguments, have emphasized the importance of long-run considerations, suggesting
that the scope for expansionary fiscal policy may be limited when long-run fiscal constraints are
significant.
The government’s long-run budget constraint is derived from the annual identity relating
the budget surplus to the gap between revenues and spending plus the restriction that government
debt cannot forever grow faster than the interest rate. This constraint may be written:

(4)

 1+ r 
Bt = ∑ 

s = t +1 1 + g 
∞

− ( s −t )

S sp

where Bt is the ratio of end-of-year national debt to GDP in the current year t, S sp is the primary
surplus in year s as a share of that year’s GDP, and r and g are the interest rate and the rate of
economic growth, assumed for simplicity here to be constant. Under normal circumstances, r>g,
meaning that it is not possible to “grow our way out of debt” passively by waiting for growth to
provide the revenues needed for debt service; a higher level of national debt requires a
compensating higher present value of future primary surpluses. This constraint always applies to
government policy, whether or not it holds for current law. If expression (4) indicates an
imbalance under current policy, this simply means that current policy is not sustainable.
The current state of fiscal policy, relative to one of fiscal balance, can influence the
efficacy of discretionary policy in two ways. First, it can influence current policy, discouraging
further expansion in the face of a preexisting fiscal imbalance, or encouraging it when the
government’s fiscal position appears more responsible. The estimates in Tables 1-3 above
suggest that policy follows this pattern, at least if the previous budget surplus as a share of GDP
provides some indication of the government’s fiscal position. (I return to this question of

26

measurement below.) Second, the government’s fiscal position provides information about the
set of feasible future policies. A situation of extreme imbalance, for example, suggests that a
substantial reduction in spending, a substantial increase in tax revenues, or both will be needed in
the future.19 Thus, a large current tax cut may have a less powerful impact on current
consumption, if households view it as unsustainable and likely to be followed very quickly by a
tax increase.
Indeed, many contributions to literature, surveyed recently by Giavazzi et al. (2000),
have suggested reasons why a loosening of fiscal policy, adopted under such conditions of fiscal
duress, may actually have contractionary economic effects. Normally, we would expect tax cuts
to have positive wealth effects, increasing current consumption demand. Even recognizing the
government’s long-run budget constraint, which requires these tax cuts to be paid for by
offsetting future policies, current consumers with finite horizons would expect some of the
burden to be placed on future generations, leaving a net positive wealth effect for those alive
today. As already discussed, the size of this wealth effect might be small, if the tax cut is
assumed to be temporary.
But the wealth effect might even be negative, if the government must rely on very
distortionary future taxes to recoup today’s revenue loss, or if reaching some critical debt level or
degree of fiscal imbalance triggers a crisis or a precipitous increase in tax burdens. In both
instances, the full induced cost of future tax increases more than offsets the benefits of
immediate tax cuts, even for current generations, who are then induced to curtail consumption
and save more in preparation for the hard times to come. A similar logic applies to the effects of

19

Included among the range of possible tax revenues are the implicit taxes on the holders of government assets
associated with inflation—through seignorage and erosion of nominal debt—and outright default.

27

government expenditures, and there is some international evidence from the output responses to
fiscal policy that mechanisms like these may be at work (Perotti 1999).
The possibility of fiscal policy having expansionary effects certainly has come up in
debates about U.S. fiscal policy in the 1980s and 1990s. The strong performance of the U.S.
economy in the 1990s was often attributed by the Clinton administration to responsible fiscal
adjustments, including the tax increase of 1993 and the extension of discretionary spending caps
in 1993 and 1997. A common view appears to have evolved in policy discussions of 1990s fiscal
policy that the positive effects worked through interest rate adjustments, the reduced crowding
out and greater confidence in government inducing lower interest rates, which then spurred
interest-sensitive private demand.
There is a long-running debate over the extent to which fiscal contractions actually do
reduce interest rates significantly. But, whatever one’s perspective on this debate, it is unclear
how the theoretical literature explaining why fiscal contractions might expand output can be
translated into the popular view of recent events that sees this expansion of output as occurring
through a decline in interest rates. In particular, a fall in interest rates is not typically an element
of the theory of expansionary fiscal contractions, and it is not evident how fiscal contractions
might lead simultaneously to lower real interest rates and higher aggregate demand and output.
As a start, the conflict may be illustrated using a standard IS-LM diagram, as in Figure
4, with the real interest rate on the vertical axis and output on the horizontal axis. The standard
analysis of a fiscal contraction, either through a tax increase or a spending reduction, starts with a
downward shift in the IS curve from its initial position at IS0, inducing a decline in aggregate
demand and a decline in interest rates, with the decline in interest rates serving to cushion the
decline in aggregate demand via a movement along the new, lower IS curve, labeled IS1 in the

28

figure. If the fiscal contraction conveys positive news about the future, this may stimulate
current private sector demand, causing the downward shift in the IS curve to lessen, as
represented by the intermediate curve labeled IS2. There is no theoretical barrier to the IS curve
actually shifting upward beyond the original curve, IS0, if the positive impact on private demand
is sufficiently strong. If this happens, then aggregate demand will indeed rise, but so will the
interest rate, r. Adding inflation expectations to this basic framework merely deepens the
problem. If the fiscal policy reduces the expected inflation rate, it reduces the nominal interest
rate corresponding to any given real interest rate, thereby increasing money demand and causing
a leftward-shift in the LM curve, from LM0 to LM1. This will require an even larger increase in
the real interest rate for aggregate demand to increase.
The IS-LM model embodies a variety of restrictive assumptions, of course, but the
difficulty of generating this combination of interest rate and output movements really just has to
do with equilibrium in the capital market. If the demand for funds does not decline, then a fall in
the real interest rate must be initiated by an increase in the supply of funds. What mechanism
can generate this increased supply of funds and an increase in output at the same time? It is hard
to see this combination as the result of a process beginning on the demand side, which would
start with a reduction in the supply of funds via an increase in private or government
consumption.
On the supply side, there could be an increase in labor supply (perhaps due to the income
effect associated with expected higher tax payments in the future), which would increase output
and, possibly, saving, but the increase in employment would tend to increase the productivity of
capital and hence the demand for capital, too. The same would be true of a positive productivity
shock (perhaps in some way associated with the salutary effects of the fiscal policy on economic

29

stability)—it might increase output and the supply of funds, but it would also increase the
demand for funds by firms seeking to take advantage of the higher productivity level. A
temporary productivity shock would “work” in that it would increase output and saving as
households sought to spread the benefits of the temporary shock over the future, but this seems
rather far afield from what has been envisioned in policy discussions.
The analysis here is certainly not definitive, for there are many more scenarios and
assumptions that a creative mind could employ. For example, if the fiscal contraction reduced
the riskiness of future inflation (rather than just the level of expected inflation), this change
might make long-term bonds relatively less risky than cash, reducing the demand for money and
shifting the LM curve out in Figure 4, as to the position LM2. The result could be an increase in
output and a decline in real interest rates, indicated by the intersection of this curve and the curve
labeled IS2.20 Or, perhaps, the “common wisdom” is based on confusion between nominal and
real interest rates, for it is easier to understand how nominal rates might decline even as output
increased as a consequence of a fiscal contraction. Finally, it is possible that a policy of fiscal
contraction induces expectations of further fiscal contractions in the future, thereby lowering
long-term interest rates enough to expand current output and short-term interest rates.21 Thus,
long-term rates would fall as current output rose, but short-term rates would rise.
As this discussion is meant to demonstrate, it is entirely possible that fiscal contractions
might benefit the economy, and it is also possible that the United States in the 1990s offers us a
positive demonstration. But the mechanism by which this is commonly supposed to have
happened is not easily matched to a clear, compelling economic explanation. As we contemplate
20

One might test this hypothesis by looking at movements in yields on indexed government bonds, which would not
benefit from a reduction in inflation risk. Unfortunately, the United States began issuing indexed bonds only in
1997, after the Clinton administration’s fiscal policy had largely been implemented.

21

This possibility of this combination of effects is demonstrated analytically in Blanchard (1981).

30

fiscal contractions in the future to respond to the major fiscal imbalance that exists, it is
important to understand not only whether the 1990s fiscal contraction had expansionary effects,
but also, if so, how this occurred.

Accounting Conventions and Fiscal Policy
Ultimately, government fiscal decisions must conform to the long-run budget constraint,
but any particular year’s policies need not, unless a long-run imbalance has precipitated a crisis
requiring immediate action. The United States faces a long-term fiscal imbalance, giving the
trajectory based on its current fiscal polices. The estimated size of this imbalance has fluctuated
in the past decade, falling during the late 1990s and rising recently, but the main source of the
imbalance—large, unfunded transfer programs, an aging population, and a continuing rise in
health care spending per capita—has not changed. Based on the most recent CBO projections,
Auerbach et al. (2002) estimate that the current imbalance, expressed as a permanent share of
GDP by which the primary surplus would need to increase to satisfy expression (4) above, is
between 4 and 8 percent. This is an enormous magnitude, larger as a share of GDP than any
conventionally measured primary deficit during the postwar period.
It appears that government policy does respond to measures like the budget surplus, but
the surplus itself is an extremely arbitrary measure. The most familiar illustration of this is the
distinction between the unified federal budget and the budget that excludes “off-budget” items,
most significantly the Social Security (OASDI) trust funds. In all but two recent fiscal years
(1999 and 2000), the unified budget excluding off-budget items has been in deficit and the
OASDI trust fund substantially in surplus. Moreover, as Figure 5 illustrates, the trends of the
two surpluses are different. The Social Security trust fund has been growing as a share of GDP
since it was roughly zero in 1984.

31

Recognition that the Social Security trust fund is being accumulated to help pay for future
benefits is now widespread among policy makers. Recent years’ legislative machinations have
given us new and arcane budget concepts like the “lock-box” in which the Social Security trust
fund was to have been kept from the clutches of the fiscally irresponsible. But there is probably
still not complete understanding how small the Social Security trust fund is relative to the
unfunded commitments that appear nowhere on the conventional federal balance sheet, or that
the annual accumulations in the trust fund are swamped by the annual accumulations in this
implicit but very firm liability.
There have been attempts to broaden the federal budget presentation to make implicit
liabilities more explicit. For example, the official U.S. budget documents released by the Office
of Management and Budget (OMB) for fiscal years 1993-95 provided estimates of generational
accounts, a recently developed and now widely used method of evaluating fiscal conditions.22
These presentations showed a substantial fiscal imbalance, represented by large looming burdens
on future generations. Both CBO and, to a lesser extent, OMB have begun providing longerterm budget projections that, like those of the Social Security Trustees reports, show quite clearly
the unsustainable policy trends.
Generational accounts and estimates of long-term budget gaps have become more
familiar over time, but these projections still serve more as background information than as
direct inputs to the policy process, which continues to rely on current and short-term deficit
measures and, indeed, has come to rely more mechanically on these measures since the GrammRudman-Hollings legislation of the 1980s setting deficit targets.23 Given how much attention
22

See, e.g., Auerbach et al. (1999).

23

The primacy of the simple surplus measure is consistent with the fact that more forward-looking measures of the
budget gap in alternative specifications of the policy equations in Table 2 were less successful in explaining policy
changes.

32

recent political debates about taxes and federal spending have given to the budget surplus,
making changes to the “official” budget surplus, as through inclusion of some measure of
accumulating liabilities, could have a major impact on policy.
As an illustration of what such a change might mean, the first column of Table 5 presents
rough estimates of the size of the implicit liability of the OASDI system at the beginning of each
year from 1997-2002, based on annual Social Security Trustees reports, other data, and a variety
of assumptions that are described more fully in the appendix to this paper. This implicit debt is
considerably larger than the reported national debt.24 The change from one year to the next in
the implicit debt is a measure of the corresponding implicit deficit. This deficit, shown for each
year in the table’s second column, may be broken down into two components, one attributable to
changes in the base year of the calculation and the other due to changes in population projections
and economic projections from one year to the next. For example, the change in the implicit
liability between 2000 and 2001 is estimated to be $769 billion, of which $798 billion—slightly
more than the total implicit deficit—is attributable to the advance of a year in the date at which
the calculation is being made. A small reduction of $29 billion in the implicit deficit is
attributable to an improvement in the forecast from the 2000 Trustees Report to the 2001
Trustees Report. For 2001, the total implicit deficit is estimated to be negative (i.e., there is an
implicit surplus), because the impact of the base-year shift is more than offset by a substantial
improvement in the forecast.
The deficit components attributable to changing forecasts are quite volatile, but the
components due to base-year changes are not. These large, positive components reflect the fact
that a large cohort in the population—the baby boom generation—is moving closer and closer to
24

The magnitude of these estimates is roughly consistent with similar calculations for the period through 1997
presented in Goss (1999).

33

retirement and the receipt of benefits. The closer in time these benefits are, the higher the
present value of the liability to pay them. These annual accumulations in the OASDI debt
swamp the annual accumulations in the OASDI trust fund, reminding us that, absent a continuing
trend of improving projections like those of the last two years, a full accrual accounting of the
OASDI system would show enormous annual deficits. Adding in the implicit liabilities of the
Medicare system would substantially amplify this result.
Just as in the private sector, accounting conventions can have important real effects if the
underlying information is not fully transparent. Even though it would directly cause no changes
in the government’s underlying liabilities, formally incorporating the accruing obligation to pay
Social Security and Medicare benefits would convey much more clearly to policy makers and,
perhaps more importantly, to those to whom policy makers are accountable, that the fiscal
imbalance is not merely a “future” problem. It is hard to imagine that inclusion of deficit
numbers like those in Table 5 in the annual presentation of the federal budget would not have an
important impact on fiscal policy decisions.

Conclusions
Recent experience and research suggest a number of conclusions regarding the use and
efficacy of discretionary fiscal policy:
(1) In recent years, U.S. discretionary fiscal policy appears to have become more active
in response to both cyclical conditions and a simple measure of budget balance.
(2) Considerable uncertainty remains about how large an impact discretionary fiscal
policy has on output.

34

(3) There is little evidence that discretionary fiscal policy has played an important
stabilization role during recent decades, both because of the potential weakness of its effects and
because some of its effects (with respect to investment) have been poorly timed.
(4) Budgetary pressure may not only affect the fiscal response, but may also weaken the
efficacy of expansionary fiscal policy if it is adopted. Conversely, contractionary fiscal policy
may not restrict activity, and might even have a salutary effect on output. This possibility may
be relevant for understanding the impact of fiscal policy in the 1990s, although the mechanism is
unclear.
(5) Automatic stabilizers offer an alternative to discretionary fiscal policy. The automatic
stabilizers embedded in the fiscal system have experienced little net change since the 1960s and
have contributed to cushioning cyclical fluctuations. But the tax system has many attributes that
weaken its potential role as an automatic stabilizer, particularly with respect to investment.
(6) The government’s reported fiscal position, to which fiscal policy appears responsive,
represents a very poor measure of underlying fiscal balance.
These findings suggest the need for continued caution in the use of discretionary policy,
greater focus on making automatic stabilizers more effective, and the integration of better
measures of fiscal balance into the discretionary policy process. And, of course, more research
on the relevant issues.

35

References
Altshuler, Rosanne, and Alan J. Auerbach, 1990, “The Significance of Tax Law Asymmetries:
An Empirical Investigation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February, 61-86.
Auerbach, Alan J., 1983, “Taxation, Corporate Financial Policy and the Cost of Capital,”
Journal of Economic Literature, September, 905-940.
Auerbach, Alan J., 1989, “Tax Reform and Adjustment Costs: The Impact on Investment and
Market Value,” International Economic Review, November, 939-962.
Auerbach, Alan J., 1994, “The U.S. Fiscal Problem: Where We Are, How We Got Here, and
Where We’re Going,” in Stanley Fischer and Julio Rotemberg, editors, NBER
Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge: MIT Press, 141–175.
Auerbach, Alan J., 1999, “On the Performance and Use of Government Revenue Forecasts,”
National Tax Journal, December, 767–82.
Auerbach, Alan J., 2000, “Formation of Fiscal Policy: The Experience of the Past Twenty-Five
Years”, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, April, 1–15.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Daniel Feenberg, 2000, “The Significance of Federal Taxes as Automatic
Stabilizers,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Summer, 37–56.
Auerbach, Alan J., William G. Gale, Peter R. Orszag, and Samara R. Potter, 2002, “The Budget
Outlook and Options for Reform,” in Henry J. Aaron, James Lindsey, and Pietro Nivola,
editors, Agenda for the Nation, Washington: Brookings Institution Press, forthcoming.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Kevin Hassett, 1992, “Tax Policy and Business Fixed Investment in the
United States,” Journal of Public Economics, 47, 141-170.
Auerbach, Alan J., and Kevin Hassett, 2002, “Fiscal Policy and Uncertainty,” paper presented at
a conference on “Stabilizing the Economy” at the Council on Foreign Relations, July.
Auerbach, Alan J., and James R. Hines, Jr., 1988, “Investment Tax Incentives and Frequent Tax
Reforms,” American Economic Review, May, 211–6.
Auerbach, Alan J., Laurence Kotlikoff, and Willi Leibfritz, editors, Generational Accounting
Around the World, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999.
Blanchard, Olivier, 1981, “Output, the Stock Market, and Interest Rates,” American Economic
Review, March, 132-43.
Blanchard, Olivier, and Roberto Perotti, 1999, “An Empirical Characterization of the Dynamic
Effects of Changes in Government Spending and Taxes on Output,” NBER Working
Paper #7269, July.

36

Bohn, Henning, 1998, “The Behavior of U.S. Public Debt and Deficits,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, August, 949–63.
Cohen, Darrel, Pernille Hanson, and Kevin Hassett, 2002, “The Effects of Temporary Partial
Expensing on Investment Incentives in the U.S.,” National Tax Journal, September,
forthcoming.
Giavazzi, Francesco, Tullio Jappelli, and Marco Pagano, 2000, “Searching for Non-Linear
Effects of Fiscal Policy: Evidence from Industrial and Developing Countries,” European
Economic Review, June, 1259-89.
Gokhale, Jagadeesh, Benjamin R. Page, and John R. Sturrock, 1999, “Generational Accounting
for the United States: An Update,” in Alan J. Auerbach, Laurence Kotlikoff, and Willi
Leibfritz, editors, Generational Accounting Around the World, 489-517.
Goss, Stephen C., 1999, “Measuring Solvency in the Social Security System,” in Olivia Mitchell,
Robert Myers, and Howard Young, editors, Prospects for Social Security Reform,
Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 17-36.
Hayashi, Fumio, 1982, “Tobin’s marginal q and average q: a neoclassical interpretation,”
Econometrica, January, 213-224.
Kniesner, Thomas J., and James P. Ziliak, 2002, “Tax Reform and Automatic Stabilization,”
American Economic Review, June, 590-612.
Parker, Jonathan A., 1999, “The Reaction of Household Consumption to Predictable Changes in
Social Security Taxes,” American Economic Review, September, 959-73.
Perotti, Roberto, 1999, “Fiscal Policy in Good Times and Bad,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
November, 1399-1436.
Romer, Christina D. and David Romer, 1994, “What Ends Recessions?” in Stanley Fischer and
Julio Rotemberg, editors, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 13-57.
Shapiro, Matthew D. and Joel Slemrod, 2001, “Consumer Response to Tax Rebates,” NBER
Working Paper #8672, December.
Souleles, Nicholas S., 1999, “The Response of Household Consumption to Income Tax
Refunds,” American Economic Review, September, 947-58.
Souleles, Nicholas S., 2002, “Consumer Response to the Reagan Tax Cuts,” Journal of Public
Economics, July, 99-120.

37

Appendix
This appendix provides a brief description of the data and methodology used to derive the
implicit OASDI liability estimates reported in Table 5.
For each year from 1997 through 2001, the following procedure is used. Projected
annual flows in and out of the OASDI system over a roughly 75-year period are taken from that
year’s OASDI Trustees report. Projections of the male and female population at each age in
each of these future years is taken from contemporaneous population projections, provided by
Social Security from unpublished data.25 The projected taxes and benefits in each future year are
allocated among cohorts using the tax and benefit profiles by age and sex from Gokhale et al.
(1999).26 Then, to obtain an estimate of the OASDI system’s “closed-group” liability—the
liability to those already participating—only the taxes and benefits in each future year that have
been allocated by this procedure to individuals who are at least 18 years old in the base year are
counted. Finally, all of these included tax and benefit flows are discounted back to the base year
using a nominal discount rate of 6 percent, a long-term discount rate consistent with recent
Trustees assumptions. For 2002, the same procedure is used, except that 2001 population
projections are used because the unpublished population projections for 2002 are not available.
The deficit for each year equals the next year’s estimated liability minus that of the
current year. The part of this deficit that is attributable to the change in base year is obtained by
re-estimating the following year’s debt using the current year’s projections of flows and
population.
25

I am grateful to Seung An at the Social Security Administration for providing these data.

26

If ai is the relative benefit (or tax) profile element for each cohort i (where i ranges over age and sex) and pit
is cohort i’s population in year t, then the fraction of year t’s benefits (or taxes) allocated to a particular cohort j is
ajpjt/(Σiaipit).

38

Source: Congressional Budget Office

**

-- significant at the .10 level
-- significant at the .05 level
***
-- significant at the .01 level

*

183

Number of Observations

183

.044

.008

R2

113

.044

-0.096**
(0.042)

-0.070***
(0.025)

—

Budget Surplus (-1)

-0.060**
(0.024)

-.057***
(.019)

-0.024
(0.016)

GDP Gap (-1)

-0.121*
(0.066)

-0.087*
(0.051)

0.003
(0.040)

Constant

(3)
1956:2—1984:2

(2)
1956:2—2001:4

1956:2—2001:4

Independent Variable

(1)

35

.106

-0.250**
(0.109)

-0.136**
(0.065)

-0.771**
(0.361)

1984:3—1993:1

(4)

(5)

35

.184

-0.285***
(0.092)

-0.358***
(0.126)

-0.154
(0.110)

1993:2—2001:4

Dependent Variable: Quarterly Change in Full-Employment Surplus, Relative to Full-Employment GDP
(standard errors in parentheses)

Table 1. Determinants of the Full-Employment Surplus

-0.100
(0.077)
-0.152
(0.121)
-.006

-0.078*
(0.043)
-0.110***
(0.029)
.317
36

GDP Gap (-1)

Budget Surplus (-1)

R2

Number of
Observations

Source: Congressional Budget Office

**

-- significant at the .10 level
-- significant at the .05 level
***
-- significant at the .01 level

*

-0.400
(0.463)

-0.211***
(0.074)

Constant

36

1984:2—
1993:1

1984:2—
2002:1

Independent Variable

36

.618

-0.182***
(0.047)

-0.158**
(0.067)

-0.254***
(0.062)

1993:2—
2002:1

Surplus (exc. debt service)

18

.208

-0.043**
(0.016)

-0.024
(0.023)

-0.077*
(0.040)

1984:2—
2002:1

18

-.054

-0.049
(0.047)

-0.026
(0.030)

-0.119
(0.180)

1984:2—
1993:1

Revenues

Dependent Variable

18

.280

-0.102**
(0.046)

-0.095
(0.065)

-0.122*
(0.060)

18

.213

0.067***
(0.021)

0.055*
(0.031)

0.134**
(0.054)

18

-.022

0.103
(0.092)

0.074
(0.059)

0.281
(0.355)

18

.442

0.080**
(0.031)

0.063
(0.044)

0.132***
(0.040)

1993:2— 1984:2— 1984:2— 1993:2—
2002:1
2002:1
1993:1
2002:1

Outlays (exc. debt service)

Dependent Variable: Semiannual Legislated Change in Surplus, Revenue, and Outlays Relative to Full-Employment GDP
(standard errors in parentheses)

Table 2. Determinants of Policy Changes

-0.046
39

R2

Number of Observations

Source: Congressional Budget Office

-- significant at the .05 level

-0.018

0.026
(0.052)

Budget Surplus (-1)

**

0.022
(0.038)

0.005
(0.038)

GDP Gap (-1)

39

--

-0.001
(0.001)

-0.001
(0.001)

Constant

1963—2001

1963—2001

(2)

Independent Variable

(1)

21

-0.044

0.042
(0.105)

--

-0.001
(0.002)

1963—1983

(3)

9

-0.027

-0.078
(0.088)

--

-0.005
(0.004)

1984—1992

(4)

9

0.570

0.061**
(0.018)

--

-0.001**
(0.0005)

1993—2001

(5)

Dependent Variable: Annual Fiscal-Year Change in Discretionary Spending, Relative to Full-Employment GDP
(standard errors in parentheses)

Table 3. Determinants of Discretionary Spending

-4.19
-3.84

.5
.7

-4.96

-8.30

-11.64

1-year

-3.32

-3.49

-3.18

Uncertain**

Source: Auerbach and Hassett (2002), adapted from Cohen, Hanson, and Hassett (2002)

Assumes that investors believe there is a 50 percent chance of the new law becoming permanent and a 50 percent
chance of it remaining as enacted.

**

-2.80

-2.80

-2.80

Permanent

Weight = discount factor applied successively to each future period’s cost of capital

*

-3.56

New Law

.3

Weight*

(7-Year Equipment)

Table 4. Percentage Change in User Cost from 2002 Partial Expensing Provision

9,433
9,750
9,680
11,247
12,016
11,607

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

Source: Author’s calculations based on Social Security data

Debt

Year

-409

769

1,567

-70

317

Deficit

(billions of dollars)

845

798

668

666

620

Base Year

-1,254

-29

899

-736

-303

Projections

Portion of Deficit Due
to Change in

Table 5. Implicit Debt and Deficits of the OASDI System

Coefficient (smoothed)

1959

1962

1965

Source: Congressional Budget Office

0.00
1956

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.35

0.40

0.45

1968

1971

1974

1980
Year

1977

1983

1986

1989

1992

1995

Figure 1. Automatic Stabilizers Implied by the Full-Employment Deficit

1998

2001

Change in Taxes

Source: NBER TAXSIM model

Income Tax w/o EITC

Fixed Income Dist

Year
w/Payroll Tax & EITC

w/Inflation Effect

0.00
1960 1964 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.35

0.40

Figure 2. Automatic Stabilizers of Individual Income and Payroll Taxes

Marginal Tax Rate Change

Source: NBER TAXSIM model

Income Tax w/o EITC

Year
w/Payroll Tax & EITC

0.00
1960 1964 1967 1969 1971 1973 1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997

0.05

0.10

0.15

0.20

0.25

0.30

0.35

Figure 3. Response of Marginal Tax Rate to Before-Tax Income

r

IS1

LM1
LM0

IS2

IS0

LM2

Y

Figure 4. Contractionary Fiscal Policy and Economic Expansion

Surplus (Percent of GDP)

1986

1988

Source: Congressional Budget Office

-6
1984

-5

-4

-3

-2

-1

0

1

2

3

1990

On-Budget

Fiscal Year

1992

Unified

1994

1996

Figure 5. Unified and On-Budget Surplus, Relative to GDP

1998

2000

