                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE CORRELATION OF WEALTH ACROSS GENERATIONS

                                           Kerwin Kofi Charles
                                               Erik Hurst

                                           Working Paper 9314
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9314


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      October 2002




         We thank Heidi Shierholz for excellent research assistance and participants at the NBER 2000
summer consumption workshop, the University of Chicago’s Graduate School of Business macro lunch, the
University of Michigan’s labor seminar, Dartmouth’s economic workshop, Wisconsin’s public finance
workshop, University of Maryland’s macro seminar, University of Florida’s applied economics workshop
and Purdue University’s macro/international workshop for helpful comments. Additionally, we would like
to thank Mark Aguiar, Orazio Attanasio, Rebecca Blank, John Bound, Sam Bowles, Charlie Brown, John
Cochrane, Steve Davis, Anil Kayshap, Kevin Lang, Glen Loury, Anna Lusardi, Casey Mulligan, Karl Sholz,
Jonathan Skinner,Gary Solon, and Nick Souleles. Hurst would also like to thank the financial support given
by the William Ladany Research Fund at the Graduate School of Business, University of Chicago for work
on this project. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Kerwin Kofi Charles and Erik Hurst. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is
given to the source.
The Correlation of Wealth Across Generations
NBER Working Paper No. 9314
October 2002
JEL No. J62, J12, G12, E21

                                            ABSTRACT
        This paper examines the similarity in wealth between parents and their children, and explores
alternative explanations for this relationship. We find that the age-adjusted elasticity of child wealth with
respect to parental wealth is 0.37, before the transfer of bequests. Lifetime income and ownership of
particular assets, both of which exhibit strong intergeneration similarity, jointly explain nearly two-thirds
of the wealth elasticity. Education, past parental transfers, and expected future bequests account for little
of the remaining elasticity. Using new experimental evidence, we assess the importance of risk tolerance.
The risk tolerance measures vary as theory would predict with the ownership of risky assets, and are
highly correlated between parents and children. However, they explain little of the intergenerational
correlation in the propensity to own different assets, suggesting that children’s savings propensities are
determined by mimicking their parents’ behavior, or the inheritance of preferences not related to risk
tolerance. Additionally, these risk tolerance measures explain only a small part of the remaining
intergenerational wealth elasticity.


.


Kerwin Kofi Charles                                                       Erik Hurst
Department of Economics                                                   Graduate School of Business
University of Michigan                                                    University of Chicago
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1220                                                  1101 East 58th Street
and NBER                                                                  Chicago, IL 60637
kcharles@umich.edu                                                        erik.hurst@gsb.uchicago.edu
1.   Introduction

     How likely are the children of wealthy parents to be wealthy as well? What accounts for this

association? Do wealthy parents have wealthy children because they: (a) invest in their children’s

education, raising their income and wealth? (b) give their children financial gifts, which raises their

wealth directly, and provide them credit and insurance so that they are more likely to undertake

potentially risky investments? or (c) pass on similar savings propensities? Despite their implications

for understanding the persistence of economic inequality, there is little empirical evidence on these

questions. This paper examines the extent of the intergenerational relationship in wealth for a

nationally representative sample of parent-child pairs. In addition, it separates among possible

explanations for this relationship.

     We estimate a simple regression of the log of child’s wealth on the log of parents’ wealth.

When the only other controls in this regression are child and parental age, the coefficient on parental

wealth measures the age-adjusted elasticity of child wealth with respect to parental wealth. Adding

parent and child controls that determine household wealth to the regression establishes how much of

the intergenerational wealth elasticity is attributable to parent-child similarity in these controls. We

find an age-adjusted intergenerational wealth elasticity of 0.37, implying that parents whose wealth

is fifty percent above the mean in the parents’ generation have children whose wealth is eighteen

percent above the mean in the children’s generation.

     We estimate the intergenerational wealth elasticity from a sample where both parents and

children are still alive, so ours is an estimate of the parent-child wealth relationship before the

transfer of bequests. As we explain below, data limitations prevent us from studying how the wealth

of parents and children is related after the transfer of bequests, though we are able to study the effect

of previous gifts and expected future bequests. Given the obvious importance of bequests, what is

the gain from studying the pre-bequest relationship? Because a child who receives bequests from




                                                   1
his parents will do so only upon their deaths, someone born to parents in their mid-twenties may be

well into his fifties before he receives a bequest from them. The pre-bequest wealth relationship we

study in this paper therefore explores why parents and children have similar wealth for the majority

of their lives. This analysis will allow us to assess intergenerational similarities in saving

propensities, conditional on lifetime resources.

     We find that standard inputs to household wealth accumulation - income, human capital, and

the ownership of particular assets - are highly correlated between parents and their children.

Similarities in the level, growth and variance of lifetime income, the dimensions of income

emphasized in the theoretical wealth literature, alone account for one half of the parent-child wealth

relationship. The tendency for parents and children to own the same assets is the next most

important factor, accounting by itself for thirty-six percent of the wealth elasticity, and for an

additional twelve percent after accounting for income. By contrast, education, previous large

financial gifts and expected future bequests explain virtually none of the intergenerational wealth

elasticity, after controlling for income.

    Almost thirty-five percent of the intergenerational wealth elasticity remains unexplained after

controlling for income, asset ownership propensity, education, gifts and expected bequests. What

are the other mechanisms for wealth transmission? Preferences are a possible candidate.          In the

final portion of the paper, we study new, experimental survey data on risk tolerance. We find that

parents and children have similar preferences for risk, especially at the tails of the risk tolerance

distribution. Also, persons with higher risk tolerance hold riskier assets, as theory would suggest.

However, risk tolerance explains only a small amount of the propensity for parents and children to

own the same asset, suggesting that this association derives either from the tendency of children to

mimic their parents’ investment behavior or from intergenerational similarity in some aspect of

preferences not related to risk. Finally, we find that the risk tolerance measures explain little of the




                                                   2
remaining intergenerational wealth elasticity after controlling for income and asset ownership.

There is thus a residual portion of the parent-child wealth relationship which we cannot explain.

      Aside from Mulligan (1997), the few previous authors who have studied the intergenerational

wealth association have used samples from very specialized sub-populations drawn from late 19th

and early 20th century.1 Although wealth was not the primary focus of his analysis, Mulligan reports

estimates of the elasticity in log wealth between parents and their children of between 0.32 and 0.43.

Mulligan, however, does not attempt to separate between different explanations for the parent-child

wealth relationship.

      Of the intergenerational relationships which can affect the similarity in parent-child wealth, the

one which has received the most independent attention is the intergenerational relationship in

income.2 The consensus is that the elasticity of log child earnings with respect to their log parents’

earnings is between 0.4 and 0.6, after accounting for measurement error (Mulligan (1997) and Solon

(1999)). Few papers have looked at how the growth rate and variances of parents’ and child’s

incomes are related, and no one has studied how much of the intergenerational wealth relationship is

attributable to the aspects of lifetime income emphasized in the theoretical literature.3

      Venti and Wise (2000) show that at all levels of lifetime earnings there is great dispersion in

the amount of accumulated assets. Only a handful of papers have looked at direct evidence on the

extent of heterogeneity in household savings preference parameters, although none examines

whether these preferences are related between parents and children (Lawrence (1991), Barksy,

Juster, Kimball and Shapiro (1996), Samwick (1998) and Warner and Pleeter (2001)). Work on


1
   Menchik (1979), Kearl and Pope (1986) and Wahl (1995) relate child and parent wealth for historical samples.
2
  See Mulligan (1997) and Solon (1999) for recent surveys on the income correlations literature. See also Altonji and
Dunn (1991, 2000), Solon (1992, 1999), Zimmerman (1992), Mulligan (1996, 1997), Ham and Mulligan (2000) and Shea
(2000). Cox, Ng, and Waldkirch (2001) document intergenerational consumption linkages. Altonji, Hayashi and
Kotlikoff (1992) test for whether parents are altruistic towards their children.
3
  Standard life-cycle models of wealth accumulation suggest that wealth depends on 1) the level of lifetime income, 2) the
trajectory of lifetime income and 3) the propensity to save out of given lifetime income levels and trajectories. See
Modigliani and Brumberg (1954) and Friedman (1957). Extensions to the basic model argue that the expected future
variance of income matters as well (Deaton (1991), Carroll (1994)).




                                                            3
intergenerational correlations in portfolio composition is equally sparse (for exceptions, see Chiteji

and Stafford (2000) and Hurst and Lusardi (2002)).


II.      DATA

      We use data from the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The PSID is a large nationally

representative survey started in 1968 which tracks the socio and economic variables of a given

family over time. In each year of the survey, demographic questions such as age, race, family

composition, and education levels are asked of all members of the households. Among other

information, the survey asks each household detailed questions about labor market participation and

earned labor income.

      Occasionally, the PSID supplements the main data set with special modules. In 1984, 1989,

1994 and 1999, the PSID asked households extensive questions about their wealth. For the measure

of wealth, we sum the household's holding of real estate - own or main home, second home, rental

real estate, land contract holdings - cars, trucks, motor homes, boats, farm or business, stocks,

bonds, mutual funds, saving and checking accounts, money market funds, certificate of deposit,

government savings bonds, Treasury bills, Individual Retirement Accounts, bond funds, cash value

of life insurance policies, valuable collections for investment purposes, and rights in a trust or estate,

less mortgage, credit card, and other debt on such assets. Aside from pensions (both private and

public), the PSID data provides a relatively complete picture of household financial wealth.4

      The PSID was designed, in part, to study economic mobility across generations. As such, the

data set takes uncommon care to track and survey children of core sample respondents. The

children of core sample members become part of the PSID core sample as they leave their parents’

household and form their own households. All new households that have become part of the PSID


4
 See Hurst, Luoh and Stafford (1998) and Juster, Smith and Stafford (1999) for a complete description of the PSID wealth
data and discussion of how the data compares to wealth information from other sources.




                                                           4
after the original sample was formed are the children or grandchildren of that original sample. This

intergenerational feature of the sample design makes the PSID a good data set to analyze the

similarity of wealth position between parents and children.

      We study families with children between 25 and 65 in the 1999 survey, and with parents who

were part of the survey in 1984, 1989 and 1999, and who were not retired in 1984 and 1989 when

parental wealth is measured. We emphasize non-retirement status in order to capture households

during the time in their life cycles when they are accumulating wealth. Parental wealth is measured

as the average of their reported wealth in both 1984 and 1989, and child wealth is measured in

1999.5

      This paper does not address the effect of bequests to children after parental death on the

intergenerational wealth relationship. The sample includes only families in which the child in 1999

has at least one core sample parent known to be alive in 1999. In fact, the vast majority of available

parent-child pairs in the data are of this type. As late as the 1999 PSIID survey, there were only 70

parent-child pairs in which both non-retired parents in 1984 were known to have died. Studying the

effect of bequests on the intergenerational wealth relationship in datasets like the PSID, in which

panel information is available about different generations of families, will not be possible for many

years yet.    The empirical work does assess the impact of expected future bequests on the parent-

child wealth relationship.

      We limit the sample to families in which both the parents and children have positive wealth in

the years measured. Doing so allows us to measure the association in log-wealth between parents

and their children, which is more directly comparable to the measures of the intergenerational

income elasticities reported in the literature. Imposing this restriction causes us to drop only a

handful of observations from the sample. About 8% of the children and less than 1% of the parents


5
  Ideally, we would like to measure parents’ and children’s wealth at the same age, but we are prevented from doing so by
the fact that the wealth measures in the PSID are currently at most fifteen years apart.




                                                           5
had negative or zero reported net worth. The basic facts about the elasticities that we present,

particularly in the transition matrix results, are not at all sensitive to this restriction.

       The analysis sample consists of 1,491 parent-child pairs.6 Table 1 presents the means and

standard deviation of key variables for both parents and children. In this table, and throughout the

paper, all dollar values are reported in 1996 dollars. The first row of the table shows that children

in the sample were about 15 years younger in 1999, on average, than their parents were in 1984.

Because both wealth and income have a strong age component, we focus on age-adjusted wealth

measures in the work which follows. The age differences between parents and children may also

account for the fact that parents had more income, more wealth, and larger asset ownership rates.

       The last four rows in the table reveal the extreme skewness of the wealth distribution. For

example, among children, the difference between the 20th and 40th percentile is about $50,000,

whereas the difference between the 60th and 80th percentile is almost double that. Comparable

numbers are evident among parents. We use the natural log of wealth in the regressions presented

later to account for this skewness.



III.     Elasticity of Child Wealth with Respect to Parental Wealth

       To estimate the age-adjusted elasticity of child’s wealth with respect to parent’s wealth, we

estimate the regression:

                  Wk = α + δ1 W p + β1k Agek + β2 k Agek2 + β1 p Age p + β2 p Age 2p + εk                       (1)

where Wk and WP measure the natural log wealth of the child, k, and parent, p, respectively; Agek ,

Agek2, Agep and Age2p measure their ages and the square of their ages at the time they are observed;



6
   There were about 250 parents who were in the sample in 1984 but dropped out of the sample prior to 1999. We also
removed these parent-child pairs from the sample because we were could not determine whether the parents had died
during the intervening years. We estimated all of the regressions with and without these households included and the
results were essentially unchanged.




                                                         6
and εk is an error term.            The regression coefficient δ 1 in (1) measures the age-adjusted

intergenerational wealth elasticity.

     The fact that available wealth data is likely fraught with measurement error complicates this

straightforward estimate of the wealth correlation. Given that it would be absorbed into εk, classical

measurement error is irrelevant for the child wealth variable in a regression such as (1). However,

classically mis-measured parental wealth would produce an attenuated estimate of the

intergenerational wealth correlation.         To deal with this problem, we follow the lead of previous

work in the income correlations literature, and exploit the panel structure of the available data, by

measuring parental wealth as the average of reported wealth over multiple time periods.7

Henceforth, the parental wealth measure is the average of parental wealth over the 1984 and 1989

survey years.

     Estimating (1) by OLS, we find an age-adjusted elasticity of child wealth with respect to

parental wealth of 0.37, with a t-statistic of more than 10. This implies that parents whose wealth is

10 percent above the mean in their generation, have children who, before any parent-child bequests

are transferred, have wealth which is 3.7 percent above the mean in the children’s generation.8

      We also examine parents' and children’s relative positions in the age-adjusted wealth

distributions.    We first regress child and parent log wealth on age and age squared.                We then split

the residuals from these two regressions into five equal segments, and create a parent-child wealth

transition matrix.     Each element π ab of the matrix indicates the probability that a child belongs to

the ath quintile of the distribution for children, given that her parents belong to the bth quintile of the

parental distribution. The more independent children’s and parents’ wealth, the greater the

7
  See Solon (1992) for a similar approach with respect to income, and see Zimmerman (1992) for a useful discussion of
potential biases in income correlations.
8
   Even though we average parental wealth over 1984 and 1989, our estimate of δ1 may still be biased downward.
Following the intergenerational income literature, we instrumented for parental wealth using parental education. The
instrumented estimate of δ1 was 0.590. We do not highlight this estimate because it is likely biased upwards. Parental
education can have a direct effect on child’s wealth, even when controlling for both child’s education and income.




                                                          7
likelihood that the elements of this transition matrix should be close to one-fifth. The greater the

departure of the elements of the transition matrix from 0.2, the greater the intergenerational

similarity in relative age-adjusted wealth position. The transition matrix method shows the

intergenerational persistence of wealth at different points in the wealth distribution, accounting for

the fact that the linear functional form assumed in (1) may be incorrect.

     Table 2 presents the intergenerational transition matrix of age-adjusted log wealth.         The

evidence about persistence in this table is consistent with the estimated wealth elasticity from the

regression. Reading down the first column, for example, the matrix indicates that 36.1% of parents

in the lowest age-adjusted wealth quintile have children whose wealth places them in that same

quintile in the children’s adjusted wealth distribution. Indeed, only 30% of parents in the lowest

quintile have children whose wealth places them in any of the three highest wealth quintiles in the

child distribution, and only 7% of children whose parents were in the lowest wealth quintile make it

to the highest quintile. Thus, despite modest mobility within the wealth distribution, the numbers

indicate that the overwhelming majority of children are unable to break free from the low wealth

status of their parents.

     Similar persistence is evident at the other tail of the parental wealth distribution. Thirty-six

percent of high wealth parents have children who end up in the top quintile of the child’s age

adjusted wealth distribution, and almost seventy-percent have children whose wealth places them in

the top two wealth quintiles.   Only 11% of the children of high wealth parents fall to the lowest

quintile.

     Overall, the table depicts substantial persistence in wealth position from parents to children.

Throughout the matrix, the probability that a child ends up in a wealth quintile different from the

one occupied by his parent tends to be monotonically decreasing the further away that quintile is

from the parents’. Children are most likely to fall into a wealth quintile exactly like that of their




                                                  8
parents, and are very unlikely to end up in a dramatically different one.     A likelihood ratio chi-

squared test confirms the persistence evident in the table: we can strongly reject the hypothesis that

the entries in the adjusted wealth position transition matrix are equal to each other at any standard

statistical level (p-value < 0.001).


IV.     Decomposing the Intergenerational Wealth Elasticity

      There are several reasons why parent and child wealth would be similar. First, wealth, unlike

income, is directly transferred between generations. Second, income is correlated between parents

and their children.       The theoretical literature that sets out to explain the documented

intergenerational earnings correlation often does so by invoking the existence of capital market

imperfections (Becker and Tomes (1979, 1986), Loury (1981)). If children find it difficult to

borrow against their future income to accumulate human capital, high-income parents will be more

able to relax the liquidity constraints faced by their children. Consequently, the children of high-

income parents will have both higher levels of education and income. Controlling for income will

partially capture the extent to which capital market imperfections cause the intergenerational

correlation in wealth. In our decompositions below, we also examine the effect of human capital

accumulation directly.

      Additionally, even if capital markets are perfect, controlling for parent and child income

captures any intergenerational correlation in innate ability or preferences that affect earnings

directly, such as work ethic. Finally, parents and children could have similar wealth because they

have similar propensities to save out of any given income stream. In many standard models, the

preference parameters that determine how much a household will save out of income also determine

in which assets the household will save (see Browning and Lusardi (1996) and the cites within). As

a result, controlling for household asset composition, in part, proxies for household savings

propensities.




                                                  9
     In this section we assess how much of the parent-child wealth relationship documented above

derives from parent-child similarities in income, education, and the propensity to own specific

assets. Additionally, we consider how much of the intergenerational wealth elasticity is due to the

direct transfer of wealth in the form of expected future bequests and past parental gifts.

     Table 3 shows that parents and their children do, in fact, have correlated levels of family

income, education and portfolio composition. The table presents results from a series of simple

regressions in which the child’s value of a given variable is regressed on the same variable for the

parent, and age controls for both the parents and children. If the variable is a binary variable, the

corresponding regression is estimated as a linear probability model.

     The first entry shows that the elasticity of the level of child family income with respect to the

parent’s is 0.3. We measure the child’s family income as the average of husband and wife’s labor

income between 1992 and 1996 and the parent’s family income as the average of the husband and

wife’s income between 1983 and 1987.          Our estimated income correlation is lower than that

reported by Solon (1992) and Mulligan (1997), but this is not surprising given that their results refer

to the elasticity between individual fathers and sons, and ours is the elasticity between fathers’ and

sons’ families. The latter correlation will be lower so long as mating is not perfectly assortative with

respect to income.

     Table 3 also shows that education is also very similar between parents and their children. For

example, the results indicate that having a parent who has some college education makes a child

thirty-two percentage points more likely to be a have college training – a very large marginal effect

given the mean college training rate among children is fifty-six percent.

     The next set of entries in the table show the intergenerational similarity in asset ownership.

The results indicate that having a parent who owns either stocks, a businesses or a home makes a

child much more likely to own the same asset as well. The estimated effect is strongly statistically




                                                   10
significant in each case, and for all of the assets, represents a large increase over the mean rate of

asset ownership.

       The association in asset ownership propensity may be simply due to fact that parental and

child lifetime incomes are similar. The final entries in the table show the similarity in asset

ownership between children and parents, after controlling for income and income squared. For each

asset category, controlling for income reduces the estimated parent-child relationship. However, for

both business ownership and home ownership, the effect of parental portfolio ownership remains

strong even after controlling for income.9 On the other hand, it appears that the intergenerational

correlation in stock ownership is exclusively a result of the intergenerational correlation in income.

Though we do not present the results, controlling for parental wealth in addition to income yields

basically the same results as the last set of numbers. These results suggest that asset ownership is not

similar between parents and children because wealthy parents relax liquidity constraints or

otherwise provide downside risk insurance to their children.

     To determine how much of the intergenerational wealth elasticity derives from the similarity

between parents and children in income, education and asset choice and how much derives from

direct transfers such as gifts and expected bequests, we estimate a series of regressions of the form:

         Wk = α + δ2 W p + β1k Agek + β2 k Agek2 + β1 p Age p + β2 p Age 2p + αk Z k + α p Z p + εk               (2)


where, as in (1), Wk and W p measure the log of child and parental wealth. The variables Z k and

Z p are vectors of child and parental controls whose explanatory role is being assessed. The extent

to which the controls account for the intergenerational wealth elasticity is measured by the extent to

which the estimated coefficient δ2 differs from δ1 (estimated from (1)).




9
 These results are robust to the inclusion of age-income interactions, higher order income controls, and the predicted
measures of income discussed below.




                                                         11
      We measure education as the completed years of schooling of parents and children. Asset

ownership is measured by a binary variable indicating that the parent or child reports owning the

particular asset. Measuring lifetime income is more difficult. Theoretical models suggest that

wealth is determined by the level, growth and expected variance of lifetime wealth.                             Empirical

measures of these dimensions of lifetime income are not readily at hand because we do not observe

the full record of individuals’ lifetime earnings.

      We use two methods to deal with this problem. The first proxies for lifetime income using the

average of the actual family labor income over multiple years. This method will average out

transitory earnings shocks and classical measurement error present in yearly survey measures of

family labor earnings. For parents, this average is over the years 1983-1987, while for children it is

over the years 1992-1996.10 To capture potential non-linearities in the relationship between income

and wealth, we also include the square of average labor income.11

      The second method first pools all of the data in the PSID for the sample years 1980 to 1997 for

non-retired persons aged between 25 and 64 in the particular year. Within race, sex, occupation and

educational cells, we then estimate regressions of annual family labor income on age and age

squared.12 This procedure provides a measure of the expected total labor income earned by

households in each race-sex-occupation-education cell, as well as the shape of their lifetime labor

income profiles between the ages of 25 and 64. Using the coefficients on age and age squared from

these regressions, we predict the family labor income, Yˆc , A , for households in each as cell, c, earned




10
   1996 income (reported in the 1997 survey) is the latest year of income that is currently available from the PSID.
11
    For robustness, we included up to a quartic in income in all of the specifications. The results reported in the remainder
of the paper (using the quadratic in income) were identical to the results when a quartic in income was used.
12
    We used 9 occupational categories, 3 education classes (less than high school, exactly high school and more than high
school), white and non-white race cells and whether the head was male or female. In total, we estimated the expected
income profile separately for 97 occupation-education-race-sex cells. There were less than 108 possible cells either
because there were no observations in some cells or because there were to few observations in these cells to run a
meaningful regression. In such cases, some cells were grouped together.




                                                             12
at every age, A. We use these predicted measures as proxies for the different aspects of lifetime

income.13

        To proxy for the level of lifetime family labor income, Yˆc ,lifetime level , we sum the family labor


income at every age in each cell, Yˆc , A , from A = 25 to A = 64. Specifically,

                                                                   A= 64
                                           Yˆc ,lifetime level =   ∑ Yˆ
                                                                   A= 25
                                                                             c, A    .                      (3)


To proxy for future income growth, we compute the fraction of lifetime income which the person is

predicted to receive beyond the last age he is measured in the data. That is, if we measure the

wealth of a person in cell, c, at age A∗ , the fraction of income expected to be earned, Yˆc , A*, growth rate ,

is measured as:

                                                         A= 64             A= 64
                               Yˆc , A*, growth rate =   ∑ Yˆ∗
                                                                 c, A      ∑ Yˆ
                                                                           A= 25
                                                                                    c, A   .                (4)
                                                         A= A


Finally, we proxy for expected future variance of a person’s future lifetime income by using the

average income variance across individuals in the different race, occupation, education and sex

cells.

        We also decompose the portion of the wealth correlation due to the expectation of future

parental bequests and past parental gifts. In the analysis sample, parents are still alive so that

children have not yet received bequests. However, the expectation that a bequest might be received

in the future could cause children to hold less wealth than otherwise, and parents - those making the

bequest - to hold more. The PSID, in 1994, asked respondents about their probability of leaving a

bequest of $10,000 or $100,000. No information was asked about how much of a bequest the

household expected to receive. We estimate the expected bequests to a particular child as the

maximum probability that their parent would leave a 10,000 or 100,000 bequest multiplied by the

13
     This idea was recommended to us by Orazio Attanasio. We are grateful for his suggestion.




                                                                        13
amount of the bequest, divided by the number of children the parent has.       In the sample, 24% of

parents expect to leave no bequest. Among those leaving a bequest, the average expected bequest to

each child was $35,264. We also included a dummy variable equal to 1 if the parent reported that

they planned to leave a $100,000 bequest with certainty.

     In each of the wealth supplements, households are asked if they received gifts totaling more

than $10,000 over the last five years. If the household answered yes to that question, they are asked

to report the exact amount of the gifts that they received. We use this report as the measure of

previous gifts. One obvious limitation of the gift measure is that small gifts are not recorded.

Unfortunately, this is only information about past gifts received in the data. However, given the size

of parental wealth for most households, these 5-year total gift measures likely capture all non-trivial

parental wealth transfers.

     Tables 4 reports the decomposition of the intergenerational wealth elasticity. There are five

columns in the table. The first column of numbers reports the coefficient on log parental wealth

from regressions of log child wealth on log parental wealth plus additional parental and child

controls. The controls in the particular regression are indicated in the first column of the table. The

third column reports how much of the overall elasticity is explained by the particular factors.    The

fourth column, relevant only for panel B, shows the how much of the elasticity is explained by a

factor once income is already accounted for. The R-squared statistic for the associated regression is

in the last column.

     Panel A of the table shows how much of the age-adjusted intergenerational wealth elasticity is

explained by different factors, considered individually. The first row shows the raw age-adjusted

intergenerational wealth elasticity of 0.37 estimated from regression (1). The next row in the panel

shows that when parental and child lifetime incomes are added to the regression, proxied by the

measures discussed above, the estimated elasticity falls to 0.18. Thus, fifty-two percent of the age-




                                                  14
adjusted elasticity is explained by the fact that the lifetime incomes of parents and children are very

similar.   Given that income explains only one-half of the intergenerational income elasticity,

however, implies that parent and child wealth is correlated for reasons beyond the capital market

imperfections discussed in much of the theoretical literature explaining the intergenerational income

correlation (Becker and Tomes (1979, 1986), Loury (1981)).

     The third row in Panel A assesses the effect of education. Adding controls for parental and

child completed schooling lowers the wealth elasticity to 0.26. The fact that parental and child

human capital is similar accounts for twenty-eight percent of the similarity in their wealth.       The

table shows that expected bequests and previous gifts, by themselves, explain approximately 17% of

the age-adjusted elasticity.   The effect of portfolio choice is much larger. The final row in the first

panel shows that thirty-six percent of the intergenerational wealth elasticity is attributable purely to

the fact that parents and children chose to hold similar types of assets – housing, stocks, and

businesses.

     One problem with the decomposition in Panel A, in which the different factors are separately

controlled for, is that their effect on the wealth elasticity net of income is not evident. This is of

particular concern since all of the additional controls are functions of child and parental income. The

third column of Panel B of Table 4 assesses how much of the age adjusted intergenerational wealth

elasticity is explained by different factors after controlling for income. The second row of Panel B

shows that controlling for parental and child education when income is already accounted for only

changes the estimated elasticity by 0.008 percentage points. This implies that education only

explains an additional 2% of the age adjusted wealth elasticity (0.008 divided by 0.365). Also trivial

is the effect of expected bequests and transfers after income adjustment: these explain only an

additional 4 percent of the wealth relationship. These results show that virtually all of explanatory

effect of intra-vivos transfers, education, and expected bequests is subsumed in the effect of the




                                                   15
parent-child income correlation. This should not be surprising given that received gifts, expected

bequests and years of schooling are highly correlated with parent and child income measures.

      The last row of Panel B indicates that the same cannot be said about portfolio decisions. Table

3 shows that portfolio choice - especially for home and business ownership - is highly persistent

across generations, after controlling for income.                    Saving propensities, proxied by portfolio

allocation, explains an additional 11 percent of the parent-child wealth elasticity.                               Jointly,

similarities in portfolio composition and income explain 64% of the raw age-adjusted elasticity from

the first row of the table. These results are very intuitively appealing. They demonstrate that the

principal reason that parents and children have similar wealth is because they generate similar flows

of economic resources, as measured by their incomes. The next most important reason is that

parents and children make similar portfolio investment decisions out of the resources they generate.

Together, these two factors explain almost two-thirds of the intergenerational wealth relationships

presented in this paper. The powerful effect of income and portfolio choice is reinforced by the

results from the last panel, in which we simultaneously control for all of the factors.                         All of the

factors together account for sixty-five percent of the raw age-adjusted elasticity – only a tiny amount

larger than the effect of income and portfolio choices only.14

      A natural question is where in the distribution the effects shown above apply. Do income and

portfolio choice explain the wealth elasticity similarly at both the high and low end of the

distributions? Table 5 is a transition matrix which allows us to answer this question. The numbers

in bold face represent the transition matrix after the log of parental and child wealth are adjusted for



12
   The inclusion of other controls which could affect the parent-child wealth correlation did not significantly change the
results presented in the last row of Table 4. In various specifications, we included controls for parent and child health,
whether the parent and child lived in the same state, the marital status of both the parent and child, whether the parent or
child was divorced, the work status of wives in married parent and child household units, the race of the parent and the
child, and the number of children in both the parent’s and the child’s household. With the inclusion of all of these
controls, the coefficient on parental wealth fell to 0.101, a 72% decline from the raw, age-adjusted intergenerational wealth
elasticity.




                                                             16
age, income and portfolio choice. For easy comparability, we present in italics the transition matrix

shown earlier in which log parental and child log wealth is adjusted only for age.

     The table shows that the effect of income and portfolio choice summarized in Table 4 applies

throughout the distribution. Relative to the raw age adjusted entries in italics, most of which are

dramatically different from 0.2, once income and portfolio choice are accounted for, the transition

matrix becomes close to what we would expect if there was random sorting. For example, whereas

parents in the fifth quintile of the age parental log wealth distribution had only a 11 percent chance

of having in a child in the lowest quintile of the child wealth distribution, much of this is because of

income and portfolio choices. When these are accounted for, the fifth column of the table shows

that the probability of a “rich” parent having a “poor” child is 17 percent.     At the other extreme,

when income and portfolio choices are ignored, parents in the lowest quintile have a thirty-six

percent chance of having their child in the same position in the children’s wealth distribution.

Adjusting for income and portfolio choices causes this probability to fall by thirteen percentage

points to only twenty-three percent.    Notice that the chi-squared test for the first entry in Table 5

rejects random sorting. Some persistence remains even after controlling for income and portfolio

composition.

     Overall, Table 5 reinforces the main lesson from Table 4: the wealth of parents and children is

similar mainly because parents “pass on” to their children comparable incomes and savings

behavior. However, the decomposition shows clearly that a significant fraction of the wealth

elasticity remains unexplained after accounting not only for income and portfolio choice, but

expected bequests, past gifts and education as well.


V. The Role of Preferences

     Apart from the factors assessed in the decomposition in the previous section, theoretical

models emphasize the role of preferences such as discount rates and risk tolerance in determining




                                                  17
wealth holdings. Might saving preferences be the factor which accounts for the unexplained portion

of the intergenerational wealth elasticity?

     Parents and children share genes and, for at least part of their lives, live in the same

environment. There is thus reason to suspect that their preferences should be similar. But, even if

parents’ and children’s preferences are related, is not the effect of this relationship on the

intergenerational wealth elasticity subsumed in the decompositions above which control for parent

and child asset choice?    This would only be true if any similarity in preferences between parents

and children: (a) was a significant determinant of parents’ and children’s tendencies to own to the

similar portfolio, and (b) affected the intergenerational wealth relationship only through its effect on

asset holdings.

     Disentangling these issues is difficult, chiefly because data on “preferences” are not usually

available in survey data. However, new experimental data available in the PSID allows us to assess

how a particular set of preferences is related between parents and children, the impact of preferences

on portfolio choice, and the effect of preferences on the intergenerational wealth elasticity.

     We use data from a 1996 supplement to the PSID which measures respondents’ risk tolerance.

The risk tolerance questions were only asked of working PSID respondents in the 1996 survey.

Because of this restriction, the sample used to analyze the similarity in risk tolerance is different

from the samples used in the above analyses. From the original sample, there were 781 parents and

1,316 children eligible to answer the risk tolerance question. The sample size for parents is smaller

because a greater proportion of them were retired as of 1996 (even though they were working when

we measured their wealth in 1984 and 1989). The new sample, a subset of the original sample, had

583 parent-child pairs where both parent and child provided non-missing answers to the risk

tolerance questions.

      The risk tolerance question in the PSID is:




                                                    18
        “Suppose you had a job that guaranteed you income for life equal to your current, total income. And
        that job was (your/your family’s) only source of income. Then you are given the opportunity to take a
        new, and equally good job with a 50-50 chance that it will cut your income by a third or, on the other
        hand, it could double your income with a 50-50 probability. Would you take that new job?”

Based on their responses to this question, respondents are asked a series of follow-up questions

about jobs that double income with a 50 percent probability or either cut income by, 10%, 20%,

50%, or 75% with a 50 percent probability. Assuming a CES utility function and correcting for

measurement error, the PSID reports four distinct categories of risk tolerance based on the

household’s response.15

      We classify a respondent’s risk tolerance as “very low”,                      “low”, “medium” or “high”

corresponding to the four categories the PSID reports. The proportion of children with “very low”,

“low”, “medium” and “high” risk tolerance measures were, respectively, 39%, 17%, 20% and 24%.

For parents, the corresponding proportions were 67%, 11%, 7% and 15%.

      The risk tolerance measures in the PSID were computed from an identical set of questions and

an identical procedure to that used by Barsky et. al (1997) with data from the Health and Retirement

Study (HRS). Barsky et. al summarize how the risk tolerance parameters are computed and show

that they predict risky behaviors in the HRS. Consistent with the results reported above, they also

find that risk tolerance falls with age.

      Table 6 examines how risk tolerance is related between parents and children. It presents linear

probability estimates of the likelihood that a child belongs to a risk tolerance category, given the risk

tolerance of his parents. In all of the regressions, parents in the “very low” risk tolerance category

are the omitted group. The results in the columns labeled A are from regressions of child risk

tolerance on parental risk tolerance and no other controls. The table reveals substantial raw

similarity in risk tolerance between parents and children, especially at the tails. Children with a


15
   Assuming CES preferences, the four risk tolerance categories (“very low”, “low”, “medium” and “high”) correspond to
estimated risk aversion measures of 6.67, 3.57, 2.86 and 1.75, respectively. See Barsky et al (1996) for a discussion of
how the measures were calculated.




                                                          19
“very low” risk tolerance are least likely to have parents whose tolerance is “high”. Children with

“high” risk tolerance are almost 16 percentage points more likely to have parents whose risk

tolerance is “high” rather than “very low”. Given that the base probability that a child has a “high”’

risk tolerance is twenty-four percent, this effect is quite large. Notice that children with “low” and

“medium” levels of risk tolerance have no statistical relationship to their parent's risk tolerance

measure.   The same basic pattern is evident in columns B of the table, where the regression also

controls for the child's age, education, predicted and actual income and wealth.

     The results are quite striking. The risk tolerance measures are derived from hypothetical

question posed to parents and their adult children. These people do not live in the same home, and,

in general, had not done so for a long time by the date that the questions were posed. Yet, we find

that their stated willingness to undertake hypothetical gambles is correlated.

     How much of the tendency for parents and children to own the same assets derives from them

having similar preferences? Table 7 presents a series of regression showing a child’s propensity to

hold various assets for households that answered the risk tolerance questions. Reassuringly, the

basic results about the intergenerational tendency to own assets, presented in the first two columns

of each section, are virtually identical to the results shown earlier for the entire sample. There is a

raw parent child similarity in stock ownership which no longer exists once controlling for income.

Business and home ownership are correlated across between parents and children, even after

controlling for income.

     The last regression for each of the assets add controls for parent and child risk tolerance

categories. We only show the results for the child risk tolerance measures to show whether the risk

tolerance measures have any predictive power for the child’s portfolio choice decisions. If these

measures mean anything, we would expect people with higher levels of risk tolerance to be more

likely to invest in riskier assets such as stocks and businesses. The results are very consistent with




                                                  20
this prediction.   For both stocks and business ownership, persons with higher risk tolerance are

more likely to make these investments, relative to the excluded category of “very low” risk

tolerance. For business ownership in particular, the estimated effects are strongly statistically

significant. Children with the highest level of risk tolerance are 7.3 percentage points more likely to

own a business, an increase of 50% over the mean child business ownership rates. With stock

ownership, children with medium and high risk tolerance were also far more likely to own stocks

than children with very low risk tolerance, although only the medium risk tolerance group was not

statistically different from zero. The results for home ownership - a relatively safe investment - are

also consistent with what we would predict, in that there is no statistically significant effect of risk

tolerance on home ownership.

       If the intergenerational tendency to own assets is driven by risk tolerance, the addition of

parental and child risk tolerance measures should dramatically lower the estimated effect of parental

asset ownership on a child’s asset ownership.    The results indicate that for business and ownership,

the effect of the parental asset ownership is reduced only slightly when risk tolerance is controlled

for.    For the other two assets, the risk tolerance measures do not lower the estimated

intergenerational relationship in ownership at all. These results suggest that risk preferences explain

little of the parent-child tendency to own the same asset. To be sure, preferences other than those

for risk affect whether people buy particular assets. Discount rates, for example, likely matter as

well. And, it is possible that were there information on these other preferences available in the data,

we might find that they explain the remainder of the parent-child asset relationship.

       However, another equally plausible explanation is that children make particular investment

decisions because of mimicry. Parents who invest in particular assets set an example which their

children follow, irrespective of similarities or differences in preferences between parents and




                                                  21
children.16 The example need not be passive. Parents who own a business can teach their children

about the skills needed to run a business and may encourage them take over the business or start one

of their own.        The key point is that it is the fact that the parent owns the asset which raises the

child’s propensity to do the same, not the fact that their preferences are similar.

      Because the parent-child similarity in risk preferences does not appreciably affect the parent-

child asset ownership relationship, any effect of risk preferences on the intergenerational wealth

elasticity will not be captured by the controls for asset composition in the decompositions presented

in the previous section. Table 8 decomposes the intergenerational wealth elasticity for the sub

sample which responds to the risk tolerance questions to see how much of the relationship

preferences explain, beyond the factors we have thus far studied. We emphasize that this

decomposition is on the “risk tolerance” sub-sample.

      The first row of the table shows that the intergenerational correlation in age-adjusted log

wealth in this sample of 0.362 is very close to that estimated in the full sample. In row 2, adding the

full set of income controls discussed earlier explains about 43% of the elasticity. This effect is

about 9 percentage points smaller than the results in the full sample, but income remains the most

important source of the wealth correlation in the restricted sample. Row 3 controls for parent and

child income and portfolio composition. As in the full sample, these two factors together explain a

substantial portion of the wealth elasticity, though the estimate of seventy percent in this sub sample

is slightly larger than what they account for in the full sample. The fourth row adds all of the

variables previously studied: income, portfolio choice, education, expected bequests, and previous

gifts. In this sub-sample, these factors explain substantially more of the intergenerational wealth



16
  One other possibility is that some other behavior, which determines the types of assets people buy, are similar between
parents and children. For example, it may be that fathers and sons tend to marry similar women whose patterns of work
make the family unit want to hold more risk. Or additionally, that fathers and sons have similar expected life spans. As
with the results earlier, these results are robust to the inclusion of parent and child race, marital status, health, location, and
family demographic controls.




                                                               22
elasticity than is true for the full sample. Nonetheless, about seventeen percent of the elasticity

remains unexplained.

     The final row adds parent and child preferences to the set of controls. The risk tolerance

measures explain an additional only three percent of the wealth elasticity in the restricted sub

sample. These results suggest that, while shared preferences do explain a small portion of the

intergenerational wealth elasticity, the effect is dwarfed by the explanatory effect of other factors.

Two cautionary notes should be made about this interpretation, however.

     First, risk tolerance is only one type of preference. It is possible that some other type of

preference about which we have no information might explain more of the remaining wealth

relationship.   Second, the decomposition in Table 8 is from a sub-sample which differs from the

original dataset in certain systematic ways like the ages of parents and children. Because all of the

persons in that larger sample did not respond to the risk tolerance sample, we simply cannot

conclude for certain whether the effects discussed in this section apply to the sample as a whole.

     Whether we use the full sample or the sub sample, the correlation in income between parents

and their children is by far the most important factor in explaining the intergenerational wealth

elasticity. Portfolio composition has the next most important effect beyond income. The strong

correlation in portfolio choice is not determined by income, wealth, and, in the sub sample, risk

tolerance. Parental example and mimicry appears the most likely explanation for this association.

However, we cannot rule out the fact that parents and children share some other preferences which

determine savings behavior, such as rates of time preference. But, we can rule out the similarity in

risk tolerance as an explanation. Even though parents and children have similar preferences for risk,

we find little independent effect of risk tolerance on the intergenerational wealth elasticity or the

intergeneration similarity in portfolio composition.




                                                  23
VI. Conclusion

     There has been much recent interest in the intergenerational transmission of economic status,

but research on the parent-child wealth association has been sparse. This paper documents the

relationship between the wealth held by parents and children. In addition, it analyzes alternative

explanations for the relationship, shedding light on the importance of different factors which have

been discussed in the theoretical literature but about which there has been little previous empirical

evidence.

     Using data from the PSID, we document substantial intergenerational persistence in wealth.

The age-adjusted elasticity of child’s wealth with respect to parents’ wealth is around 0.37. These

intergenerational relationships are large, especially since we only focus on households who have not

yet received bequests from their parents. Results from transition matrices indicate that much of this

persistence arises from what occurs in the tails: children of very low wealth or very high wealth

parents rarely end with wealth substantially different from their parents’.

     We assess alternative accounts for this persistence.       We construct indices for the level,

expected growth and expected future variance of income, the aspects of income which the

theoretical literature has emphasized as being important for household wealth accumulation. We

ask, how much of the wealth association derives from the fact that these income measures are

intergenerationally related? We find that the effect of comparable incomes is quite large – by far the

largest of the possible explanations we study. Over one-half of the wealth correlation is attributable

to income, and controlling for income almost completely removes the relative intergenerational

persistence in the middle of the wealth distribution.

     Despite its very large effect, income does not fully account for the parent-child wealth

persistence. Additionally, the effect of previous gifts, education and expected bequests is very small

once accounting for income. That we find only a modest effect of education once income is




                                                  24
controlled for is particularly noteworthy, as previous authors have speculated that wealthy parents

principally transfer their position by easing liquidity constraints that their children face in financing

schooling. Taken together, these results suggest that parents pass on to their children more than just

financial resources.

     Theory suggests that similarities between parents and children in the propensity to save out of

income as the likely next most important explanation, in a sample where bequests have not yet been

received. We find that parents and children tend to allocate their portfolios quite similarly, even

after controlling for both the income and wealth of parents and children. We show that this

tendency is, apart from income, the next most important reason why wealth tends to be similar

across generations. Using only these income and portfolio allocation measures, we can account for

between two-thirds and seventy percent of the parent-child wealth relationship.

     Why portfolios are similar between parents and children is a question on which we shed some

light. We find that having wealthy parents may allow children to undertake investment decisions

like stock ownership. But this effect does not hold for other assets, such as business ownership. In

general, the fact that a parent owns an asset is enough to predict that the child will as well. On the

surface, it would generally be impossible to disentangle 1) whether children mimic or learn from

their parents or 2) whether shared preferences such as risk tolerance can explain why portfolio

composition is correlated intergenerationally even after controlling for similarities in income.

However, using new experimental data in the PSID on risk tolerances, we explicitly address this

question.

     In the final section of the paper, we show that preferences are, in fact, correlated across

generations, especially at the tails of the risk tolerance distribution. Moreover, for both parents and

children, asset ownership varies in a predictable fashion with attitudes toward risk. But, the parent-

child similarity in asset composition is not affected with the addition of risk tolerance controls. This




                                                   25
suggests either that some preference other than prudence matters or that children learn from and/or

mimic their parents’ savings behaviors, irrespective of the similarity in their preferences. We find

further that risk tolerance only explains a very modest portion of the intergenerational wealth

association, once asset composition and income are accounted for.     Nonetheless, the other results

about preferences suggest that analyzing the role that parents play in shaping child preferences is a

very interesting area for future research.




                                                 26
                                       Bibliography

Altonji, Joseph, and Thomas Dunn (1991). “Relationships Among the Family Incomes and
        Labor Market Outcomes of Relatives.” Research in Labor Economics, 12, pgs 269-310.

Altonji, Joseph, and Thomas Dunn (2000). “An Intergenerational Model of Wages, Hours, and
         Earnings.” Journal of Human Resources, 35(2), pgs 221-58.

Altonji, Joseph, Fumio Hayashi, and Laurence Kotlikoff (1992). “Is the Extended Family
        Altruistically Linked? Direct Tests Using Micro Data.” American Economic Review,
        82(5), pgs 1177 - 98.

Barsky, Bob, Tom Juster, Miles Kimball and Matthew Shapiro (1997). “Preference Parameters
        and Behavioral Heterogeneity: An Experimental Approach in the Health and Retirement
        Study”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 112(2), pgs 537-79.

Becker, Gary and Nigel Tomes (1979). “An Equilibrium Theory of the Distribution of Income
        and Intergenerational Mobility.” Journal of Political Economy, 87(6), pgs 1153 - 89.

Becker, Gary and Nigel Tomes (1986). “Human Capital and the Rise and Fall of Families.”
       Journal of Labor Economics, 4, pgs S1-S39.

Blanchflower, David and Andrew Oswald (1998). “What Makes an Entrepreneur?” Journal of
       Labor Economics, 16(1), pgs 26-59.

Browning, Martin and Annamaria Lusardi (1996). “Household Saving: Micro Theories and
       Micro Facts.” The Journal of Economic Literature, 34(4), pgs 1797-1855.

Carroll, Chris (1994). “How Does Future Income Affect Current Consumption.” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 109(1), pgs 111-47.

Charles, Kerwin K. and Erik Hurst (2000). “The Transition to Home Ownership and the
        Black/White Wealth Gap.” Review of Economics and Statistics (forthcoming).

Chiteji, Ngina and Frank P. Stafford (2000). “Asset Ownership Across Generations.” University
         of Michigan Working Paper.

Cox, Donald, Serena Ng and Andreas Waldkirch (2000). “Intergenerational Linkages in
      Consumption Behavior.” Boston College Working Paper.

Deaton, Angus (1991). “Saving and Liquidity Constraints.” Econometrica, 59(2), pgs 1221-48.

Evans, David and Linda Leighton (1989). “Some Empirical Aspects of Entrepreneurship,”
       American Economic Review, 79(3), pgs 519 - 535.

Engelhardt, Gary (1996). “Consumption, Down Payments, and Liquidity Constraints,” Journal
       of Money, Credit and Banking, May, pgs 255-71.
Failrie, Robert (1999). “The Absence of African-American Owned Business: An Analysis of the
         Dynamics of Self-Employment,” Journal of Labor Economics, 17(1), pgs 80 - 108.

Friedman, Milton (1957).    A Theory of the Consumption Function.       Princeton: Princeton
       University Press.

Ham, Song and Casey Mulligan (2000). “Human Capital, Heterogeneity, and Estimated Degrees
      of Intergenerational Mobility.” NBER Working Paper No. 7678. April.

Hurst, Erik, Ming Ching Luoh, and Frank Stafford (1998). “The Wealth Dynamics of American
        Families: 1984 - 1994”. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 98:1.

Hurst, Erik and Anna Lusardi (2000). “Entrepreneurship and Household Wealth”. Unpublished
        Mimeo.

Juster, Thomas, James Smith and Frank Stafford (1999). “The Measurement and Structure of
        Household Wealth.” Labour Economics, 1999.

Kearl, James and Clayne Pope (1986). “Unobservable Family and Individual Contributions to the
        Distributions of Income and Wealth.” Journal of Labor Economics, 4(3) S48-79.

Lawrence, Emily (1991). “Poverty and the Rate of Time Preference: Evidence from Panel
      Data.” Journal of Political Economy, 991(1), pgs 54-77.

Loury, Glenn (1981). “Intergenerational Transfers and the Distribution of Earnings.”
       Econometrica, 49(4), pgs 843-67.

Menchik, Paul (1979). “Intergenerational Transmission of Inequality: An Empirical Study of
      Wealth Mobility.” Economica, 46(184), pgs 349-62.

Modigliani, Franco and Richard Brumberg (1954). “Utility Analysis and the Consumption
       Function: An Interpretation of the Cross Section Data,” in Post-Keynesian Economics,
       Eds.: Kenneth Kurihara. New Brunswick, NJ, Rutgers University Press, pgs, 388-436.

Mulligan, Casey (1996). “Work Ethic and Family Background: Some Evidence’ University of
       Chicago Working Paper.

Mulligan, Casey (1997). Parental Priorities and Economic Inequality. University of Chicago
       Press, Chicago, IL.

Samwick, Andrew (1998). “Discount Rate Heterogeneity and Social Security Reform.” Journal
      of Development Economics, 57, 117-146.

Solon, Gary (1992). “Intergenerational Income Mobility in the United States.” American
       Economic Review, 82(3), pgs 393-408.

Solon, Gary (1999). “Intergenerational Mobility in the Labor Market”, in Handbook of Labor
       Economics, Volume 3, edited by Orley Ashenfelter and David Card.
Shea, John (2000). “Does Parents’ Money Matter?” Journal of Public Economics, 77, pgs 155-
        84.

Venti, Steven and David Wise (2000). “Choice, Chance, and Wealth Dispersion at Retirement.”
        NBER Working Paper No. 7521. February.


Wahl, Jennifer (1985). “Fertility in America: Historical Patterns and Wealth Effects on the
       Quantity and Quality of Children.” Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Economics,
       University of Chicago.

Warner, John and Saul Pleeter (2001). “The Personal Discount Rate: Evidence from Military
       Downsizing Programs.” American Economic Review, 91(1), pgs 33-53.

Zimmerman, David (1992). “Regression Toward Mediocrity in Economic Stature.” American
      Economic Review, 82(3), pgs 409-29.
                              Table 1: Means of Wealth and Demographic
                               Variables for PSID Parent-Child Sample
                                 (Standard Deviations in Parentheses)


                 Variable                              Children (1999)                  Parents(1984-1989)

Age                                                           37.5                              52.0
                                                              (7.1)                             (7.8)

Average Family Labor Income                                  57,200                            70,400
                                                            (50,800)                          (60,700)

Percent Owning Stocks                                         0.313                             0.503
                                                             (0.464)                           (0.500)

Percent Owning a Home                                         0.688                             0.919
                                                             (0.464)                           (0.276)

Percent Owning a Business                                     0.169                             0.300
                                                             (0.374)                           (0.458)

20th Percentile of Wealth                                   39,225                            49,635
40th Percentile of Wealth                                   88,731                            99,369
60th Percentile of Wealth                                   162,728                           174,889
80th Percentile of Wealth                                   348,879                           347,622

Level of Wealth (Mean)                                       158,716                           326,355
                                                            (550,272)                         (822,990)

Log of Wealth (Mean)                                          10.7                              11.7
                                                              (1.7)                             (1.5)

* Sample: All PSID parent-child pairs in which: parents were in survey in 1984-1989 and alive in 1989; child was in
survey 1999; parent not retired and between ages of 25 and 65 in 1984; child between ages 25 and 65 in 1999; child
and parent measured wealth both positive when measured. (1,491 parent-child pairs)

* All data in this table and all subsequent tables weighted using PSID core sample weights.
* All dollar amounts in this table, and all subsequent tables, are in 1996 dollars.
Table 2: Intergenerational Transition Matrix of Age-Adjusted Log Wealth Position

                              Parental Age-Adjusted Log Wealth Quintile (1984-1989)
   Child Age-Adjusted Log Wealth
          Quintile (1999)               1        2        3         4          5

                         1                                 36             26            16             15            11


                         2                                 29             24            21             13            16


                         3                                 16             24            25             20            14


                         4                                 12             15            24             26            24


                         5                                  7             12            15             26            36

                      Total                               100            100           100            100           100


* Each element of the matrix above, πab , indicates the probability (in percent) that a child belongs to the ath quintile of
the distribution for children, given that her parents belong to the bth quintile of the parental distribution. The entries
sum to one along the columns.

* See footnote to Table 1 for sample description (1,491 parent-child pairs).
* To get age-adjusted wealth measures, both parent and children’s log wealth were adjusted using a first stage OLS
regression of log wealth on age and age squared. The correlation of the residuals from the first stage regression is
presented in this table.
* Likelihood ratio χ2 statistic that each cell is equal to the other for the unadjusted wealth entries: χ2 = 262.4 (p-value <
0.001).
  Table 3: Similarity in Parent-Child Income, Human Capital and Portfolio Composition
                                (1,491 Parent-Child Pairs)

                                                                       I                               II
                                                         Coefficient on Corresponding          Mean of Dependent
Child Outcome Measure (Dependent Variable)              Parental Outcome Variable (γ1)             Variable

Income
  Child’s Family Log Labor Income                                     0.301                             10.7
                                                                     (0.025)
Education
 1. Head of Child’s Family has Education < 12                         0.098                            0.084
                                                                     (0.016)

  2. Head of Child’s Family has Education =12                         0.043                            0.355
                                                                     (0.034)

  3. Head of Child’s Family has Education > 12                        0.325                            0.561
                                                                     (0.025)

Asset Ownership
 1. Dummy: Child Owns Stock                                           0.162                            0.313
                                                                     (0.022)

  2. Dummy: Child Owns Business                                       0.096                            0.169
                                                                     (0.018)

  3. Dummy: Child Owns Home                                           0.167                            0.688
                                                                     (0.040)

Asset Ownership, Net of Income and Education
 4. Dummy: Child Owns Stock                                           0.028                            0.313
                                                                     (0.022)

  5. Dummy: Child Owns Business                                       0.073                            0.169
                                                                     (0.018)

  6. Dummy: Child Owns Home                                           0.089                            0.688
                                                                     (0.039)

Regression:                  zk = γ0 + γ1 zp + γ2 Agek + γ3 Age2k + γ4 Agep + γ5 Age2p + νk,

where zk = child outcome variable and zp is the similarly defined parental outcome variable.

Outcome Measures:

* Income: Average child log family labor income is measured over 1992 and 1996. Average parent log family labor
income is measured over 1984 and 1988.
* Education: Dummy variable equal to 1 indicating if the head of the household attained m years of
schooling (for m < 12, m = 12, and m > 12).
* Asset Ownership: Dummy variable which takes the value of 1 if the household owns portfolio component j (j =
stocks, business, and home). Child asset ownership is measured in 1999. Parental asset ownership is measured in
1984.
* Standard errors for the regressions (in parenthesis) are robust to heteroskedasticity and within-family correlation.
                  Table 4: Decomposition of Intergenerational Wealth Elasticity:

     Estimated coefficient on log parental wealth from regressions of log child wealth on log
              parental wealth with various additional parental and child controls.
                                                                Estimated     Fraction       Additional     Adjusted
                                                                Elasticity       of           Fraction         R-
                                                                              Elasticity         of         squared
                                                                              Explained      Elasticity
                                                                                             Explained
A.

Wealth Elasticity, Controlling for Only Age                       0.365           -----         -----        0.102
                                                                 (0.028)

Wealth Elasticity, Controlling for Age and:

     Actual and Predicted Income                                  0.175         52.1%           -----        0.304
                                                                 (0.032)

     Education                                                    0.263         28.0%           -----        0.154
                                                                 (0.030)

     Past Transfers and Expected Bequests                         0.303         16.9%           -----        0.112
                                                                 (0.032)

     Portfolio Composition                                        0.232         36.4%           -----        0.421
                                                                 (0.031)

B.

Wealth Elasticity, Controlling for Age, Income and:

      Education                                                   0.167         54.3%           2.2%         0.310
                                                                 (0.032)

      Past Transfers and Expected Bequests                        0.161         55.7%           3.6%         0.305
                                                                 (0.034)

      Portfolio Composition                                       0.133         63.6%          11.5%         0.490
                                                                 (0.035)

      Education, Past Transfers, Expected Bequests                0.129         64.7%          12.6%         0.492
      and Portfolio Composition                                  (0.037)


* See Footnote to Table 1 for sample description (1,491 parent-child pairs).
* Income controls include all the actual and predicted income controls described in Text (including a quadratic in
actual income and age interacted with the actual and predicted income measures).
* Standard errors for the regressions (in parenthesis) are robust to heteroskedasticity and within-family correlation.
  Table 5: Intergenerational Transition Matrix of Age-Adjusted Log Wealth, After
              Controlling for Lifetime Income and Asset Composition.

             Age, Income and Portfolio Composition Adjusted Position in Bold
                            Age-Adjusted Position in Italics

                                                    Parental Adjusted Log Wealth Quintile (1984-1989)
 Child Adjusted Log Wealth Quintile
               (1999)                                      1              2             3              4             5


                         1                                23             25            20             15            17
                                                          36             26            16             15            11

                         2                                21             17            25             17            20
                                                          29             24            21             13            16

                         3                                18             19            20             21            22
                                                          16             24            25             20            14

                         4                                21             21            20             21            17
                                                          12             15            24             26            24

                         5                                17             19            15             25            24
                                                           7             12            15             26            36

  Total                                                   100           100            100           100           100


* Each element of the matrix above, πab , indicates the probability (in percent) that a child belongs to the ath quintile of
the distribution for children, given that her parents belong to the bth quintile of the parental distribution. The entries
sum to one along the columns.
* To get adjusted wealth measures, both parent and children’s log wealth were adjusted using a first stage OLS
regression of log wealth on age and age squared, measures of actual and predicted lifetime income, and binary variables
denoting whether the person owned a home, stocks or a business. The correlation of the residuals from the first stage
regression is presented in this table.
* See Footnote to Table 1 for sample description (1,491 parent-child pairs).
* Likelihood ratio χ2 statistic that each cell is equal to the other for the unadjusted wealth entries: χ2 = 34.7 (p-value <
0.004).
                  Table 6: Linear Probability Estimates of Relationship Between Child and Parent Risk Tolerance Categories


                                                                                     Child’s Risk Tolerance Measure
               Regressors                                Very Low                          Low                          Medium                            High
                                                     A               B              A               B               A               B               A               B

Parental Risk Tolerance

   Dummy: Low Risk Tolerance                       0.059          0.064           0.008           -0.021          -0.054          -0.042         -0.012           -0.001
                                                  (0.065)        (0.066)         (0.051)         (0.052)         (0.054)         (0.054)        (0.057)          (0.058)

   Dummy: Medium Risk Tolerance                    -0.117         -0.125          0.072           0.039           0.081           0.107          -0.037           -0.021
                                                  (0.079)        (0.083)         (0.062)         (0.065)         (0.065)         (0.068)        (0.069)          (0.072)

   Dummy: High Risk Tolerance                      -0.138         -0.098          -0.005          -0.013          -0.010          -0.012         0.154            0.123
                                                  (0.057)        (0.057)         (0.045)         (0.047)         (0.047)         (0.049)        (0.050)          (0.053)


* Regression reported in this table: Linear probability model of child risk tolerance category as a function of parental risk tolerance categories without wealth, income and
demographic controls (Column A) and with wealth, income and demographic controls (Column B).

* Sample: Persons in the “main” sample defined in footnote to Table 1 who also responded to “risk tolerance” questions asked of persons working in 1996. Sub-sample consists
of 583 parent-child pairs.
* For Column B, demographic, income and wealth controls include both parent and child’s: age, age squared, log wealth and all actual and predicted income controls.
* Percent of children with ‘very low’, ‘low’, ‘medium’ and ‘high’ risk tolerance, respectively, 0.39, 0.17, 0.20, and 0.24.
* Coefficients in bold are significant at the 10 percent level.
* Standard errors for the regressions (in parenthesis) are robust to heteroskedasticity and within-family correlation.
                                    Table 7: Intergenerational Similarity in Portfolio Composition and Risk Tolerance

                                                                     I. Child Owns Stock?                 II. Child Owns Business?            III. Child Owns Home?
                                                                       A        B         C                   A        B         C               A        B       C

Parent Owns Stock                                                   0.133        0.057        0.058
                                                                   (0.039)      (0.041)      (0.041)

Parental Owns Business                                                                                     0.110      0.081      0.065
                                                                                                          (0.033)    (0.034)    (0.034)

Parental Owns Home                                                                                                                            0.245       0.145        0.147
                                                                                                                                             (0.073)     (0.072)      (0.073)

  Child is “Low” Risk Tolerance                                                               -0.027                             0.066                                 -0.088
                                                                                             (0.054)                            (0.046)                               (0.052)
  Child is “Medium” Risk Tolerance                                                             0.186                             0.120                                  0.028
                                                                                             (0.051)                            (0.044)                               (0.049)
  Child is “High” Risk Tolerance                                                              -0.021                             0.087                                 -0.009
                                                                                             (0.049)                            (0.042)                               (0.046)
Parent and Child Age Controls                                        Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes    Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes
Parent and Child Income Controls                                     No           Yes           Yes            No     Yes         Yes          No          Yes           Yes
Parent and Child Risk Tolerance Controls                             No           No            Yes            No     No          Yes          No          No            Yes

Adjusted R-Squared                                                  0.030        0.115        0.138        0.029     0.062       0.072        0.087       0.180        0.181


* Table reports the linear probability regression results of child portfolio ownership on parental portfolio ownership with and without income and risk tolerance controls.
* Sample: A sub sample of the ‘main’ sample of analysis described in the footnote for Tables 1. The additional restriction imposed is that both parent and child had to have been
working in 1996 and had to give non-missing responses to the risk tolerance questions (see text for full discussion). (583 parent-child pairs)

* Age controls include: Age and age squared of both parent and child.
* Income and Education controls include: All human capital and income controls described in regression 5 of Table 3 for both parents and their children..
* Risk Tolerance controls include: Three risk tolerance categories (‘low’, ‘medium’ and ‘high’) for both parents and children. The omitted group was ‘very low’ for both groups.

* Base probability that the child owns stock, a business, or a house, respectively: 0.350, 0.186, and 0.691.
                           Table 8: Decomposition of Intergenerational Wealth Elasticity, Including Effect of Preferences


                                                                                            Estimated Elasticity                Fraction of Elasticity           Adjusted
                                                                                                                                     Explained                  R-squared


Intergenerational Wealth Elasticity, Controlling for Only Age                                       0.357                                 -----                    0.102
                                                                                                   (0.041)
Intergenerational Wealth Elasticity, Controlling for Age and:

  Actual and Predicted Income                                                                       0.205                               42.6%                      0.304
                                                                                                   (0.408)

  Actual and Predicted Income, Portfolio Choice                                                     0.108                               69.7%                      0.555
                                                                                                   (0.042)

  Actual and Predicted Income, Portfolio Choice, Education, Past                                    0.06                                83.2%                      0.571
  Transfers, Expected Bequests                                                                     (0.045)

  Actual and Predicted Income, Portfolio Choice, Education, Past                                    0.049                               86.3%                      0.580
  Transfers, Expected Bequests and Preferences                                                     (0.045)

* Sample: A sub sample of the ‘main’ sample of analysis described in the footnote for Tables 1. The additional restriction imposed is that both parent and child had to have been
working in 1996 and had to give non-missing responses to the risk tolerance questions (see text for full discussion). (583 parent-child pairs)
* Income controls include all the actual and predicted income controls described in Text (including a quadratic in actual income and age interacted with the actual and predicted
income measures).
* Standard errors for the regressions (in parenthesis) are robust to heteroskedasticity and within-family correlation.
