                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          HEALTH AND RETIREMENT:
           DO CHANGES IN HEALTH AFFECT RETIREMENT EXPECTATIONS?

                                           Kathleen McGarry

                                          Working Paper 9317
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9317


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2002




I thank John Karl Scholz and an anonymous referee for exceptionally helpful comments, and the
National Bureau of Economic Research for generous fellowship support. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Kathleen McGarry. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Health and Retirement: Do Changes in Health Affect Retirement Expectations?
Kathleen McGarry
NBER Working Paper No. 9317
November 2002
JEL No. J2, I1

                                               ABSTRACT

The choice of a retirement date is one of the most important decisions facing older workers. It is a
decision that will affect their economic well-being for the remainder of their lives. One of the factors that
undoubtedly impacts this choice is the worker's health. However, the many studies examining the
realtionship between health and retirement have failed to reach agreement on the relative importance of

health in comparison to financial variables. Efforts to do so have been hampered by the difficulty of

correctly measuring health status. Much of the concern centers on the fear that subjective reports of
health are biased by individuals using poor health as a justification for early retirement. This paper takes
advantage of a unique measure of labor force attachment, the subjective probability of continued work,
to re-examine the role of health and changes in health status By focusing exclusively on workers I

eliminate the concern about justification bias among retired individuals and find that subjective reports
of health do have important effects on retirement, effects that are arguably stronger than those of the
financial variables. The effects of subjective health remain large even when more objective measures of

health, such as disease conditions, are included in the model. I also find that changes in retirement
expectations are driven to a much greater degree by changes in health than by changes in income or
wealth.



Kathleen McGarry
Department of Economics
UCLA
405 Hilgard Avenue
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1477
and NBER
mcgarry@UCLA.edu
