CUSTOMER ANGER AT PRICE INCREASES, TIME VARIATION IN THE
   FREQUENCY OF PRICES CHANGES AND MONETARY POLICY

                     Julio J. Rotemberg

                    Working Paper 9320
                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




          CUSTOMER ANGER AT PRICE INCREASES, TIME VARIATION IN THE
             FREQUENCY OF PRICES CHANGES AND MONETARY POLICY

                                           Julio J. Rotemberg

                                          Working Paper 9320
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9320


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2002




I wish to thank Laura Alfaro, Rafael Di Tella, Huw Pill and Michael Woodford for helpful conversations and
the Harvard Business School Division of Research for research support.

© 2002 by Julio J. Rotemberg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Customer Anger at Price Increases, Time Variation in the Frequency of
Price Changes and Monetary Policy
Julio J. Rotemberg
NBER Working Paper No. 9320
November 2002
JEL No. E3, E4, L2

                                             ABSTRACT

While much evidence suggests tha price rigidity is due to a concern with the reaction of customers, price
increases do not seem to be typically associated with drastic reduction in purchases. To explain this
apparent inconsistency, this paper develops a model where consumers care about the fairness of prices

and react negatively only when they become convinced that prices are unfair. This leads to price rigidity,
though the implications of the model are not identical to those of existing models of costly price

adjustment. In particular, the frequency of price adjustment ought to depend on economy-wide variables
observed by consumers. As I show, this has implications for the effects of monetary policy. It can, in
particular, explain why inflation does not fall immediately after a monetary tightening.



Julio J. Rotemberg
Graduate School of Business
Harvard University, Morgan Hall
Soldiers Field
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jrotemberg@hbs.edu
1    Introduction

Price setters have been asked on repeated occasions to explain why their prices stay constant
in nominal terms for periods of time that are vastly longer than the period over which the
opportunity cost of production stays constant. The two most common answers received by
Hall and Hitch (1939) involved the psychology of customers. They were, in particular, that
\conventional price [is] in [the] minds of buyers" and that \Price changes [are] disliked by
buyers." Blinder  et al (1998) asked price setters about the validity of various theories of
sticky prices developed by economists, so they did not ask directly whether price changes
were disliked by customers. Nonetheless, a majority of their respondents volunteered that
changing prices would \antagonize" or \cause diÆculties" with their customers (p. 308).
    The simplest model of such negative reactions would posit that the quantity demanded
falls dramatically every time a price is increased, perhaps because price increases trigger
search as suggested by Stiglitz (1984). However, as I discuss further below, many price
increases are associated with only trivial instantaneous reductions in the quantity demanded.
It would thus seem that the negative reactions, if they come, come only occasionally. In this
paper I propose a model of this type. I suppose that consumers only wish to buy from rms
whose prices are \fair" and that price changes trigger a re-evaluation of the rm's fairness.
This turns out to be suÆcient to imply that rms keep their prices constant at certain times
even though most price changes do not lead to customer anger because the rm that increases
its price is deemed to have behaved fairly.
    A more standard explanation for the existence of periods where prices are xed involves
the assumption that there are non-convex costs of changing prices. These costs are usually
motivated by the observation that posting prices involves physical resources so that resources
must be spent to change prices by, for example, printing new catalogues (Sheshinski and
Weiss 1977). While Levy    et.     (1997) show that the resource costs of changing prices in
                                 al.


supermarkets are nontrivial, these administrative costs simply cannot be the whole story.
    To see this, Figure 1 shows the prices charged by a supermarket chain for a particular

                                              1
product. A striking feature of this series is the recurrence of downwards spikes, short periods
where this particular item is \on special". Putting an item on special involves not just
labelling it with a di erent price, but often also involves changing the way it is displayed.
After the promotion is over, the supermarket changes the price again, but often chooses
exactly the same price as prevailed before the special. Thus, rms appear to have a preference
for prices they have charged before even when the resource costs needed to post such prices
are the same as those that would be needed to display any other price.
    An even more common approach to modelling price rigidity is to suppose that price
setters have imperfect information (see Lucas 1972, Mankiw and Reis (2001), Woodford
(2002)). However, the prices of commodities are well publicized and move minute by minute
while, at the same time, a majority of the economy's prices are set by a small number of
individuals. It seems hard to believe that these individuals, who are presumably selected for
their competence, would fail to update their beliefs regarding optimal prices for months at
a time.
    It is worth stressing, however, that the inability of models based on imperfect information
by producers to explain this aspect of day-to-day pricing in no way rules out these models
as explanations for aggregate movements in economic activity. Indeed, other models of rigid
prices that have been applied to aggregate data also seem to face limitations when confronted
with microeconomic observations. The model of quadratic costs of price adjustment of
Rotemberg (1982), for example, predicts that rms ought to change their prices continuously
by small amounts. The Calvo (1983) model assumes periods of price rigidity and thus has
the advantage that it is both consistent with this set of micro observations and that it can be
calibrated on the basis of information on the frequency of price changes. However, it raises
the question of how one should interpret its random trigger for individual price changes. One
could interpret it along the lines of Dotseyet. al.   (1999) as resulting from i.i.d. randomness
in the xed cost of changing prices. However, it is not clear why the physical costs of changing
prices should be particularly random from one period to the next.
    One attraction of focusing on how consumers perceive prices is that rms routinely say

                                               2
they want their prices to be \fair." As discussed by Hall and Hitch (1939), many rms set
prices using the \cost-plus" method which involves starting with variable unit cost, adding
the average overhead cost per unit under that assumption that rms produce at \capacity"
and, lastly, adding a margin of pro t. Oxenfeldt (1951, p. 158) reports that rms justify
their margins as follows: \Questionnaire and eld surveys indicate the particular acceptance
of a margin as `fair' to be the most important reason for the widespread use of that margin."
These managerial concerns with fairness are perfectly mirrored in the answers given by
potential customers in the research of Kahneman, Knetch and Thaler (1986). They asked
students what prices they would and would not regard as fair. Their basic conclusion is
that price increases due exclusively to changes in demand, e.g. increases in the price of snow
shovels during a snowstorm, were deemed to be unfair while increases in prices due to cost
increases were deemed fair.
    Interestingly, marketing experts have long bemoaned the tendency of rms to set prices
with too much regard for costs. For example, after noting that a survey of U.S. exporters
reveals that 70% of them set their prices using the cost-plus method, Dolan and Simon (1996,
p.37-38) say \It is foolish not to consider the demand side in setting prices... In spite of its
popularity in practice, cost-plus pricing is not an acceptable method for the power-pricer."
Yet, in discussing why sellers prefer cost-plus to what he calls \ exible markup pricing,"
Oxenfeldt (1951, p. 177) says \The strong ethical basis for cost-plus pricing is lost when
margins vary according to conditions of demand. Flexible markup pricing would take on the
motivation of `charge as much as the market will bear' ".
    When managers express their desire to charge fair prices, they may well be concerned with
the way consumers perceive these prices. In many of the instances where rms change the
terms on which they o er their products they also try to manage these consumer perceptions.
For example, many rms told Blinder    at al (1998) that they preferred to change other features
of their product rather than change the prices themselves. One standard way of doing this,
which is often discussed in the \Selling It" column of   Consumer Reports    , is to reduce the
quantity of valuable ingredients in a package. For example, in the October 1994 issue of this

                                               3
publication, it is reported that Minute Maid signi cantly reduced the concentration of its 12
oz. can of Raspberry Lemonade while keeping the price constant. A company representative
explained that this was due to cost increases and that \Otherwise, we would have had to
charge more."
    A perhaps even more insidious version of this is to lower the quality while lowering the
price by less than the resulting cost reduction. The October 1994 issue of  Consumer Reports


reports an example of this as well. It discusses a change in the design of the packages for
Gutterman thread. The company made its plastic spools fatter so that, when lled with 110
yards of thread, they would have the same outside dimensions than a previous version which
included 220 yards of thread. The price of the newer version was $1.25 while the previous
one was $1.45.
    These examples might be seen as simple attempts to move along consumers' demand
functions by preventing them from noticing that the price has increased (or that the e ective
quantity bought has declined). However no equivalent incentive exists for masking price
declines with quality improvements. Yet, Oxenfeld (1951) reports that Whitman's boxed
chocolates increased its quality but did not reduce its price in the entire Great Depression.
The President of the company declared afterwards \Time has proved the wisdom of this
procedure. ... For many rms have found it diÆcult to increase their prices again once they
had been reduced" (quoted in Oxenfeldt, 1951, p. 190).
    This is a puzzling statement from the point of view of demand management for the
following reason. Suppose that the increased sales when a price is reduced are matched by
an equal sales decline when the price is subsequently raised and brought back to its original
level. A rm that masks both its price decline and its subsequent increase then experiences
fewer changes in sales than one that makes its price changes explicit. But, if cost reductions
are the cause of the initial masked price cut, it would seem that pro ts would increase by
more if the rm cut its price explicitly so that its sales would rise while its costs were low. A
more straightforward interpretation of this statement by Whitman's President is that price
increases lead to negative customer reactions that go beyond reductions of sales along a

                                               4
well-behaved demand curve.
    My theory of price rigidity hinges on the assumption that consumers use nominal price
changes as a trigger for re ection about the attitudes of producers. This ts with the
suggestion that rms ought to try to \improve" their product when they raise prices. Miller
(1976 p. 23) makes this suggestion to restaurants as a way to overcome customer resistance
when printing a menu with higher prices. He recommends adding something (like potato
chips) \to a standard item and creat[ing] a new package that includes the standard but can
be sold for a slightly higher price".
    It is worth noting that I am giving consumers a \rule of thumb" when I suppose that
they rethink the fairness of their suppliers. In the absence of computation costs, more
frequent assessments of fairness might be optimal. However, if re ection about the attitudes
of producers is costly, consumers will seek to economize on this type of analysis and will only
carry out the required computations when conditions change noticeably.
    Interestingly, this model can provide a rationale for the random price changes in Calvo
(1983). Consumers' evaluation of the fairness of a price-changing rm depends on their
information and this information evolves randomly over time. Thus, there may be periods
where a rm is particularly likely to face sti resistance to price increases and others where
much lower resistance is expected. A rm with some information about the likely reactions
of its consumers would obviously choose to raise its prices in the latter. Thus, the random
receipt of information by consumers may rationalize the random price changes assumed by
Calvo (1983).
    One di erence with the Calvo (1983) model, however, is that price changes ought to
be more frequent when the macroeconomic environment suggests that these price changes
are fair. Thus, for example, high in ation in the past might convince consumers that costs
are likely to have increased and thus may make price increases easier to sustain. This type
of reasoning leads to two reasons why contractionary monetary policies may have only a
negligible impact on current in ation, with most of the reduction in in ation being observed
sometime after interest rates are increased.

                                              5
    I model the rst of these reasons explicitly. A contractionary monetary policy typically
reduces the price that a price changing rm would wish to charge because the reduction in
demand tends to lower marginal cost. This can, paradoxically, increase the frequency of rms
changing prices since the price change that rms now desire has just become more palatable.
If the typical rm that changes its prices actually raises them (because the rm operates in
an environment of steady in ation), the increased frequency of price adjustment can o set
the decline in the price chosen by those rms that change their prices. There is also a second
reason for an increase in the frequency of price adjustment in the immediate aftermath of a
monetary contraction, though I do not model this explicitly. This is that such a shock makes
  rms realize that price increases will become less palatable once in ation slows down. This
acts as an incentive to raise price before in ation falls, and thereby postpones the onset of
low in ation.
    The paper proceeds as follows. In the next section I present some evidence on the e ects
of price increases. The issue I address is whether consumer \resistance" to price increases
boils down to a precipitous fall in demand when prices is increased. Insofar as sales do not
fall sharply every time prices are raised, the model I propose in the subsequent section is
more attractive. The reason is that this model involves the possibility of sharp drops in sales
if consumers feel the price increase is unfair but, most of the time, rms will choose price
changes that pass muster with their customers.
    Section 3 presents my model of consumer reactions to price increases. Section 4 turns to
macroeconomic considerations by discussing a general equilibrium model with random price
changes where the frequency of price changes can depend on observable economic variables.
Section 5 then analyzes how this model behaves in response to monetary policy shocks and
Section 6 concludes.

2    What happens when prices are increased

Close observation of what happens to rms that change prices is likely to contain impor-
tant information about the causes of price rigidity. For this reason, I start by studying
                                              6
some features of the the scanner data from Dominick's Fine Foods. These data contain
                                                                           1



weekly transactions data on price, sales and acquisition cost for a multitude of supermarket
items. The data cover several of Dominick's stores and pertains to the period that goes
from September 1989 to May 1997. The prices for many of these items alternate between
\regular" prices and \specials". A typical example of this pattern is provided in Figure 1,
which plots the retail prices as well as the acquisition costs (averaged over stores) for the 16
oz. package of Nabisco Premium Saltines over the 380 weeks for which data are available.
As can be seen in this Figure, the \regular" price of this item was changed 5 times. Within
each period during which any particular regular price prevailed, there were several subperi-
ods where the item was "on special" and was sold at a lower price. The Figure also shows
that the acquisition cost varies closely with the retail price, from which it follows that the
manufacturer is closely involved in most (if not necessarily all) decisions to change the retail
price of this product.
    The price that is \sticky" in this Figure is the \regular" price and it is thus of particular
interest to study the e ects of changes in this price. Before doing so, it is worth mentioning
that total sales of this item are signi cantly larger during the weeks that the item is on
\special." This is consistent with the ndings of Hendel and Nevo (2002). Large increases in
sales during specials are easy to rationalize, since Saltines are storable at least to some extent.
Thus, a temporary reduction in price not only encourages more current consumption but
also encourages consumer to purchase extra units for future use. In addition, \specials" may
induce purchases from consumers who do not typically buy the item, particularly because
specials are often displayed prominently in the supermarket.
    One important feature of \specials" is that supermarkets rarely put similar products
o ered by competing producers on \special" at the same time. An obvious question that
arises when studying changes in \regular" prices is whether competitors synchronize these
changes. I thus discuss brie y the range of related products sold by Dominick's. First,
  1 The  data were obtained from http://gsbwww.uchicago.edu/research/mkt/Databases/DFF/Files.html.
For a longer description, see Barsky et. al. (2002).



                                                7
Nabisco itself produces several similar products including Saltines with either no or low salt,
as well as packages in di erent sizes. The 16oz. package of Nabisco Premium Saltines is
the most popular of these, but the other items with the same weight sell almost always for
exactly the same price. Thus, this item seems representative of the Nabisco o erings of this
product class. Several other manufacturers produce saltines, though only three additional
brands were sold by Dominick's for most of the duration of this particular sample. One of
these is the Dominick's brand of Saltines, a second one is sold under the brand of Salerno.
In addition, Dominick's carried both regular and low salt saltines sold under the Keebler
brand. Since the two Keebler products were almost always sold for the same price, I focus
on Keebler's regular product, which was more popular. The sales of Keebler and Dominick's
own brand of saltines were comparable, though considerably smaller than those of Nabisco's
brand. The sales under the Salerno brand were somewhat smaller that those of either the
Keebler or Dominick's brand.
    These four brands did not synchronize the timing of their \regular" prices changes.
Nabisco's Premium Saltines were rst sold for $1.79, $1.89, $1.99, $2.19 and $2.29 in weeks
21, 108, 142, 327 and 364 respectively. Only the rst of these price changes was accompa-
                                             2



nied by changes in the regular prices of any of the main competitors. Nabisco acted as a price
leader in that competitors tended to follow its price increases, but with some delay. Salerno,
for example, followed the third, fourth and fth increases with price increases in weeks 149,
339 and 373 respectively. Keebler followed the second and fourth Nabisco increases with
changes in weeks 116 and 338, while Dominick's had a price change in week 333 and thereby
followed Nabisco's fourth increase. The rst Nabisco price increase was unusual because
Keebler also raised its price to $1.78 in week 21.
    Before proceeding to the discussion of the changes in quantity that accompanied these
price increases, it is worth noting that the rst three of these regular price increases were
   2 In giving the weeks in which various events took place, I use the nomenclature for \weeks" in the
Dominick's data base. This does not coincide perfectly with the way weeks are displayed in Figure 1 because
data is not available for certain weeks.




                                                    8
preceded by having Nabisco's Premium Saltines on special. The previous regular price been
                                                                     3



charged in contiguous weeks ending in week 16, 104 and 137 respectively. To get a sense
of what happened to Nabisco's sales after regular price increases, I compare the average
number of boxes sold in the rst three weeks of the new price to the average sold in the
last contiguous stretch where the previous regular price was charged to customers. This             4



comparison might overstate the declines in sales brought on by the regular price increase if
the intervening weeks where the product was on special led customers to stock up. In any
event, the last two increases are free from this problem.
                                       Table 1
                  Changes in Nabisco Sales when Regular Price Rises
                           Weeks of Weeks of % change % change in
                          \old" price \new price in price boxes sold
                      1      13-16      21-23      16.3      -.12
                      2     89-104     108-110      5.6      23.4
                      3    132-137     142-144      5.3     -18.3
                      4    320-325     327-329     10.0      -4.6
                      5    356-362     364-366      4.6       23
    The results of this comparison are presented in Table 1, which also gives the weeks of
\old" and \new" prices that I compare, as well as the relevant percent change in regular
prices. The table shows that, on two occasions, sales actually rise dramatically right after
the regular price is increased while only once does the quantity decline signi cantly. While
generalizing from this small set of numbers is precarious, it seems fair to say that regular
price increases are not necessarily followed by big reductions in the quantity demanded, even
if competitors do not match the price increases.
   3 This suggests that the xed costs of physically posting new prices may play some role in the joint timing
of promotions and regular price changes. When an item goes back to being sold at a regular price, the
store incurs costs to change what it displays and some of these costs must be incurred again if the store
later changes the regular price of the item. There are thus some cost savings in moving directly from the
promotional price to a new regular price.
   4 I use averages because sales vary considerably from week to week. This is what leads me to use the
entire set of contiguous weeks where the \old" regular price was last charged. I only use the rst three weeks
with the \new" price to capture the e ect of price changes. The results are not very sensitive to using only
the rst full week with the new price or just the last three contiguous weeks with the \old" price.



                                                     9
    One potential interpretation of these observations is that Nabisco has information about
the weeks in which demand is higher and raises its price in those weeks. This cannot be ruled
out. However, forecasting week-to-week demand changes in this industry seems diÆcult.
Weekly sales are quite volatile even in periods with constant prices. For example, while all
four major brands kept their price constant from week 33 to week 34, Nabisco's sales fell
by 21% from the former to the latter. Moreover, since the four rms do not synchronize
their price movements, one would only be able to believe that Nabisco is timing its price
changes to coincide with demand variations if one also believed that the relative demand for
the di erent brands is predictable.
    If one accepts that prices are not tailored to signi cant brand-speci c demand variations,
the evidence of Table 1 would seem to rule out theories where demand is kinked at the \old"
price. Since competitive products whose price has remained constant are available nearby,
the evidence suggests that individuals do not respond to price increases by immediately
embarking on a search for a better deal. The evidence also seems inconsistent with a setting
where customers feel that any price increase is suÆciently unfair as to lead customers to
reduce their purchases. Rather it suggests that, insofar as customers react badly to price
increases, they do so either with a delay or only occasionally.
    Given that some price increases elicit strenuous objections right away, it seems more
straightforward to suppose that consumers only react with anger on certain occasions. More-
over, the strenuous reactions that do occur appear to catch price setters by surprise. Con-
sider, for example, the reaction to those stores that raised their prices in the aftermath of the
earthquake that hit the Los Angeles area in January 1994. Some of these stores were visited
by activists and threatened with boycotts (L.A. Times, January 30, 1994). The consumer
reaction was so vociferous that Southland Corp. terminated its franchise agreement with
several 7-Eleven franchisees who raised prices during the episode (The Orange County Reg-
ister, 23 January 1994). The hypothesis that franchisees expected this particular reaction
does not seem particularly plausible.
    Many consumers have also been angry at European stores for \rounding up" when con-

                                               10
verting their prices to euro's. The extent to which this behavior actually raised in ation is
in dispute. Nonetheless, some of the complaints have been loud. In Greece, in particular,
consumer groups successfully called for a mass boycott of stores in early September 2002 to
protest the price gouging associated with the introduction of the euro (Reuters, September
2, 2002).
    These violent reactions in dramatic historical episodes still leave open the question of
whether the typical rm that changes its price faces a signi cant probability of consumer
revolt. The evidence of Table 1 makes it clear that such revolts are not commonplace and
is open to at least two interpretations. In the rst, rms have good information about
consumer reactions and change prices only when they feel the probability of a negative
consumer reactions is particularly low. In the second, rms know relatively little about the
price that will trigger consumer anger and price conservatively so that the likelihood of such
a reaction remains low. The model I develop in the next section can accommodate both of
these possibilities.

3    A One-period model with fairness concerns

In this section I consider a model where a rm must choose its price in the \last period" of
a relationship with consumers. As usual, consumers derive utility from purchasing a good
which a rm nds costly to produce. I model these standard components of the relationship
by supposing that there is a unit mass of consumers which obtain utility U (x) from consuming
x units of the good. At the same time, their utility is linear in the real income that is left
over after paying for the x units of the good that they buy. This means that the \material
payo s" of consumers, their utility function leaving aside aside fairness concerns is
                       i.e.


                                                         P
                                      = U (x) + Y       x t :                            (1)
                                                         Pt
    The maximization of this utility would lead consumers to purchase a quantity x that
satis es
                                                 P
                                       U 0 (x) = t                                 (2)
                                                 P  t

                                             11
where primes denote derivatives. Since the supermarket data suggests that manufacturers are
at least partly responsible for the rigidity of prices, I simply consider the pricing decision of
a producer. I thus analyze a single monopolistic producer whose nominal cost of production
equals to c(x) and suppose that pro ts from sales give the producer a utility of
                                                        !
                                            xPt c(x)
                                        V
                                                 Pt
                                                          :                                   (3)
   I let the producer set his price rst and then let consumers decide how much to purchase.
Absent fairness concerns, the optimal price satis es
                               
                                     1 
                                                             xPt
                            P 1
                              t
                                      t
                                         = c0 t        =  t
                                                                Pt U 00
                                                                                        (4)
where t is the elasticity of demand at t.
    I now consider the actions of a consumer concerned with fairness. A pioneering approach
to modelling these concerns is provided by Rabin (1993). His model of fairness involves three
key ingredients. These are a de nition of \kindness", a de nition of \equitable payo s" and
a speci cation of preferences that depend on both one's own kindness and the kindness one
expects from the person one is dealing with. He measures the expected kindness of the
second player towards the rst by the di erence between the payo s that the rst expects
to receive from the second and the payo s that it would \equitable" for the second to give
to the rst. He then de nes equitable payo s as being equal to the average of the highest
and the lowest payo s the second agent can give to the rst under the assumption that
the player acts eÆciently. Lastly, he supposes that agents maximize the sum of their own
material payo s and the product of their own kindness times the kindness they expect to
receive from the other agent. Thus, if the rst agent expects the second to give the rst a
payo that is higher than the \equitable" payo , the rst agent seeks to raise the second
agent's payo above that agent's equitable payo .       5



    While my approach is in the spirit of Rabin (1993), it di ers in some respects. In partic-
ular, I suppose that consumers view rms as fair when they feel that rms act altruistically.
  5 Foran extension of the Rabin (1993) model to dynamic games, see Falk and Fischbacher (2000) and
Dufwenberg and Kirchsteiger (2001).

                                                  12
In particular, I suppose that consumers expect the rm to maximize
                                                                       !
                                            xPt          c(x)
                                       V
                                                   Pt
                                                                + f       :                           (5)

This is not inconsistent with pure pro t maximization since f can be zero. I further suppose
that consumers have a \psychological utility function" given by
                                               "                       !            #
                                                  xPt c(x)
                                     c (^ f ) V                              Vo                      (6)
                                                     Pt
where Vo is the value of V without the consumer's purchase, c is an arbitrarily large number
and is a function of the consumer's perception of the altruism of the rm. I suppose this6



function is a step function which equals zero if the consumer cannot reject the hypothesis that
the rms f equals  against the alternative that it equals zero. If, instead, the consumer is
able to reject the hypothesis that f = , then the function equals one. This means that,
in this case, the consumer stops his purchases.
    While my approach to fairness is quite similar to Rabin's (1993) in its use of a psy-
chological utility function that seeks to reward like with like, there are some di erences in
the two speci cations. From the point of view of generating price rigidity, one of the key
di erences is my supposition that the psychological utility function is highly nonlinear. In
particular, I suppose that consumers have a neutral attitude towards rm pro ts in a broad
set of circumstances. Positive utility for punishing a rm arises only if consumers feel the
 rm has behaved in a demonstrably egregious manner. This speci cation predicts that con-
sumer reactions will be subject to threshold e ects, where consumers react only to what
they perceive to be extreme cases. When they do react, on the other hand, their reactions
are strong. Casual observation suggests that this ts the reactions of consumers somewhat
better than the supposition that consumers react in a \continuous" way to bad behavior by
   6 Inthis paper, I consider only altruism of the rm towards consumers. However, corporations also seek
to appear \corporately responsible" by engaging in charitable activities. Moreover Campbell (1999) provides
questionnaire evidence that people's perception of the fairness of raising the price of a doll whose demand
is high just before Christmas depends on whether the proceeds will go to charity or whether they will be
kept by the store. Thus, consumers may also refrain from punishing rms that are altruistic towards people
other than the consumers themselves.


                                                         13
the rm. It is much more common to hear calls for complete boycotts than calls for small
         7



reductions in the purchases from particular rms, for example.
    A second di erence with Rabin's (1993) analysis is that he supposes that each player
knows both the preferences and the opportunities available to the other. In the case of
consumers, it is not plausible to suppose that their information regarding their supplier's
circumstances is very good. I have thus cast the analysis in parametric terms, consumers use
their information to estimate and test hypotheses about the value of one parameter. The
use of an altruism parameter seems particularly straightforward and has the advantage that
the parameter remains meaningful even if essentially nothing is known about the rm.
    I now analyze the interaction between an altruistic rm and consumers concerned with
the rm's fairness. Suppose rst that this relationship exists for only one period so that
there is no history before t. When faced with a price Pt , consumers must decide whether f
equals  or not. Taking into account (2), consumers suppose that a rm with an altruism
parameter equal to f maximizes
                                                                !
                              V xU 0
                                       c( x ) + f [U (x) xU 0 ] :                       (7)
                                        Pt
    The rst order condition for this problem is
                                                     !
                                   P 1
                                              1  f
                                                       = c0 :                            (8)
                                        t                     t
                                                   t
Not surprisingly, this involves a lower price the higher is the altruism parameter f . The
competitive limit is approached as f tends to 1.
   In practice, consumers are unlikely to have perfect information about either c0 or . For
simplicity, I leave aside the latter uncertainty for the moment and focus just on uncertainty
about c0 . In particular, I suppose that consumers have a subjective p.d.f for c0 given by F (c0).
                                           
Given (8), consumers expect Pt 1 tf to inherit this density function. This means that,
                                         1



consumers can reject the hypothesis that f =  at the usual 95% con dence level if
                                      "               !#
                                               1   
                                   F P 1    t
                                                   t
                                                          :95:
  7 \Discontinuous" reactions of this type also characterize relationships between rms and workers. See
Rotemberg (2003) for a discussion.

                                                  14
     Let P~ represent the price that satis es this relationship with equality. The rm has a
p.d.f. over P~ given by G. This p.d.f. is a step function if the rm knows the true value of
P~ . For an arbitrary G, the rm sets Pt to maximize
                                                                     !
                                       Pt x c(x)                  Pt 
                        [1 G(Pt)]V         Pt
                                                   + f U (x) x P :                    (9)
                                                                    t

    The rst order condition for this problem is
                     "                 !      #                                          !
                V0            1     f      0            Pt x c(x)                   Pt 
  [1 G(P )] U 00 P Pt 1         t
                                           ct g (P )V
                                                              Pt
                                                                     + f U (x) x P  0:
                   t                                                                  t
                                                                                             (10)
In the case where the Pt which solves (8) has the property that G(Pt) = 0, the solution to
this rst order condition is given by (8) itself and this is also the optimal price. Now suppose
that the price that satis es (8) does not satisfy (10) because G(Pt ) is positive at the price
that satis es (8). There are then two cases to consider. In the rst, the price that maximizes
(9), P , is interior so that (10) is satis ed as an equality at this price. In the second, the
price that maximizes (9) is the price P that satis es G(P ) = 0 and thus guarantees that
consumers regard this price as fair. This second solution applies when g(P ) is suÆciently
large at the P that ensures that G(P ) = 0 that (10) holds as an inequality at this price.
    This model can justify price rigidity from one period to the next even if one supposes that
the optimum is of this last type (perhaps because G is a step function at P~ ). However, one
would then have to imagine that P~ is perfectly rigid over time. This latter condition is not
particularly plausible, since consumers are bombarded with information about the economy
on a daily basis so they ought to update their distribution of c0 from one day to the next.
    A more plausible model of price rigidity follows if one assumes that consumers do not
revise their opinion about the rm's altruism until the rm changes its price. While I do not
derive conditions under which this is optimal for consumers, it ts with Kahneman, Knetsch
and Thaler (1986) who suppose that an action is regarded as fair if it is better, or at least not
worse than a reference action. For the most part, like Rabin (1994), they see actions as fair if
they somehow balance the interests of the two parties. But, Kahneman, Knetsch and Thaler
(1986) also assert that reference actions are often dictated by the past. According to them,
                                               15
changes in conditions including reductions in wages and increases in prices are regarded as
unfair unless it is common knowledge that the rm who imposes these changes would su er
greatly without taking these actions.
    One reason why consumers may not revise the fairness of the prices they pay if these are
identical in nominal terms to those that they have paid in the past is that this rule of thumb
saves on costs of computation. Moreover, in the presence of a positive level of trend in ation
  rms that keep their nominal prices constant at t do tend to o er consumers a better deal
than they did at t 1. Thus, this rule of thumb may not be very costly to consumers. A
second reason for consumers to refrain from re-evaluating the fairness of a rm's price when
this price remains constant is that consumers may believe the rm has large administrative
costs of changing prices. If consumers had such a belief, they would not change their estimate
of f even if the rm kept its price constant under a broad range of circumstances.
    Suppose that economic conditions change from t 1 to t, so the rm contemplates a
change in its price. There are now two illuminating extreme cases to consider. In the
  rst, consumers have no memory of past costs. Thus, they can only compare their current
subjective p.d.f. of costs to the current price as above. Knowledge of the past price may be
helpful to consumers in this setting, but only insofar as it contains information about the
  rm's current costs.
    If the price at t that satis es (8) also satis es (10) because G(Pt) = 0, the rm chooses
its rst best action in spite of the customers scrutiny of the rm's altruism. Indeed, in this
case, there is no reason for the rm to choose to repeat its earlier price. Now suppose that
the price P that satis es (8) has the property that G(P ) > 0. The rm now keeps its price
equal to Pt , its price in the previous period, if the price that maximizes (9) (which is below
            1


the price that satis es (8)) is lower than Pt . Keeping the price constant leads to a price
                                              1


which is closer to the rm's unconstrained optimum without creating any risk of customer
complaints.
    This logic can explain downwards price rigidity, where costs fall but price stays constant
because the resulting high pro ts are not so visible that they lead to cries of unfairness.

                                              16
Obviously, if costs fall enough and consumers are not aware of it, the rm may nd that
the price that maximizes its true objective function (7) now satis es (10). Price would then
fall, but the fall would be less than proportional to the fall in costs even if the elasticity of
demand were constant.      8



     Suppose that, instead, the price that maximizes (9) is above Pt , so that prices would
                                                                                  1


be expected to rise. If the price that maximizes (9) is the price that satis es G(P ) = 0,
the rm should increase its price. The reason is that it thereby increases the value of its
objective function without increasing the probability of a consumer revolt. In this case the
price is not rigid in the sense of staying constant. However, the rm is being prevented from
charging the price it most would like to charge by its fear of consumer reactions.
     On the other hand, keeping the price constant is good for the rm if the optimum is
interior and the price that satis es (10), P , is suÆciently close to Pt . By keeping the
                                                                                       1


price constant, the owner gets V (Pt ) while he gets [1 G(Pt)]V (Pt) if he raises it to
                                             1


P  . Since G(P  ) > 0 the latter can be less than the former. Thus, fear of consumer re-
evaluation of the rm's fairness can act as a \ xed" cost of price changes that keeps rm
prices constant. What makes the model di er from one with a simple xed cost, however,
is that the magnitude of the price change matters as well. This ts with the evidence
of Zbaracki   et al (2002) who report that salesmen are much more worried about negative
reactions to large price increases than they are about small ones.
     Consumers are particularly likely to react to large price         , as opposed to high
                                                                      changes                          levels


of prices if they have a di use prior about the          of c0t but have a more precise estimate
                                                          level


of the percent change in c0 from t 1 to t. This case would seem quite relevant because
relatively accurate estimates of the percent change in costs would seem easier to obtain than
accurate measures of cost levels. Under constant returns to scale, the percent change in cost
equals the inner product of the vector of cost shares with the vector of percent changes in
the prices of individual factors. Such an estimate is thus obtainable even if individuals do
   8 This logic might explain the widening of pro t margins for U.S. co ee distributors as the wholesale price
of co ee fell dramatically between 1997 and 2002. See Wall Street Journal, July 8, 2002 for a brief discussion
of the relevant facts.


                                                     17
not have access to information about total costs and total revenues. Regarding rms as fair
if they price according to (8) with f = , consumers expect the percent change in the price
dP=P to equal
                                   dP dc0
                                       =          1  d :
                                   P      c0  1 +  
    For a given elasticity of demand, prices are expected to rise by the same amount, namely
the percent change in marginal cost regardless of the level of rm altruism. However, changes
in  are expected to have a larger e ect if the rm is sel sh than if f = . Thus, large
di erences between the rate of change of prices and the rate of change of costs lead consumers
to reject the hypothesis that rm's altruism parameter equals  and, according to my model,
lead to a cessation of purchases. Supposing once again that consumers only compute whether
the rm is being fair when the rm changes its prices, the rm will tend to keep its price
constant if its optimal price at t, Pt is close to its inherited price Pt .
                                                                       1


    While the model rationalizes price rigidity in some circumstances, its precise implications
for dynamic pricing depend on the way consumers update their beliefs about P~ . A thorough
analysis of these beliefs is beyond the scope of this paper. It is worth noting, however, that
the bene t that consumers derive from good information about c0 may be relatively low. It
may thus be possible for consumers to have fairly poor information about the price the rm
would charge if its true altruism parameter were .
    Out of all the bits of information available about changes in c0 , consumers presumably
only observe a subset. Thus, their estimates of how a fair price ought to vary could easily
be \biased" from the point of view of more informed observers. While rms are likely to
be much better informed, they may su er from limited credibility when they try to convey
their information to consumers. This is likely to be particularly true if consumers are not
convinced of the rm's altruism.
    In what follows I do not explicitly model the way consumers update their information.
I suppose instead that consumer beliefs are random functions of the true state of nature
and that rms have some information about these beliefs. I use this approach to study the
aggregate consequences of potential anger over price changes.
                                              18
4          A Multi-period General Equilibrium Model

I consider a setting where the beliefs of consumers about what constitutes fair pricing for
any given rm vary from period to period and from rm to rm (even though all rms are
symmetric). The problem is considerably simpli ed by supposing that each rm knows what
changes in prices its own consumers would regard as fair while also supposing that changing
a price when consumers see this as unfair leads to prohibitive losses in pro ts. This means
that rms only change their prices when they know that consumers will nd this acceptable.
    I suppose that, for each rm, the probability that any price increase at t will be regarded
as unfair is t . With the complementary probability (1 t ), any price increase will be
deemed to be fair. With a suÆciently large level of steady state in ation, rms do not ever
 nd it optimal to lower their prices in my setting. It is then unimportant to understand how
consumers react to price decreases. This setting leads to a straightforward generalization
                                          9



of Calvo (1983), since rms change their prices with probability t. The only di erence is
that he considers the case where t is constant. For reasons that I discuss below, it seems
more natural to imagine that t varies over time when the reason that rms are sometimes
reluctant to change their prices is that they fear negative customer reactions.
    The production and aggregate demand structure of the model are based on Rotemberg
and Woodford (1997). In particular, I suppose that each of a continuum of households
produces his own di erentiated good and that his utility function at t is given by
                                              10


                                              1
                                              X
                                         E0     t [u(C i )    v (yti)]                                   (11)
                                                          t
                                              t=0

where yti is the output of household i at t while Cti is the household's consumption at t. This
    9 Inthe absence of such steady state in ation, price decreases are sometimes optimal. The model is then
only valid if any price change is acceptable only with probability (1      ). One way to justify the idea that
price decreases could be seen as unfair is to lean on the assumption that consumers only re-evaluate the
fairness of prices when these are changed. A price decrease then leads to such a re-evaluation and information
about costs may then suggest that even a price lower than the one that prevailed previously is unfair.
   10 This captures in a simple way the market segmentation that is useful for ensuring that monetary policy
has persistent e ects (see Woodford (2003) for a discussion).




                                                     19
consumption is, in turn, the aggregate of the consumption of many individual goods, with
                                                          hZ       1                      1        i1
                                               Cti   =                 cit (z )
                                                                                  
                                                                                             dz          :                                    (12)
                                                               0


   Supposing that there are full insurance markets and ignoring all other uses of output,
each individual's consumption at t is a xed fraction of aggregate output Yt . This means
that quantity demanded of good i is given by Yt(Pti=Pt)  where the Pti is the price charged
by household i for its product and the price index Pt is
                                                          hZ       1                           i11
                                                Pt =                   (Pti)  di
                                                                              1
                                                                                                      :                                        (13)
                                                               0


   In addition to having access to a full set of insurance markets, households can borrow
and lend at the riskless nominal rate Rt . This means that they must be indi erent between
consuming an additional unit of consumption at t and expecting to consume (1+ Rt)Pt =Pt                                                            +1


additional units of consumption at t + 1. Thus
                              (                         )
                                  (1 + Rt )Pt u0 (Cti )
                            E          t                  = u0(C i):
                                                           Pt+1
                                                                                       (14)
                                                                                      +1
                                                                                                              t

    Lastly, each producer can change his nominal price at time t with probability t . When
changing prices at t, the producer maximizes lifetime utility knowing that a one dollar
increase in pro ts in period t + j raises expected utility at t by Et j u0(Cti j )=Pt j . Thus,                                   +       +


the optimal price maximizes
                                                                                          !1               0                  ! 1 i
                     1
                     X   j                 h                                Pti                                          Pti
                       j(Y                  u0 (Cti+j )Yt+j
                Et                  t+` )                                                                 v @Yt+j                 A            (15)
                     j =0     `=1                                          Pt+j                                         Pt+j
over Pti. The rst order condition for this problem is
                                            ! h                                                          !         0                  ! 1 i
        1
        X   j
                                     Pti                                             Pti                                         Pti
          j(Y                                              )u0 (C i                                          v 0 @Y
   Et                 t+` )Yt+j                      (1                       t+j ) P                                    t+j              A = 0:
        j =0   `=1                  Pt+j                                              t+j                                       Pt+j
   Dividing through by (Pti=Pt)  , the relative price of price changers Pti=Pt satis es
                                    P1                                         P i  
                                            j (Qj                         0
                                                 `=1 t+` )Yt+j Pt+j
                                                                  P
                              Et                                        v Yt+j Pt+t j
                                                                   t
                                       j =0
                Xt =                                                                       :
                            1         Et 1
                                           P
                                            j =0
                                                  j (Qj       ) Y
                                                      `=1 t+` t+j Pt+j
                                                                       Pt 1  u0 (ci )
                                                                                   t+j

                                                                         20
    I consider the case where u0(c) equals uoc  while v0(y) is proportional to vo y! . With
complete markets and a unit mass of households, the consumption of each of them equals Yt
at a symmetric equilibrium. Letting Xt denote the relative price of price changers, it follows
that                                 P
                           vo =uo Et 1      j (Qj
                                                         t ` (1 + t ` )
                                                                          ! )Y !             (1+ )   1+
                                       j          `                              t j
                 Xt =
                   1+!                       =0            =1       +
                                                                                          (16)
                                                                                          +           +

                            1  Et P1    j
                                               j (Qj
                                               =0   `     t ` (1 +
                                                                =1  t `
                                                                     +   ) ) Y t j
                                                                                    
                                                                                          +
                                                                                                 1    1
                                                                                                      +


where t = PtPtPt1 1 The absence of taste changes implies that output is a constant Y at a
deterministic steady state with constant in ation . At such a steady state, the relative
price of price changers is
                                X = Y! 
                                             1+        (1 + )                   1
                                                                                          (17)
                                           1          (1 + ) !           (1+ )


where is the steady state probability of changing prices.
   There is also an additional relation between X and  that follows mechanically from
the de nition (13) and the fact that all price changers set the same price. Using (13), the
common choice of Pti=Pt implies
                           "                                                      1
                                                            
                                                                Pt 1 1   # 1        
                            (1        t )Xt
                                          1       +    t
                                                                 Pt
                                                                                          = 1:             (18)

   In steady state, this implies

                                 (1      )X   1       + (1 + ) = 1:    1
                                                                                                           (19)

    Together with (17) this can be solved for the values of X and Y that hold at a determinis-
tic steady state with constant . At such a steady state, the relative price of each price setter
declines until he is again able to set his relative price to X . I approximate the equilibrium
near such a steady state and let x~t , y~t, ~t and ~t denote the logarithmic deviations from
their steady state values of of X , Y , and 1 +  respectively.
    Di erentiating (18), and using (19) to substitute for the steady state value of X , one
obtains
                         ~t =
                               1     (1 +  )       (1 +
                                                        1
                                                           )  1             1


                                   (1 + ) x~t + (1 )( 1) ~t :
                                                    1
                                                                                             (20)


                                                        21
   Di erentiating (16),
                                                                                                                                                     
                    1
(1+!)~xt = Et 1  =L c y~t+ ~t + (1+!)~t
                                    y                                                                 1
                                                                                  +Et 1  =L c y~t  ~t               y
                                                                                                                                        2 ( 1)~t+1
                                    1       1    +1      1               +1                                           2        2   +1
                        1                                                                                 2
                                                                                                                                            (21)
where L is the lag operator and the parameters cy , cy ,  and  are given by
                                                                     1        2       1               2



                    1     (1 + ) !          (1+ )
                                                                          2    (1 + )                         1



                    cy  (1 + ! )(1  )
                     1                               1                   cy  ( 1)(1  ):
                                                                          2                                       2



    When the steady state rate of in ation  equals zero, the coeÆcient of ~ in (20) equals
zero. In addition,  =  = in this case, so that the coeÆcient of ~ in (21) is zero as
                     1          2


well. Thus small variations in have no e ect on economic outcomes. The reason is that,
with zero steady state in ation, the steady state value of X is 1.00 so that the typical price
changer changes his price by zero percent. Thus, an increase in the number of price changers
does not typically a ect the price level. When in ation is positive, by contrast, X > 1 and
the typical price changer raises his price. While the e ect of changes in is necessarily small
for  suÆciently small, I show below that the e ect of small variations in ~ can be signi cant
if steady state in ation is equal to just 5 percent per year.
    To compute these e ects, it is worth multiplying both sides of (21) by (1  =L)(1  =L)                                    1            2


to obtain

    Et [~xt   ( +  )~xt +   x~t ] = Et [(cy + cy )~yt (cy  + cy  )~yt + (
                1    2      +1          1   2   +2               1       2                    1   2           2   1       +1       1    2 )~t+1
               +((1 + !) + (  )(1 ))~t
                                 1          2        1    (1 + ! )~t ]:
                                                                     +1           1       2                       +2                        (22)

    The computation of deviations from the steady state equilibrium require also the lin-
earization of (14), which is given by

                                        Et [ (~yt+1         y~t ) ~it + ~t+1 ] = 0

where ~it is the log deviation of the total nominal return from its steady state value. The
computation of responses to monetary policy also requires a speci cation of the systematic

                                                               22
component of this policy. For purposes of illustration, I suppose that the reaction function
of the central bank is given by
                                      ~it = ci ~t + ci ~it + it :
                                                        1   1                               (23)

    The object of the next section is to analyze the response of the economy to monetary
policy shocks it . The main contribution of this analysis relative to the existing literature is
that I seek to incorporate the idea that customers resistance to price changes evolves over
time. This evolution obviously a ects the extent to which rms change prices so that it
a ects t. Before discussing these changes, I start with the standard speci cation where
is constant. While the exercise I carry out is only meant to be illustrative, I use parameter
values that are similar to those in the literature. I suppose, in particular that = :99,
 = 1 while I set  and ! a the values of Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) of 7.88 and .47
respectively. I consider separately the case where annual in ation equals 5% and the one
where it equals 50%.
    As when there are xed costs of changing prices, one would expect price adjustment to
be more frequent when in ation is more rapid. On the other hand, xed costs of changing
prices also imply that the departure of the reset price from the average price ( X ) is larger
                                                                                i.e.


when in ation is larger, and this is consistent with the experience of high in ation countries.
I thus suppose that, when annual in ation equals 5%, the typical price-changing rm sets
a price 5% above that of its peers so that the steady state value of X equals 1.05. The
typical price changer is then raising his price by Pti=Pt , or X (1 + ), which equals 6.3%.
                                                                   1


Using (19), this value of X implies that rms adjust their prices on average once a year and
   equals .76. By contrast, when I let annual in ation equal 50%, I suppose X = 1:06 and
the resulting value of is only .25. Aside from the consistency with models of xed costs
of changing prices, Bakhshi   et al  (2002) report that having fall relatively rapidly with
in ation is necessary to ensure that output does not become excessively sensitive to in ation
as steady state in ation rises.
    I let the two parameters of the monetary policy rule, ci and ci equal .9. I choose these
                                                                       1




                                                   23
high values both to ensure that the it shock has persistent e ects and to obtain a determinate
equilibrium. It turns out that the conditions for determinacy are substantially more stringent
when the equilibrium is approximated around a steady state with positive in ation then when
it is approximated around one with zero in ation, as is more standard. In the standard case,
discussed for example in Woodford (2003), determinacy obtains even with ci = 0 as long as  1

ci  1. By contrast,if ci = 0 determinacy in the case of the parameters I use when  = :05
                            1

requires that ci be no smaller than 2.8.        11




5     Monetary Policy

For the case of constant , the e ects of a unit increase in it when the annual rate of in ation
is either 5 or 50% (which correspond to quarterly rates  of .012 and .107 respectively) are
depicted in Figure 2. When  = :012, the e ect on output is large relative to the e ect on
in ation. The reason for this is that ci is large (see Woodford (2003) for a discussion of the
                                             1

e ects of this parameter). By contrast, the e ects on in ation are larger and the e ects on
output are smaller when  = :107. In this case, the low value of leads prices to respond
more quickly. Given (23), this also implies that the interest rate returns more quickly to its
steady state value.
    One standard result in this gure is that, for either steady state in ation rate, the drop
in in ation is largest in the rst quarter and then tapers o relatively quickly. Since the
drop in demand is largest at t rms adjusting at t set a lower value of X than rms adjusting
later. This pattern of responses of in ation to monetary policy shocks di ers from estimated
responses because, in the latter, the largest reduction in in ation takes place sometime after
the monetary policy shock. Rotemberg and Woodford (1997) nd that the biggest response
takes place after two quarters and show that a model with delays in price setting can account
for these delays. Other studies nd longer delays, with Christiano, Eichenbaum and Evans
  11 This  substantial quantitative di erence in the case of the two approximations ts well with the results of
Ascari (2000) and Bakhshi et al (2002), who also show that this model behaves di erently with even modest
levels of steady state in ation. The di erences reported by Bakhshi et al (2002) can be o set by changes in
  , however, whereas determinacy in the approximation with zero steady state in ation is independent of .


                                                      24
(2001) reporting a maximum response after 9 quarters.          12



    In an important extension of the Calvo (1983) model, Dotsey, King and Wollman (1999)
maintain the assumption that costs of changing prices are independently distributed over
time for each individual rm but relax the assumption that these costs are drawn from a two
point distribution where the costs are either negligible or prohibitive. Instead, they let the
costs be drawn from a compact set. When a rm faces the lowest possible cost of changing
prices, it is quite likely to adjust its price. It is less likely to do so if this realized cost is
somewhat higher because it is then tempting to wait in the hope that future costs will be
lower. On the other hand, a rm will change its price even if its realized cost is relatively high
as long as its existing price is suÆciently far from the optimal one because it has recently
drawn a series of large costs of changing prices. While their model incorporates variations
in the costs of changing prices for individual rms, they suppose that the costs of changing
prices for the \typical" rm do not vary over time.
    Unfortunately, this modi cation appears to exacerbate the tendency for in ation to fall
immediately when interest rates are increased. The reason is that, in an environment with
                                                     13



positive steady state in ation, a reduction in future in ation means that the prices that
maximize pro ts in the future are now closer to Pt itself. This is re ected in the fall in Xt
at the moment that it rises. The fact that an increase in it leads rms that change prices
to raise them by less implies that it also lowers the payo from adjusting prices relative to
the payo of doing nothing. With a compact set of realizations for the cost of changing
prices, this reduces the fraction of rms that adjust their prices at t. Since the typical price-
adjusting rm is actually increasing its price, this reduction in the fraction of rms that
adjust their price lowers in ation at t even further.
    If, instead, price rigidity is due to fear of customer reactions rather than to xed costs of
changing prices, one would expect a rather di erent pattern of responses. In particular, one
  12 They  also argue that introducing an empirically plausible delay between the time that inputs must be
acquired and the time that output is sold can account for this delay.
  13 They carry out their analysis by considering changes in the growth of the money supply. However, the
logic of their analysis ought to carry over to monetary policy reaction functions like (23).



                                                   25
would expect that the reduction in Xt induced by a contractionary monetary policy would
make it easier for rms to raise their prices so that they charge their desired price. Thus, if
consumers react to the the price charged by price changers, more rms might be willing to
change their price after a monetary contraction.
    A formal model where this occurs is the following. Suppose that rms draw a \type"
each period and let z index the type with H (z) representing the density of z. Firms with a
higher z can get away with charging a higher relative price X , and the maximum allowable
X is a function g (z ). There is a particular value of z , z such that rms with a z  z can
charge any price that they desire without incurring negative reactions and I suppose that
H (z ) < 1. Lastly, I suppose that consumers observe the price charged by the rms who can
charge any price they want and react negatively with respect to any rm that changes its
price but charges a price di erent from the one charged by these rms.
    This can be justi ed as follows. Consumers would have good reason to be angry with
  rms that charge more than those who are able to charge any price they wish. However, given
that all rms are symmetric in my model, no rm would wish to do so. The question is then
why consumers would react negatively to price-changing rms whose price relative to Pt, is
lower than that charged by the rms who are free to choose their price. One justi cation for
this is that, by charging a lower price, these rms draw attention to the fact that consumers
would react with anger if they charged the same price as that charged by the unconstrained
price changers. When consumers realize that these rms are not entitled to charge the same
price as these other price changers, they react with suspicion to any price change at all.
    It follows form this set of assumptions that the rms with z  z charge the price that
maximizes (15), Pt Xt. Firms whose z is above g (Xt) do the same. However, those whose
                                                    1



z is below g (Xt ) keep their price constant. They can neither charge Pt Xt nor a lower price
             1



that di ers from their past price. Thus, t = H (g (Xt)). Linearizing this,
                                                        1




                                          ~t = cX x~t                                    (24)

where the parameter cX is positive. Figure 3 reports responses for the case where (24) holds

                                              26
with cX equal to 2.5 and  = :012. For comparison, it also reports that responses when
  t is constant. Having t fall with Xt implies that in ation falls less on impact because
more rms change their prices and the typical price changer increases its price. Given the
monetary policy rule (23), this reduced fall in in ation implies that interest rates do not
fall back as rapidly towards their steady state values. This latter e ect is so quantitatively
important that real interest rates rise by more and drop more slowly in the case of variable
  . This explains why output falls by more in this case.
    One disappointing feature of the Figure 3 is that in ation still falls by the largest amount
on impact. This ceases to be true, however, once one adds one more determinant to . As
discussed above, consumers are likely to use estimates of cost increases to decide whether
price rises are justi ed. If recent in ation has been relatively low, they are likely to believe
that cost increases have been modest and are likely to be less tolerant of price increases.
One can model this by supposing that z is once again the i.i.d. \type" drawn by each rm
but that the maximum relative price a rm can charge is X = g(z; ~t ). A higher t
                                                                             1                 1


increases the X that a rm can charge, or reduces the z that is needed for any particular
X . I continue to suppose that there is a strictly positive mass of rms that can charge any
price they wish and that no price changer can charge a price that di ers from that charged
by these privileged rms. The fraction of privileged rms presumably varies with t as       1


well, but that is not important for my analysis.
    Let z = g^ (X; t ) be the type of a rm that can raise its price to X if past in ation
               1
                       1


were equal to t . Obviously, z is lower for a given X if t is larger. The fraction of rms
                   1                                                 1


that keeps its prices constant, t , is then given by H (^g (Xt ; t )). Linearizing, this yields
                                                                 1
                                                                         1



                                      ~t = cX x~t + c ~t   1                             (25)

where c is negative.
   Figures 4 and 5 report responses when ~ is given by (25). The parameter cX is set equal
to 2.5 in both cases while c = 15 when  = :012 and c = 10 when  = :107. These
parameters are such that t initially falls (because Xt falls) and then rises (because in ation

                                               27
falls). The result is that, when the annual steady state in ation rate is 5%, in ation has its
lowest point two quarters after the monetary shock. Moreover, the fall in in ation is much
smaller in the initial quarter than when is xed. In the latter case, in ation falls by about
.18% with an initial increase in the rate of interest of .88%. By contrast, when is given by
(25), in ation falls initially by only .06% even though the interest rate rises by .95%. This
di erence obtains even though the fraction of rms keeping their price constant falls by only
about 1.8%. Since rms who adjust their price in steady state do so by about 6.3%, having
1.8% more of them do so raises in ation by about .11% so this does not fully account for
the di erence in in ation responses. The rest is accounted for by the fact that Xt falls more
when is constant. This occurs because, with variable , rms who adjust their price realize
that price adjustments will become more infrequent in the future (because the reduction in
in ation will push up t j ). Given the existence of underlying in ation, this leads them to
                         +


charge slightly higher prices at t.
    Interestingly, neither the path of output nor that of interest rates is signi cantly a ected
by these changed dynamics of in ation. The lack of monotonicity in the in ation response
means that the real rate rises less initially but stays higher for a longer period of time when
   is variable. The real rate of interest on a long term bond, which determines the initial
response of output, is similar in both cases.
    In the case of Figure 5, where the annual steady state in ation rate is 50%, the e ect
of using (25) on the output and interest rate responses is larger. In ation is much lower
on impact than with a xed and it reaches its lowest point in the second quarter rather
than the rst. The reason the decline in in ation is so much smaller even though t falls by
less than one percent is that the typical price changer is now changing prices by 17.3% so
that having 1% more price changers raises in ation by .17%. By the same token, the higher
underlying in ation means that the expectation of an increase in the future value of has a
substantial e ect on Xt . Because in ation falls so much less, interest rates are not brought
back as quickly with variable and output falls much more.
    This quantitative analysis suggests that, as could be expected from the analytical dis-

                                              28
cussion, the e ect of variable is a great deal more important in countries whose average
in ation is higher. Indeed, it suggests that fairly large recessions can still be induced in such
settings by tightening monetary policy. This result is attractive because, when in ation is
high, the frequency of price adjustment is high as well so it would seem that a model with
 xed frequency of price adjustment has almost no chance to produce output reductions in
response to highly visible changes in monetary policy. Yet, stabilizations in high in ation
countries often do involve substantial losses in output.
    I have given a particular model of consumer reactions where t respond endogenously
by rst falling and then rising in response to a monetary tightening. In part because the
responses of are not derived from a detailed model of consumer behavior and in part
because there are other reasons for to respond in this way, I now carry out some calculations
treating as exogenous. In other words, I look at the impulse responses of output, in ation
and interest rates to monetary shocks by considering what seem      a priori  plausible responses
of t . One purpose of this exercise is to show that, in principe, such variations in ought
to make it considerable easier to explain actual responses to monetary policy. The ip side
of this is that variations in t ought in principle to be observable. Thus, a more ambitious
research agenda would analyze how the rest of the economy ought to react given the actual
responses of the fraction of rms changing prices. It would then proceed also to try to explain
the actual movement in the fraction of price changers.
    Before carrying out this analysis, it is worth giving one additional reason for to fall in
the immediate aftermath of a monetary contraction. Such a contraction ought to lead so-
phisticated price setters to realize that in ation will slow so that price increases will become
more diÆcult to \sell" in the future. This leads to the conjecture that some price setters
that would have kept their prices constant in the absence of the tightening ought to raise
prices and thereby increase the risk of contemporaneous negative reactions by customers.
The advantage of doing so is that price setters can still point to past in ation as a reason
for the price increase while this will become harder in the future. Unfortunately, this mech-
anism does not t into the model I developed so far because, for simplicity, I looked at a

                                               29
setting where rms keep the probability of negative reactions equal to zero. By contrast, the
mechanism I just suggested requires that rms be willing to increase this probability above
zero under some circumstances.
    The pattern of exogenous responses of t that I consider is depicted in Figure 6. For the
simulations, I use a di erence equation to describe this response, and this di erence equation
is
                          ~t = 1:02~t 1   :116~t  2   :302~t 3    c it                  (26)
where the parameter c varies with the speci cation. According to this equation, a monetary
contraction rst raises the fraction of price adjusters and, after a few quarters, lowers this
fraction below its steady state value. This pattern would be reasonable if in ation stayed
near the steady state for several quarters and then dipped below, because this would justify
both the initial rush of price adjustments and the subsequent reduction in the fraction of
adjusters. The initial rush could then be due either to the reduction in Xt or to the desire
to raise prices while one can still point to a recent episode of relatively high in ation.
    With c set equal to 3, the resulting responses of output, in ation and interest rates
are plotted in Figure 6 as well. The Figure shows that the response of in ation is indeed
delayed for several quarters, and in ation reaches its minimum 6 quarters after the initial
burst of interest rates. Thus, the pattern of responses in that I have assumed seems to
yield the pattern of in ation responses (where in ation at rst does little even though X falls
and then in ation later declines) which makes the assumed response of reasonable. It is
worth noting, however, that my assumed responses of are substantially larger in absolute
magnitude than the responses of in ation. It remains unclear whether such a di erence in
the size of these responses is justi able through an explicit model of consumer behavior.
    Because in ation responds so modestly, (23) implies that interest rates do not return
quickly to their steady state value. This means that real interest rates stay high for some
time and that the output drop is considerable. Such large output declines are not particularly
realistic but the main point of the exercise is to show that contractionary monetary policy
with long lived output e ects is perfectly consistent with muted and delayed responses of
                                             30
in ation.
    One obviously unrealistic feature of the responses that I have displayed so far is that out-
put has its biggest fall instantaneously. To describe situations where output falls only over
time the model has to be modi ed either by adding decision lags (as in Rotemberg and Wood-
ford 1997) or by changing the speci cation of preferences so consumers try to smooth output
changes. As suggested by Fuhrer (2000), one way of obtaining \hump shaped" responses of
output in monetary models of this type is to suppose that consumers have preferences that
can be characterized by \habit persistence". I now consider brie y a modi cation of the
model along these lines.
    I let Ct represent the \habit" and specialize the utility from consumption so it is given
by
                                     1
                                     X        ( Cti )            1
                                  E      t [ (1 )C v(yti)]:
                                            0                                               (27)
                                                t=0                     t
   I follow Abel (1990) and let this habit be external to the individual. Speci cally, I suppose
that Ct = Yt . The case = 0 corresponds to the utility function I have used so far.
              1

   The consumer must still be indi erent to consuming one less dollar at t and consuming
the proceeds from investing this dollar in a nominal asset yielding Rt at t + 1. This now
requires that
                                 Et
                                      (1 + Rt )Pt Yt Ct 
                                                           = 1:        1        +1
                                                     Pt+1 Yt Ct
   Linearizing this equation around a steady state while remembering that Ct = Yt yields
                            Et [ ((~yt+1       y~t ) (~yt           y~t )) ~it + ~t ] = 0
                                                                            1        +1



where  = =.
   This change in the utility function also a ects the value of marginal utility in (15). Using
Yt  =Yt for this marginal utility, (16) becomes
         1


                                                 P            Q
                              vo =uo Et 1      j j
                                           j =0 ( `=1 t+` (1 + t+` )
                                                                     (1+!) )Y 1+!
                                                                              t+j
                  Xt
                   1+  !   = 1  P1 j Qj                                                           (28)
                                     Et j =0 ( `=1 t+` (1 + t+` ) )Yt+j Yt+j
                                                                     1  1 
                                                                                                1

   To compute impulse responses, the linearized equations (21) and (22) must be modi ed
accordingly. I compute these responses for  = :7 and plot them in Figure 7, which also
                                                              31
shows the responses for constant t as a benchmark. When comparing Figures 6 and 7
for the case of constant , one sees that the higher value of does induce a hum-shaped
response of output. In addition, the e ect of the monetary disturbance on in ation rises,
particularly relative to the response of output. With c = 3, on the other hand, the response
of output to the monetary disturbance is quite large, though it remains hump-shaped. The
reason, in part, is that the resulting swings in are large enough to mute considerably the
initial response of in ation. This means that the real interest rate rises a great deal and this
induces large swings in output.
    Figure 7 thus shows that hump shaped responses of output together with modest in ation
responses are not at all inconsistent with the model as long as varies in the requisite ways.
The qualitative features of the required response of remain intuitively appealing. Whether
the actual magnitude of this response is either empirically valid and whether it can be derived
from a quantitative model of consumer behavior remain open questions for research.

6    Conclusions

This paper has shown that the threat of consumer anger can account for the constancy of
prices from one period to the next while also having the potential for explaining some of
the dynamic responses of the economy to monetary policy shocks. The consumer reactions
I have focused on are \irrational" in the sense that consumers are maximizing something
other than a utility function that depends only on their own material payo s. Rather, they
also wish to harm (or at least not to help) rms that they see as having given them a bad
deal. Understandably, this leads rms to be careful not to induce these emotional reactions.
    One attraction of modelling price rigidity as stemming from consumer reactions is that
this provides a new mechanism through which lack of information about economic conditions
translates into muted price responses. It is easy to believe that consumers are poorly informed
about cost changes and this may lead rms that are concerned about consumer reactions
to make their prices less sensitive to costs. By contrast, more standard models in which
poor information leads to sluggish price adjustment suppose directly that producers are
                                              32
imperfectly informed about either costs or demand. Given the huge incentives for producers
to acquire all relevant information and given that a small number of sophisticated individuals
makes the bulk of the economy's pricing decisions, this approach seems less attractive.
    Having said this, the model I have constructed has not explored deeply how consumers
update their information about producer fairness, and this deserves further investigation.
One reason this is particularly important is that, while producers can be expected to have
good information about their own cost conditions, they are likely to know less about what
consumers regard as fair. In particular, they are likely to know less about the information
that consumers have about the producers' costs. This departure from full information may
well prove important in elaborations of the model I have presented here.
    Heterogeneity in information sets ought not to be con ned to di erences between pro-
ducers and consumers. Consumers, in particular, are likely to di er a great deal from each
other in both their information and their attitude towards suppliers. Nonetheless, anger
at producers appears to be communicable and this seems capable of leading to the sort of
discontinuous change in purchases that I have modelled in this paper. Thus, information
transmission from one set of consumers to another, particularly in situations where some
consumers feel that the rm has stepped over the line, seems to be important in practice.
Modelling this information transmission thus remains an important topic for future research.

7      References


    Abel, Andrew B., \Asset Prices under Habit Formation and Catching up with the Joneses,"
           American Economic Review,   , 80, May 1990, 38-42.
     Ascari, G. \Staggered Price and Trend In ation: Some Nuisances," mimeo, 2000.
     Bakhshi, Hasan, Pablo Burriel-Llombart, Hashmat Khan and Barbara Rudolf, \Endoge-
          nous Price Stickiness, trend In ation and the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,"
          mimeo 2002.
     Blinder, Alan S., Elie R.D. Canetti, David E. Lebow and Jeremy B. Rudd,    Asking about
           Prices:   A New Approach to Understanding Price Stickiness , New York: Russell

                                             33
     Sage, 1998.
Barsky, Robert, Mark Bergen, Shantanu Dutta and Daniel Levy, \ What Can the Price
     Gap Between Branded and Private Label Products Tell Us About Markups?" in
     Robert Feenstra and Matthew Shapiro, editors,                              ,
                                                       Scanner Data and Price Indexes
     Studies in Income and Wealth No. 64 University of Chicago Press, 2002.
Calvo, Guillermo, \Staggered Prices in a Utility-Maximizing Framework,"     Journal of
     Monetary Economics  , 12(3), 1983, 383-98.
Campbell, Margaret C., \Perceptions of price Unfairness: Antecedents and Consequences,"
     Journal of Marketing Research, , 36, May 1999, 187-99.
Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Charles Evans, \Nominal Rigidities
      and the Dynamic E ects of a Shock to Monetary Policy,"    NBER Working Paper
     8403 , July 2001.
Dolan, Robert J. and Hermann Simon,   Power Pricing,   New York: The Free Press, 1996.
Dotsey, Michael, Robert G. King and Alexander Wolman, \State-Dependent Pricing and
     the General Equilibrium Dynamics of Money and Output,"       Quarterly Journal of
     Economics  , 114, May 1999, 655-90.
Dufwenberg, Martin and Georg Kirchsteiger, \A Theory of Sequential Reciprocity,"
     mimeo, 2001.
Falk, Armin and Urs Fiscbacher, \A Theory of Reciprocity,"      Institute for Empirical
                                                , July 2000.
     Economics, University of Zurich, Working Paper



Fuhrer, Je rey C., \Habit Formation in Consumption and its Implications for Monetary-
     Policy Models," American Economic Review,  , 90, June 2000, 367-90.
Kahneman, Daniel, Jack Knetsch and Richard Thaler, \Fairness as a Constraint on Pro t:
    Seeking Entitlements in the Market,"     American Economic Review, 76, September
    1986, 728-41.
Hall, R. L. and C. J. Hitch, \Price Theory and Business Behaviour,"   Oxford Economic
     Papers  , May 1939, 12-45.
Hendel, Igal and Aviv Nevo, \Sales and Consumer Behavior,"      NBER Working Paper
     9048 , July 2002.
Levy, Daniel, Mark Bergen, Shantanu Dutta and Robert Venable, \The Magnitude of
      Menu Costs: Direct Evidence from Large U.S. Supermarket Chains,"       Quarterly




                                        34
       Journal of Economics,    112, August 1997, 791-825.
Lucas, Robert E. Jr. \Expectations and the Neutrality of Money,"       Journal of Economic
             4, 1972, 103-124.
       Theory,



Mankiw, N. Gregory and Ricardo Reis, \Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A
    Proposal to Replace the New Keynesian Phillips Curve,"          NBER Working Paper
        , May 2001.
       8290



Miller, Jack E.   Menu Pricing,   Boston: Cahners, 1976.
Oxenfeldt, Alfred R.,   Industrial Pricing and Market Practices, , New York: Prentice Hall,
     1951.
Rabin, Matthew, \Incorporating Fairness into Game Theory and Economics,"         American
       Economic Review,83, December 1993, 1281-1302.
Rotemberg, Julio J., \Monopolistic Price Adjustment and Aggregate Output,"         Review
                        , 49, October 1982, 517-31.
       of Economic Studies



| \Altruism, Reciprocity and Cooperation in the Workplace," forthcoming in Gerard-
    Varet, Louis-Andre, Serge-Christophe Kolm and Jean Mercier Ythier,         Handbook
                                                        , North Holland, 2003.
       on the Economics of Giving, Reciprocity and Altruism



Rotemberg, Julio J., and Michael Woodford, \An Optimization-Based Econometric Frame-
     work for the Evaluation of Monetary Policy,"                                 ,
                                                      NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997
     297-346.
Sheshinski, Eytan and Yoram Weiss, \In ation and Costs of Price Adjustment,"       Review
                          44, 1977, 287-303.
       of Economic Studies,



Stiglitz, Joseph E., \Price Rigidities and Market Structure,"   American Economic Review,
       74, May 1984, 350-5.
Woodford, Michael, \Imperfect Common Knowledge and the E ects of Monetary Policy,"
    mimeo 2002.
|,   Interest and Prices,   Princeton, Princeton University Press, 2003.
Zbaracki, Mark J., Mark Riston, Daniel Levy, Shantanu Dutta and Mark Bergen, \Man-
     agerial and Customer Costs of Price Adjustment: Direct Evidence from Industrial
     Markets," mimeo 2002.


                                             35
                  Figure 1: Pricing at Dominick's




              Nabisco Premium Saltines 16oz.
1.0

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

-0.2

-0.4

-0.6
       50      100      150       200      250      300   350

            log(avg. retail)          log(avg. acquisition)




                                36
                                      Figure 2: Responses with constant




                                                            Inflation
                0
                         π=.012
            -0.2
percent




            -0.4

            -0.6           π=.107

            -0.8
                     0            2          4                6           8   10   12
                                                            Output
                0

                -1          π=.107
      percent




                -2                               π=.012

                -3

                -4
                     0            2          4                  6         8   10   12
                                                          Interest rate
                1
  percent




            0.5                               π=.012
                                  π=.107

                0
                     0            2          4                 6          8   10   12
                                                              date




                                                            37
                                   Figure 3: Responses when ~ responds to x~,  = :012




                                               Inflation                                                          Output
                  0                                                                       0

                           Variable α                                                     -1       Fixed α
          -0.05
                                                                                          -2
percent




                                                                                percent
                -0.1                                                                      -3

                                                                                          -4
          -0.15
                               Fixed α                                                    -5         Variable α

                -0.2                                                                      -6
                       0                 5                 10   15                             0             5             10   15
                                                 date                                                              date

                                             Interest rate                                                        Alpha
                  1                                                                       0

                                                                                    -0.5
                0.8
                                                                                          -1
                0.6                 Variable α
      percent




                                                                          percent




                                                                                    -1.5

                0.4                                                                       -2

                                                                                    -2.5
                0.2           Fixed α
                                                                                          -3

                  0                                                                 -3.5
                       0                 5                 10   15                             0             5             10   15
                                                 date                                                              date




                                                                     38
                         Figure 4: Responses when ~ responds to x~ and ~ ,  = :012




                                         Inflation                                               Output
                0                                                                   1

                                                                                    0
          -0.05
                                           Variable α                               -1
percent




                                                                          percent
              -0.1                                                                  -2

                                                                                    -3
          -0.15
                         Fixed α                                                    -4

              -0.2                                                                  -5
                     0             5                 10   15                             0   5            10   15
                                           date                                                   date

                                       Interest rate                                             Alpha
              1.2                                                                   1

                1                                                               0.5
              0.8
                                                                                    0
    percent




                                                                    percent




              0.6
                                                                              -0.5
              0.4
                                                                                    -1
              0.2

                0                                                             -1.5

              -0.2                                                                  -2
                     0             5                 10   15                             0   5            10   15
                                           date                                                   date




                                                               39
                     Figure 5: Responses when ~ responds to x~ and ~ ,  = :107




                                     Inflation                                                        Output
          0.2                                                               0.5

            0                                                                   0

                                                                          -0.5
          -0.2             Variable α
percent




                                                                percent
                                                                                -1
          -0.4
                                                                          -1.5
          -0.6       Fixed α                                                    -2       Variable α

          -0.8                                                            -2.5
                 0             5                 10   15                             0            5            10   15
                                       date                                                            date

                                   Interest rate                                                      Alpha
          0.8                                                                   3

          0.6         Variable α
                                                                                2

          0.4
percent




                                                                      percent




                                                                                1
          0.2

                                                                                0
            0

          -0.2                                                                  -1
                 0             5                 10   15                             0            5            10   15
                                       date                                                            date




                                                           40
                                                Figure 6: Responses with exogenous




                                             Inflation                                                     Output
            0.05                                                                    0
                                                                                             Fixed α
                  0                                                                 -1

                                                                                    -2
          -0.05
percent




                                                                          percent
                                                                                    -3
                -0.1
                                                   Variable α                       -4
          -0.15                                                                               Variable α
                             Fixed α                                                -5

                -0.2                                                                -6
                       0               5                 10     15                       0             5            10   15
                                               date                                                         date

                                           Interest rate                                                   Alpha
                  1                                                                 2

                0.8                                                                 1
                                     Variable α                                     0
                0.6
      percent




                                                                          percent




                                                                                    -1
                0.4
                                                                                    -2
                           Fixed α
                0.2                                                                 -3

                  0                                                                 -4
                       0               5                 10     15                       0             5            10   15
                                               date                                                         date




                                                                     41
                          Figure 7: Responses with exogenous and habit persistence




                                           Inflation                                                     Output
               0.1                                                                0

              0.05
                                                                                  -2       Fixed α
                0
percent




                                                                        percent
          -0.05
                                                                                  -4
              -0.1                                                                                         Variable α
                                                 Variable α
          -0.15
                                                                                  -6
              -0.2         Fixed α
          -0.25                                                                   -8
                     0               5                 10     15                       0             5            10    15
                                             date                                                         date

                                         Interest rate                                                   Alpha
               1.2                                                                2

                1                                                                 1
               0.8
                                   Variable α                                     0
    percent




                                                                        percent




               0.6
                                                                                  -1
               0.4
                                                                                  -2
               0.2
                         Fixed α
                0                                                                 -3

              -0.2                                                                -4
                     0               5                 10     15                       0             5            10    15
                                             date                                                         date




                                                                   42
