                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             HOW COUNTRY AND SAFETY-NET CHARACTERISTICS AFFECT
                            BANK RISK-SHIFTING

                                          Armen Hovakimian
                                           Edward J. Kane
                                             Luc Laeven

                                          Working Paper 9322
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9322


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2002




The authors would like to thank Robert Bliss, Gerard Caprio, Stijn Claessens, James Thomson, and seminar
participants at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Hitotsubashi and Depaul Universities, and the Seventh
Annual Meeting fo the Latin American and Caribbean Economic Association in Madrid, for helpful
comments on earlier drafts of the paper. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Armen Hovakimian, Edward J. Kane and Luc Laeven. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
How Country and Safety-Net Characteristics Affect Bank Risk-Shifting
Armen Hovakimian, Edward J. Kane and Luc Laeven
NBER Working Paper No. 9322
November 2002
JEL No. G21, G28, F33

                                                ABSTRACT

        Risk-shifting occurs when creditors or guarantors are exposed to loss without receiving adequate
compensation. This paper seeks to measure and compare how well authorities in 56 countries controlled
bank risk shifting during the 1990s. Although significant risk shifting occurs on average, substantial
variation exists in the effectiveness of risk control across countries. We find that the tendency for explicit
deposit insurance to exacerbate risk shifting is tempered by incorporating loss-control features such as
risk-sensitive premiums, coverage limits, and coinsurance. Introducing explicit deposit insurance has had
adverse effects in environments that are low in political and economic freedom and high in corruption.




Edward J. Kane                         Armen Hovakimian                               Luc Laeven
Boston College                         Baruch College                                 World Bank
Finance Department
Fulton Hall 330A
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu
                                                                        October 11, 2002

How Country and Deposit Insurance Characteristics Affect Bank
                       Risk-Shifting


       Even when its long-run effects are adverse, instituting deposit insurance can

benefit short-horizoned policymakers and politicians. As long as its guarantees remain

credible, explicit insurance promises to eliminate the threat of depositor runs and to

protect depositors from harm with only a smidgen of its true economic cost actually

registering on the official government budget.

       Part of the long-run cost of deposit insurance is that it reduces incentives for

depositors to monitor and police their banks. In countries that have not introduced

deposit insurance explicitly, insurance still exists in an implicit form. The costs and

benefits society experiences from either type of guarantees depend on how effectively

government regulators can control bank risk-shifting (Buser, Chen, and Kane, 1981;

Brickley and James, 1988; Calomiris, 1992; Kane, 1995; Honohan and Klingebiel, 2001).

       Risk-shifting occurs whenever a contractual counterparty is exposed to loss from

fraud, leverage or earnings volatility without receiving adequate compensation for the

risk entailed. Other things equal, a bank can shift risk onto its deposit insurer in two

principal ways: by increasing its leverage and by increasing the volatility of its return on

assets. Risk-shifting is subsidized whenever the value of the explicit and implicit deposit

guarantees a country’s banks enjoy exceeds the implicit and explicit premiums the

insurer imposes on them. To avoid subsidizing bank risk taking, a deposit insurer must

monitor increases in volatility and leverage and police them appropriately.




                                                                                          1
       The empirical literature on bank risk-shifting begins with Marcus and Shaked

(1984). Employing U.S. data and a single-equation framework, these authors use a one-

year put option model to estimate a risk-adjusted “fair” value for a bank’s deposit

insurance premium. These authors and subsequent research by Ronn and Verma (1986)

find that on average FDIC insurance was overpriced, but that the distribution of fair

premiums was strongly skewed to the right. Pennacchi (1987a and b) shows that this

skewness gains importance when deposit insurance is analyzed in a multiperiod context

inasmuch as evidence of average underpricing emerges in long-maturity models.

       Improving on these single-equation models, Duan, Moreau and Sealey (1992)

separate the effects of leverage and return volatility in testing for risk shifting during

1976-1986 using a sample of thirty large U.S. banks, they found that twenty percent

showed risk-shifting behavior. Using this triangular two-equation framework and fitting

both single-period and infinite-maturity option models of deposit-insurance value,

Hovakimian and Kane (2000) examine risk-shifting in 1985-1994 for a sample of 123

U.S. banks. They find that on average capital regulation did not prevent sample banks

from shifting risk. Risk-shifting proved particularly strong for poorly capitalized banks

and for banks with high ratios of insured deposits to insured debt.

       Laeven (2002a) fits the single-equation option model to a sample of banks in

several countries.   He interprets estimates of the fair (i.e., properly priced) deposit

insurance premium (IPP) as a proxy for bank risk and shows that this proxy helps to

forecast bank distress in different countries. Laeven (2002b) investigates how country-

specific and bank-specific features contribute to the value of insurance services. The

opportunity-cost value of deposit insurance services proves higher in countries with



                                                                                        2
explicit deposit insurance, but its contribution to bank stock prices disappears in

countries with high-quality and well-enforced legal systems.

       Kane (2000) argues that the value of a country’s financial safety net should

respond to country-specific variation in risk control: differences in informational

environments and in the enforceability of private contracts in particular. Demirgüç-Kunt

and Kane (2002) contend that explicit deposit insurance generates costly subsidies in

countries whose institutional environment is weak. Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache

(2002) find cross-country evidence that, in countries with weak institutional

environments, explicit deposit insurance increases the probability of banking crises.

       Using Hovakimian and Kane’s (2000) adaptation of the two-equation regression

model introduced by Duan, Moreau, and Sealey (1992), this paper focuses on how well

authorities in 56 countries controlled risk-shifting incentives in recent years. Although

we find significant risk shifting on average, our method allows us to model how the

effectiveness of risk control differs across countries. As hypothesized in Kane (2000),

differences in the value of IPP across countries are explained by differences in deposit-

insurance design features and in environmental measures of political repression,

economic freedom, and government corruption. Specifically, we find that introducing

explicit deposit insurance may exacerbate risk shifting, but that this effect is tempered

when loss-control features such as risk-sensitive deposit insurance premiums, coverage

limits, and coinsurance are incorporated into the deposit-insurance system. We also find

that introducing explicit deposit insurance expands risk-shifting opportunities in

environments that are low in political and economic freedom and high in corruption.




                                                                                        3
Regression results confirm that recent adopters of explicit insurance have done a

particularly poor job of managing the value of their deposit guarantees.

       The paper proceeds as follows. Section I introduces the methods used to model

bank risk-shifting behavior. Section II describes the sources of our data and our sampling

procedures. Section III presents and interprets estimates of risk-shifting incentives. In

this section and in Section IV, the analysis focuses on how risk-shifting differs across

countries that manage their deposit insurance system in different ways and under

different circumstances. Section V summarizes our findings.


               I.      Role of Alternative Deposit-Insurance Models

       This section describes procedures for estimating risk-shifting opportunities at

individual banks. Merton (1977, 1978) shows that, other things equal, the fair insurance

premium (expressed as a percentage of deposits) increases with a bank’s leverage and

with the volatility of its returns. Our tests employ a linear version of this relation:

                               IPP = γ0 + γ1σ1 + γ2(B/V) + ε1                      (1)

In this equation, B is the face value of deposits and other debt, V is the market value of a

bank’s assets, σV is the standard deviation of asset returns, and IPP is the “fair” deposit

insurance premium per dollar of deposits.

       Duan, Moreau, and Sealey (1992) show that we can assess bank-risk shifting

incentives by breaking out the following pair of equations:

                                   B/V = α0 + α1σV + ε2,                                  (2)

                                    IPP = β0 + β1σV + ε3.                                 (3)




                                                                                           4
The intuition is that of a rational-expectations game: a bank sets its leverage and asset

risk, σV, with a clear understanding that creditors and regulators will monitor and

discipline their choices. Similarly, creditors and regulators expect banks to react to the

discipline they provide. Equation (2) expresses the idea that regulators and creditors

constrain banks to a limited set of leverage and volatility pairs. The slope coefficients in

equations (2) and (3) have the following interpretations:

                                               d(B / V )
                                        α1 ≡             ,                               (4)
                                                dσ V

                                  ∂IPP   ∂IPP
                           β1 ≡        +           α 1 = γ 1 + γ 2α 1 .                  (5)
                                  ∂σ V ∂ ( B / V )

       The Merton model (1) treats the insurer’s guarantee as a simple put option that the

bank sells on its assets. This formulation implies that, other things equal, the value of

deposit insurance increases in both σV and B/V. By themselves, the positive partial

derivatives γ 1 = ∂IPP ∂σ V and γ 2 = ∂IPP ∂ ( B / V ) in the linearized model (1) tell us

how much value bank stockholders might extract from the insurer by marginal

adjustments. However, in practice, the deposit-insurance contract conveys loss-control

powers to the put holder that permit an insurer to monitor and control risk taking by

client banks.

       If effective, risk-sensitive capital requirements modify what we can call the utility

value of risk-taking by introducing penalties that create a negative relationship between

B/V and σV. Hence, the values of α1 and β1 indicate whether regulatory and market

discipline forces a bank to strengthen its capital position as its asset volatility increases

and to cut back its volatility when its leverage increases. A negative α1 would imply that




                                                                                           5
risk-sensitive capital regulation and complementary market discipline constrain realizable

deposit-insurance benefits.

       Given the external discipline a bank faces, Equation (3) measures whether asset

volatility influences on balance the value of the implicit and explicit government

guarantees that are imbedded in the bank’s stock price. To fully neutralize risk-shifting

incentives at the margin, disciplinary penalties that induce a decline in B/V must be large

enough to fully offset whatever increase in IPP would otherwise be generated by a higher

σV. Empirically, if the total derivative β1 is nonpositive, risk-shifting incentives are fully

neutralized.

       Thus, for market and regulatory pressure to consistently discipline and potentially

neutralize incremental risk-shifting incentives, two conditions must be met:

   Capital increases with volatility:                 α1 < 0,

   Guarantee value does not rise with volatility:     β1 ≤ 0.

   None of the variables featured in our three equations is directly observable.

However, Marcus and Shaked (1984) show how to use option-based models of deposit

insurance to track these variables synthetically. Because unobservable expectations play

a central role in term-structure and asset-pricing theories, running regressions on

synthetic data sets is a common practice in finance. Our two-step econometric models

test substantive hypotheses about asset valuation jointly with the subsidiary hypothesis

that the synthetic observations are unbiased estimates of the true variables. In our

experiments, one cannot rule out the possibility that measurement error and

simultaneous-equation bias distort our results. Murphy and Topel (1985) show that

standard errors of substantive parameters are often underestimated in two-step tests.



                                                                                            6
These considerations suggest that we should interpret t-values conservatively and subject

our results to a variety of robustness tests.

        The first step in the Marcus-Shaked procedure is to obtain tracking values for V

and σV by numerical methods. These values are then used to estimate IPP as the value of

a put option on bank assets. The procedure begins by solving the call-option formula for

equity, E. The last step uses Îto’s lemma to link σV to E, V and σE (the instantaneous

standard deviation of equity returns) by means of equation (6):

                                   σV = σE(E/V)/(∂E/∂V).                                 (6)

To establish whether inferences are robust to differences in how forbearance is modeled,

we conducted regressions using proxies for V, σV, and IPP derived from three different

models of deposit-insurance option value.1

        The first model follows Merton (1977) in portraying deposit insurance as a single-

period European put option on the bank’s assets. This model treats bank equity as the

sum of a dividend-unprotected European call option and the present value of the

dividends distributed before the option’s expiration date. The bank’s debt is assumed to

mature in one year, which is also the assumed exercise date for the insurer. The model

expresses the value of a bank’s equity, E, and the value of the fair deposit insurance

premium, IPP, as:

                         E = V[1-(1- δ)T] + V(1- δ)TN(x1) - BN(x2),                      (7)

                              IPP = N(-x2) - (1- δ)TN(-x1)V/B.                           (8)

In (7) and (8), δ is the fraction of bank assets distributed at each interim dividend date to

stockholders, T is the number of interim dividend payments, N(xi) states the probability




                                                                                           7
that the variate value x is ≤ xi, given that x is distributed with zero mean and unit

variance.2

           Ronn and Verma (1986) adapt Merton's model to account for market conjectures

that the FDIC may forbear from exercising its implicit call on the put when its claim is

only slightly in the money. The RV model scales down the effective exercise price of the

put by a factor of ρ = 0.97. Our second model employs an adaptation of the RV model

devised by Hovakimian and Kane (2000):

                            E = V[1-(1- δ)T] + V(1- δ)TN(x3) - ρBN(x4),                   (9)

                                   IPP = N(-x4) - (1- δ)TN(-x3)V/B.                     (10)

           The third model also appears in Hovakimian and Kane (2000). It assigns

stockholder benefits from forbearance only to banks that actually experience a capital

shortfall. This model suppresses the forbearance benefit (1-ρ)BN(x2) for solvent banks.

The value of a bank’s equity becomes:

                    E = V[1-(1- δ)T] + V(1- δ)TN(x3) - ρBN(x4) - (1-ρ)BN(x2),           (11)

                           IPP = N(-x4) - (1- δ)TN(-x3)V/B - (1-ρ)N(x2) .               (12)

           These models fix ρ at either 1.0 or 0.97 for every country at every date. Although

one might usefully experiment with other specifications, the policy implications of our

regression tests prove relatively insensitive to this parameter.

           Pennacchi (1987a and b) shows that, by counterfactually presuming prompt and

complete insolvency resolution, single-period models of IPP tend to understate the

economic value that government guarantees convey to bank stockholders. In exploring

1
    Hovakimian and Kane (2000) provide a detailed discussion of these models.




                                                                                           8
risk-shifting opportunities and authorities’ ability to control them, this bias promises to

increase the power of regression tests based on Merton’s minimal-forbearance model.


                              II.      Sample Selection and Data

         The paper uses annual data from 1991 through 1999. Bank-level data come from

two sources. Monthly stock prices and annual market values of equity are obtained from

Datastream. Balance-sheet data come from Bankscope.3 Data on incentive-modifying

deposit insurance features employed in different countries come from the World Bank

Survey of Prudential Regulations and Supervision of Commercial Banks and from the

Demirgüç-Kunt and Sobaci (2001) database studied by Demirgüç-Kunt and Kane (2002).

         Country characteristics are measured on three dimensions. Repression of political

rights and civil liberties is measured by the Freedom House, which constructs a

categorical repression indicator.4 This indicator recognizes three categories: free, partly

free, and not free. The second index is a measure of economic freedom compiled by the

Heritage Foundation.5         The third index reports the perceived corruption of national

governments (CP) as assessed by Transparency International.6                          This index ranks

countries on a scale of 1 (very corrupt) to 10 (not corrupt). The CP is based on surveys of

2
  x1 = [ln((1-δ)TV/B)+σV2 T/2]/(σV√T), x2 = x1 - σV√T, x3 = [ln((1-δ)TV/ρB)+σV2 T/2]/(σV√T), x4 = x3 -
σV√T.
3
  To scale down the number of listed banks in Japan and the US, we include only long-term credit, city and
trust banks in Japan and in the U.S. only multinational and superregional banks as these are defined by
Goldman Sachs in its Global Banks Fact Sheet (July 2000).
4
  These data are explained at the following website: http://www.freedomhouse.org.
5
  The economic freedom index tracks the following factors: Corruption in the judiciary, customs service,
and government bureaucracy; Non-tariff barriers to trade, such as import bans and quotas as well as strict
labeling and licensing requirements; The fiscal burden of government, which encompasses income tax
rates, corporate tax rates, and government expenditures as a percent of output; The rule of law, efficiency
within the judiciary, and the ability to enforce contracts; Regulatory burdens on business, including health,
safety, and environmental regulation; Restrictions on banks regarding financial services, such as selling
securities and insurance; Labor market regulations, such as established work weeks and mandatory




                                                                                                            9
business people, academics, and risk analysts. Because the three indices measure related

aspects of a country’s institutional infrastructure, pairwise correlations among the indices

range between 0.54 and 0.67. Panel A of Table I summarizes the distribution of each

index and selected deposit-insurance features across sample countries.

         Individual-bank data were screened in two ways. First, to be included into our

sample, the datasets must record at least three years of data on the input variables needed

to calculate B/V, σV, and IPP. Second, to guard against reporting errors in the Datastream

source, observations generating extreme values for these variables (i.e., below the first or

above the ninety-ninth percentiles) are trimmed away.                    These screening criteria are

satisfied for a total of 2,255 bank-year observations. The political freedom indicator is

available for 2,192 observations. The economic freedom index is available for 1,533

observations. The CP is available for 1,401 observations.

         Panel B in Table I summarizes sample coverage by country, year, and deposit

insurance status. Our sample covers 390 banks representing 56 countries. The number of

observations per country varies from four (one bank) for Russia to 309 (42 banks) for

Denmark.        Ten countries (299 observations) limit themselves to implicit deposit

insurance during our observation period. Eight more countries (351 observations)

introduce explicit deposit insurance (EI) during the period. The remaining thirty-eight

countries (1605 observations) offer explicit insurance throughout the observation period.

         For four salient subsamples, Table II reports the mean leverage ratio, the standard

deviation of returns on assets, and the mean insurance premium per dollar of deposits



separation pay; and Black market activities, including smuggling, piracy of intellectual property rights, and
the underground provision of labor and other services.
6
  Additional details may be found at http://www.transparency.org.


                                                                                                          10
calculated from the three alternative models of deposit insurance summarized in Section

I. The first column reports values for observations recorded under an implicit insurance

(II) regime. These estimates pool observations from countries that never introduced

explicit guarantees with pre-adoption observations for countries that introduced EI during

our 1991-99 observation period. Column (2) pools all observations in years spent under

an EI regime.

       Standard t-tests indicate that the EI subsample is characterized by significantly

higher leverage but significantly lower return volatility. Although mean IPP proves lower

in the EI subsample, the differences in leverage and volatility broadly offset each other,

so that the difference in premiums is not statistically significant. For each subsample, the

mean values of leverage and return volatility vary only slightly across the three models.

However, the economic significance of the observed difference in leverage emerges

clearly if the fraction reported is inverted.     How forbearance is modelled proves

important in that the mean IPP varies directly with the degree of forbearance assumed.

       Demirgüç-Kunt and Kane (2002) argue that many of the countries that adopted

deposit insurance in the 1990s lacked an appropriate institutional infrastructure and were

unable to compensate for imperfections in their contracting environments. For the subset

of countries that introduced EI during the observation period, columns (3) and (4) in

Table II compare results experienced under implicit and explicit regimes. The explicit-

regime subsample shows a significantly higher leverage ratio (9.2 vs. 8.3) and an

insignificantly higher return volatility. However, fair deposit insurance premiums are

significantly higher under the EI regimes than under the preceding implicit regimes. For

countries introducing EI during the 1990s, not only does the leverage ratio increase from



                                                                                         11
8.6 to 11.6, but banks show an increase rather than a decrease in return volatility and a

substantially (and significantly) higher mean IPP.        This indicates that regulatory

discipline did a poor job of replacing the bank bonding activities and depositor discipline

that EI displaced.

          Table III reports the mean value of the fair explicit premium for banks in each

sample country under each of the models summarized in Section I. For each country, the

value of government guarantees increases with the degree of forbearance assumed.

Values range from less than 0.001 percent for Australia, Austria, Germany, and

Luxembourg using Merton’s minimal-forbearance model to a high of 2.943 percent for

Russia using RV’s maximal-forbearance formulation. Particularly large values are

reported for countries known to have experienced a financial crisis during the observation

period.


      III.     The Effects of Deposit Insurance on Risk-Shifting Behavior


A. Benchmark Runs

          In this section, we examine the effectiveness of risk-shifting controls by

expanding models (1) through (3) to include bank-specific fixed effects and particular

deposit-insurance design features. Likelihood-ratio and Hausman tests support the fixed-

effects specification over either a random-effects specification or a specification that

dispenses with bank-specific effects. Because the Merton and Hovakimian-Kane models

achieve much the same results, we report benchmark estimates for the Merton and Ronn-

Verma specifications only.




                                                                                        12
       Tables IV and V let us compare results for four versions of regressions (1)

through (3). In each table, results for a fixed-effects benchmark model appear in the first

column of Panels A, B, and C. Each panel explores a different question:

       A. How valuable are unconstrained increases in leverage and volatility?

       B. How strongly do capital requirements discipline volatility?

       C. Do officials generate enough supervisory and regulatory pressure to offset the

           private bonding and depositor discipline that government guarantees displace?

       Panel A summarizes the benefits of unconstrained risk-shifting. However, the

significantly negative estimates for α1 in Panel B confirm that, on balance across the

sample, regulatory capital requirements and private market pressure did generate risk-

restraining discipline. Unfortunately, the significantly positive β1 value in the first

column of Panel C tells a sadder story. It implies that on average outside restraints on

bank risk-taking did not fully neutralize risk-shifting incentives.

       Column (2) minimally expands the fixed-effects regressions. It introduces a zero-

one dummy variable to recognize the presence of explicit insurance: the “EI Dummy.” In

both tables, the EI dummy receives a negative sign in the Panel A regressions, indicating

that on average explicit insurance did not increase risk-shifting opportunities. However,

the significantly positive values found for EI as a slope-shift parameter in the Panel B

(B/V) regressions indicate that net external discipline declines. Apparently, explicit

deposit insurance displaces more private policing than authorities manage to supply. In

the Panel C (restrained IPP) regressions, the effect of explicit deposit insurance on risk

shifting is insignificant in both Tables IV and V. Still, it is only in the minimal-




                                                                                        13
forbearance Merton model (Table IV) that the coefficient on the EI dummy in the IPP

regression even receives the hoped-for negative sign.

       Columns (3) and (4) further expand the regressions to allow risk-mitigating

features of deposit-insurance design also to influence model coefficients. The first

experiment interacts a dummy variable that is set to one if explicit premiums are risk-

sensitive, and is zero otherwise. The regression experiments reported in column (4) look

at two additional interactions. These experiments introduce dummy variables for the

existence of coinsurance and limits on the size of insured balances. The results show that

the strength of risk-shifting incentives depends critically on deposit insurance design. In

both the leverage and the constrained IPP regressions, coefficient estimates for the

explicit insurance dummy are significantly positive, but coefficient estimates for all three

interacted risk-control features prove significantly negative.        This indicates that

contractual controls designed to reduce bank risk-shifting incentives are at least partially

successful.

       The differences observed are economically significant. For example, column (4)

of Panel C of Table IV indicates that a percentage-point increase in asset volatility σV

generates a 16 basis-point increase in IPP in countries without EI and a 23 basis-point

increase in countries that adopt EI but refrain from introducing any risk-mitigating design

features. On average, increases in σV slightly reduce IPP in countries that adopt all three

risk-mitigating features.


B. How does risk-shifting change when a country adopts explicit insurance?

       The insignificance of the interacted EI Dummy in column (2) of the IPP

regressions in Tables IV and V may reflect differences in economic and political maturity


                                                                                         14
between countries that adopted EI years ago and those that adopted it only recently. In

this subsection, we focus on the subsample of 351 observations drawn from countries that

installed explicit insurance during 1991-99. The analysis seeks to assess the quality of

risk control in these countries in terms of shifts in α1 and β1 observed in the post-adoption

era.

         Comparing Panel A of Table VI with the same panel of Table IV shows that

unconstrained risk-shifting offers larger returns in adopting countries, while the last

column shows that explicit insurance reduced IPP only in countries that set coverage

limits. In the Panel B and C regressions, significantly positive coefficients emerge for the

interacted variable (EI Dummy × σV). This result confirms that regulators in other

adopting countries were unable to compensate adequately for the private monitoring that

EI displaced. The favorable effect of the Risk-Sensitive Premium Dummy in containing

risk-shifting incentives fails to achieve significance in Table VI. However, the slope-

shift estimated for the Coverage Limits Dummy remains significantly negative in all

regressions.7


   IV.      How risk-shifting is affected by specific country characteristics


A. Differences in Risk-Shifting Across Environments

         In countries where political and economic freedoms are low and government

corruption is high, households and firms should be reluctant to entrust their deposits to

opaque banks. In these circumstances, agents that become depositors are apt to insist on

information flows, bonding activity, and deterrent rights sufficient to price the risk




                                                                                          15
exposure banks pass through to them. Kane (2000) argues that, in low freedom/high

corruption countries, introducing explicit deposit insurance is apt to displace more

private discipline than government regulators may reasonably be expected to generate in

its stead.

           Tables VII through IX test this hypothesis with data derived from the Merton

model.8 The tests investigate the extent to which coefficients of our three equations

differ across subsamples of countries whose institutional environments differ in specified

ways.       In each table, observations have been ranked and grouped into subsamples

according to the strength of a particular measure of the character of a country’s financial

contracting environment. Each experiment is limited to countries for which the particular

measure is available. In every panel, we benchmark the risk-shifting opportunities that

exist in the absence of explicit insurance, and use the EI dummy to estimate the

adjustment in opportunities occurring in countries that have adopted EI.

           Table VII investigates the effect of differences in political freedom using a three-

way partition developed by Freedom House. Because this index is widely available, this

experiment includes almost every observation studied in Tables IV and V. Panel A

shows that, as freedom declines, risk-shifting opportunities increase. The leverage

regressions in Panel B indicate that, as freedom declines, private discipline tends to

increase and so does the extent to which it is displaced by EI. The Panel C regressions

indicate that risk-shifting opportunities exist even without EI, except in the economies

that show the least amount of political freedom. Again, the perverse effect of introducing

EI grows as freedom declines.

7
    The Coinsurance Dummy could not be incorporated into these runs because no country in the recent-



                                                                                                        16
        Table VIII partitions the 1533 observations for which the Economic Freedom

index exists. The “free” subsample includes all countries whose score on the index

equaled or exceeded the median value of 2.3. Results differ sharply between the two

environments. In strong (i.e., “free”) contracting environments, explicit insurance

strengthens rather than undermines private risk-shifting discipline. However, and as we

found in Table VII, in poor contracting environments, EI expands banks’ opportunities to

shift risk.

        Table IX examines the 1401 observations covered by the Corruption index. Kane

(2000) shows that in countries for which accounting standards have been indexed, the CP

correlates strongly with the informativeness of accounting records.            CP may also

correlate positively with a government’s capacity to collect taxes. Countries are divided

according to whether CP falls short of or exceeds 5, the midpoint of the index range. In

both regressions, benchmark discipline is greater in more-corrupt and less-transparent

environments, and explicit insurance expands risk-shifting opportunities in high-

corruption environments. In low-corruption countries, while EI exerts no significant

effect on leverage discipline, its presence does serve to limit the size of the fair insurance

premium.

        That explicit insurance arrangements control risk-shifting only in strong

contracting environments accords with empirical evidence on how explicit insurance

affects the probability of financial crisis as summarized in Demirgüç-Kunt and Kane

(2002). Tables VII to IX support these authors’ contention that governments should

repair weaknesses in their contracting environments before trying to establish an explicit


adopter subsample requires coinsurance.



                                                                                           17
deposit insurance system. The differences we observe continue to be economically

significant. For example, in Panel C of Table IX, a percentage-point increase in asset

volatility σV generates a net 16 basis-point increase in corrupt countries, but only a 10

basis-point increase in IPP in countries that are less corrupt.

B. Robustness Tests Focusing on Equations (2) and (3)

       Our final experiments expand in sometimes-complicated ways the regressions

reported in the previous six tables. Both to save space and to focus the robustness testing

on policy implications, Table X through XIII omit parallel results for adapted versions of

Equation (1).

       Table X investigates whether we can incorporate deposit-insurance design features

and potentially collinear country characteristics into summary regressions. In both the

leverage and IPP equations, results confirm the patterns found for individual deposit-

insurance features in Tables IV to VI.                    However, the disruptions we observe in

coefficient magnitudes from specification to specification support the hypothesis that

unfavorable country characteristics adversely influence deposit-insurance design.

           Because the coverage of individual indices must overlap, the final catchall

regressions must be run over a particularly small subsample. The catchall IPP regression

implies that when we control for levels of political repression, corruption, and restrictions

on economic freedom at the same time, EI strongly expands risk-shifting and coinsurance

and coverage limits significantly reduce it. While economic freedom drops out of the

catchall fair-premium regression, political repression promotes benchmark risk-shifting

and integrity in government curtails it.


8
    The results (not reported) are qualitatively similar when the other two models are used.


                                                                                               18
Two-step regression model with self-selection. It seems likely that the coefficient

estimates found for deposit insurance design features in Tables IV and V are subject to

sample-selection bias. Countries that adopt features to restrain risk-shifting behavior

might have experienced less risk-shifting in any case, precisely because the overall

contracting environment in these countries restrains risk shifting. As a robustness check,

we re-estimate the coefficients for design features using Heckman’s (1976, 1978) two-

step approach to incorporate control-system self-selection. The endogenous variable in

the first-stage probit model is a dummy variable that indicates whether the design feature

is selected or not. We investigate three features: risk-sensitive premiums, coinsurance,

and coverage limits. The results of the second-stage model are presented in Table XI.

Because Heckman’s method reduces the useable sample we also report OLS estimates for

the original model using the parallel subsample.9 The coefficient for Heckman’s lambda

(also known as the inverse Mill’s ratio) measures the covariance of the error terms from

the substantive regression and the selection equation. A significant coefficient on

Heckman’s lambda indicates the presence of a sample-selection bias.

         The results support the hypothesis of sample-selection bias, since the coefficient

on Heckman's lambda is significant in all but one specification. However, taking account

of selection affects only one policy implication: risk-sensitive premiums lose statistical

significance in the IPP regression. However, the sample size in these runs is less than half

of that employed in Table IV. Because this increases the standard error of each test, it

makes it harder to reject the null.



9
 The sample size is smaller because the first-stage probit is estimated for observations with non-missing
values of the indices of political freedom, economic freedom, and corruption.


                                                                                                            19
Switching Regression Model with Unknown Sample Separation. This section uses a

switching regression model with unknown sample separation (Maddala, 1983) to test the

hypothesis that risk-shifting incentives vary with the strength of a country’s institutional

environment. The switching model has three equations:10

                                           B V 1 = α 10 + α 11σ V + ε 1 ,                   (13)

                                           B V 2 = α 20 + α 21σ V + ε 2 ,                   (14)

                                                  I * = Zγ + u .                            (15)

           Equations (12) and (13) are risk-control equations that characterize the behavior

of banks in the alternate regimes. Equation (14) is a control-system selection equation. It

expresses a bank’s latent qualifications, I*, to follow one or the other regime. I* is

specified to be a function of our three proxies for the quality of the institutional

environment. The sign of I* determines whether either B/V1 or B/V2 is observed:

                                         B/Vit = B/V1it iff Iit* < 0

                                         B/Vit = B/V2it iff Iit* ≥ 0.                       (16)

           This switching regression model offers three advantages. First, it estimates

differences in risk-shifting behavior endogenously, without having to specify in advance

either what regime applies to each bank or the value of the sample breakpoint. Second,

this model can investigate the individual and joint influence of several determinants of

regime character. Because environmental characteristics jointly govern sample selection,

the model incorporates more information into the process of separating risk-control

regimes. Third, the model can assess the relative importance of our three proxies for

institutional strength.

10
     Three parallel equations are specified for the fair deposit insurance premiums, IPP.


                                                                                             20
        Table XII estimates the switching model for leverage control, while Table XIII

reports parallel estimates for risk shifting. Panel A reports the selection equations and

Panels B and C present the alternate risk-control models. The coefficients reported in

these tables are estimated by Maximum Likelihood. The likelihood function is as

follows:11

                            L = Φ (− Z it γ )φ (ε 1it ) + [1 − Φ (− Z it γ )]φ (ε 2it ) ,            (17)

where φ(.) is the density function and Φ(.) is the cumulative of the normal distribution.

        The selection equations model institutional strength more plausibly than the

catchall leverage and premium regressions presented in Table X. Every country

characteristic receives the same sign in both equations. Political repression and

corruption weaken the public contracting environment. Although economic repression is

found to strengthen controls on bank leverage, its effect on net risk shifting is less

strongly significant.

        The risk-control equations confirm our previous findings. In weak contracting

environments, background controls on private contracting are stronger, and introducing

explicit insurance significantly undermines environmental controls. In strong

environments, explicit insurance improves leverage control though, on balance, the

extent of risk shifting does not change significantly.


Regression Results by Geographic Region. As a final sensitivity test, we estimate the

parsimonious risk-control equations featured in Tables XII and XIII for each of nine

broad geographic regions. Of course, in any region where all member countries either do

11
  Shocks to leverage, B/V, and the shocks to the institutional environment are assumed to be uncorrelated.
Attempts to estimate models that allow correlated errors in the risk-controls and the selection equations



                                                                                                       21
or do not offer explicit insurance, a slope-shift term for EI cannot be estimated. Table

XIV reports the results.

        Except between Eastern Europe and Latin America, leverage and risk-shifting

coefficients vary significantly across all possible regional pairings. Leverage and risk-

shifting control systems appear particularly strong in Australia (which has eschewed

explicit insurance) and North America.      Although leverage discipline is exerted on

balance in every region, risk-shifting opportunities vary substantially. The coefficients

for fair premiums are particularly high in Asia and Africa. Countries that have adopted

explicit insurance systems in Eastern Europe, Latin America, and the Middle East appear

to have managed to restrain risk-shifting incentives, but Western European countries with

explicit insurance have intensified risk-shifting opportunities to some extent. However,

some of the regional differences turn on some very small samples. For example, the

subsample of Eastern European banks with no explicit deposit insurance consists of four

observations derived from a single Russian bank. The subsample of Western European

banks with no explicit deposit insurance consists of two observations of Greek banks and

seven observations of Swedish banks. Therefore, the effect of explicit deposit insurance

in Western Europe may be driven by relatively low risk-shifting in Sweden.

        In the fair premium regressions, the σv coefficient may be interpreted as a

measure of the strength of implicit guarantees. On this reading, expectations of depositor

bailouts are extremely high in Eastern Europe and Latin America and moderately high in

Asia and Africa.


                           V.       Summary and Conclusions


encountered convergence problems.


                                                                                       22
        Modern finance theory stresses that depositors and other creditors must mitigate

incentives for opportunistic behavior by bank managers, owners, and borrowers. To

bond their willingness to behave nonopportunistically, banks must convey to depositors a

degree of informational transparency and an appropriate set of deterrent rights. Because

individual efforts to monitor and police bank risk-taking exhibit wasteful overlaps,

efficiency demands that depositor oversight be supplemented by some centralized

program of monitoring and control. This centralized program must be able to establish,

enforce, and dynamically readjust protocols for verification, disclosure, truth-telling,

promise-making, promise-keeping, and conciliation.

        In practice, risk-control protocols are imbedded in a financial safety net erected

and managed by government officials. The ideal safety net is one that efficiently

mitigates the particular monitoring and policing difficulties that present themselves in the

contracting environment of a given country. These difficulties are apt to vary with

informational, ethical, legal, and economic subcultures that govern the design and

enforcement of financial contracts.

        Public-choice theory recognizes that officials’ incentives differ in important ways

from those of private creditors.      To persuade safety-net managers to make socially

optimal choices, taxpayers must be able to observe and protect their stake in regulatory

activities.

        This paper investigates how well authorities in 56 different countries have

restrained bank risk-shifting incentives in recent years.         Results show that the

effectiveness of private and governmental controls on bank leverage and deposit-

insurance subsidies varies across contracting environments in predictable ways.



                                                                                         23
       In any country, explicit deposit insurance threatens to displace more private

discipline than official oversight can generate.      In strong contracting environments,

officials usually manage to avoid this result. Significant portions of the variation in the

effectiveness of risk control are explained by differences in political climate, economic

freedom, and government corruption. Regressions incorporating these environmental

factors are sensitive to model specification, but they indicate on balance that explicit

deposit insurance expands risk-shifting opportunities in poor contracting environments.

       Our data show that the displacement of private discipline is reduced in systems

that impose appropriate combinations of loss-sharing rules, risk-sensitive premiums, and

coverage limits.    Unfortunately, in poor contracting environments, explicit deposit

insurance has an unhealthy appeal to policymakers. Regression results confirm that

recent adopters of explicit insurance have done a particularly poor job of replacing the

depositor discipline that explicit insurance displaced.

       Two important lessons follow. First, weaknesses in risk control can generate

large fiscal and social costs under an explicit insurance regime, a truth that most recent

financial crises underscore (Honohan and Klingebiel, 2002). Because the effectiveness of

risk control depends on deposit insurance design and country circumstances, in the long

run adopting explicit insurance can easily do more harm than good. Countries with a poor

contracting environment should upgrade this environment before adopting explicit

deposit insurance. Second, even in a good contracting environment, the benefits of

explicit deposit insurance depend critically on safety-net design. Risk-mitigating features

such as risk-based premiums, coinsurance and low coverage levels can curb bank risk-




                                                                                          24
shifting. However, countries where government corruption is high and economic and

political freedom is low find it difficult to adopt and enforce appropriate restraints.




                                                                                          25
References
Allen, L. and A. Saunders, 1993, Forbearance and valuation of deposit insurance as a
   callable put, Journal of Banking and Finance 17, 629-643.

Brickley, J.A. and C.M. James, 1986, Access to deposit insurance, insolvency rules, and
   the stock returns of financial institutions, Journal of Financial Economics 16, 345-
   372.

Buser, S.A., A.H. Chen and E.J. Kane, 1981, Federal deposit insurance, regulatory
   policy, and optimal bank capital, Journal of Finance 35, 51-60.

Calomiris, C.W., 1992, Getting the incentives right in the current deposit-insurance
   system: successes from the pre-FDIC era, in J.R. Barth and R.D. Brumbaugh, Jr.,
   eds.: The reform of federal deposit insurance: Disciplining government and
   protecting taxpayers (Harper Collins, New York), 13-35.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and E. Detragiache, 2002, Does deposit insurance increase banking
  system stability? An empirical investigation, Journal of Monetary Economics,
  forthcoming.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and H. Huizinga, 1999, Market discipline and financial safety net
  design, Policy research working paper No. 2183, World Bank.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A., and E.J. Kane, 2002, Deposit insurance around the world: where
  does it work?, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16 (Spring), pp. 175-195.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and T. Sobaci, 2001, A new development database. Deposit
  insurance around the world, World Bank Economic Review 15, 481-490.

Duan, J-C., A.F. Moreau and C.W. Sealey, 1992, Fixed-rate deposit insurance and risk-
   shifting behavior at commercial banks, Journal of Banking and Finance 16, 715-742.

Heckman, J., 1976, The common structure of statistical models of truncation, sample
   selection and limited dependent variables and a simple estimator for such models,
   Annals of Economic and Social Measurement 5, 475-492.

Heckman, J., 1978, Dummy endogenous variables in a simultaneous equation system,
   Econometrica 46, 931-959.

Honohan, P., and D. Klingebiel, 2002, The fiscal cost implications of an accommodating
   approach to banking crises, Journal of Banking and Finance, forthcoming.

Hovakimian A., and E.J. Kane, 2000, Effectiveness of capital regulation at U.S.
   commercial banks, 1985-1994, Journal of Finance 55, 451-469.

Kane, E.J., 1995, Three paradigms for the role of capitalization requirements in insured
   financial institutions, Journal of Banking and Finance 19, 431-454.


                                                                                     26
Kane, E.J., 2000, Designing financial safety nets to fit country circumstances, Mimeo,
   Boston College.

Laeven, L., 2002a, Bank risk and deposit insurance, World Bank Economic Review, 16,
   pp. 109-137.

Laeven, L., 2002b, International evidence on the cost of deposit insurance, Quarterly
   Review of Economics and Finance, 42, pp. 721-732.

Madalla, G.S., 1983. Limited-Dependent and Qualitative Variables in Econometrics,
  New York: Cambridge University Press.

Marcus, A.J., 1984, Deregulation and bank financial policy, Journal of Banking and
  Finance 8, 557-565.

Marcus, A.J., and I. Shaked, 1984, The valuation of FDIC deposit insurance using
  option-pricing estimates, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 16, 446 - 460.

Merton, R.C., 1977, An analytic derivation of the cost of deposit insurance and loan
  guarantees, Journal of Banking and Finance 1, 3-11.

Merton, R.C., 1978, On the cost of deposit insurance when there are surveillance costs,
  Journal of Business 51, 439-452.

Murphy, K.M., and R.H. Topel, 1985. Estimation and Inference in Two-Step
  Econometric Models, Journal of Business & Economic Statistics, 3, 370-379.

Pennacchi, G.G., 1987a, A reexamination of the over- (or under-) pricing of deposit
   insurance, Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 19, 340-360.

Pennacchi, G.G., 1987b, Alternative forms of deposit insurance: pricing and bank
   incentive issues, Journal of Banking and Finance 11, 291-312.

Ronn, E.I. and A.K. Verma, 1986, Pricing risk-adjusted deposit insurance: An option-
   based model, Journal of Finance 41, 871 - 895.




                                                                                    27
                                                Table I
Panel A: Distribution of country-level variables

                                         Mean        Median        Minimum    Maximum      Obs.

Explicit Insurance Dummy                 0.78             1           0           1        2255
Risk-Sensitive EI Dummy                  0.21             0               0       1        1760
Coinsurance Dummy                        0.15             0           0           1        1760
Coverage Limits Dummy                    0.72             1           0           1        1486
Political Freedom Index                  1.28             1               1       3        2192
Economic Freedom Index                   2.39             2.3         1.3         4        1533
Corruption Index                         6.44             6.7         1          10        1401


Panel B: Sample composition by country, year, and deposit insurance status
                     Deposit
                    insurance                              Sample years
                   1 = Explicit
                   0 = Implicit    Date enacted       From            To      # of banks   Obs.
Argentina               1             1979            1993           1999          4        23
Australia               0              n.a.           1992           1999          9        59
Austria                 1             1979            1993           1999          2        11
Bangladesh              1             1984            1992           1999          6        39
Brazil I                0             1995            1992           1994          6         7
Brazil II               1             1995            1995           1999          6        24
Canada                  1             1967            1991           1999          9        57
Chile                   1             1986            1994           1999          1         6
Colombia                1             1985            1992           1999          6        42
Cyprus                  0             2000            1993           1999          3        18
Czech Republic          1             1994            1994           1999          4        22
Denmark                 1             1988            1992           1999         42       309
Ecuador                 0             1999            1994           1998          3        13
Finland                 1             1969            1992           1999          1         7
France                  1             1980            1991           1999          4        29
Germany                 1             1966            1992           1999          5        35
Greece I                0             1993            1992           1992          2         2
Greece II               1             1993            1993           1999          4        23
Hong Kong               0              n.a.           1992           1999         10        59
Hungary                 1             1993            1995           1999          2        10
India                   1             1961            1992           1999          8        45
Indonesia I             0             1998            1992           1997          8        42
Indonesia II            1             1998            1999           1999          1         1
Ireland                 1             1989            1992           1999          3        24
Israel                  0              n.a.           1993           1999          3        18
Italy                   1             1987            1992           1999         21       146
Japan                   1             1971            1992           1999         16       126
Kenya                   1             1985            1992           1999          3        22
Korea, Rep. of I        0             1996            1992           1995         15        52



                                                                                                  28
Korea, Rep. of II        1               1996            1996          1999           16            47
Luxembourg               1               1989            1992          1999            2            16
Malaysia I               0               1998            1993          1997           9            36
Malaysia II              1               1998            1998          1999            9            16
Morocco I                0               1996            1993          1995            5            15
Morocco II               1               1996            1996          1999            5            19
Netherlands              1               1979            1992          1999            2            12
Norway                   1               1961            1992          1999           11           66
Pakistan                 0                n.a.           1992          1999            7            41
Peru                     1               1992            1993          1999            4            21
Philippines              1               1963            1992          1999           10            64
Poland                   1               1995            1995          1999            6            26
Portugal                 1               1992            1992          1999            4            28
Russia                   0                n.a.           1995          1998            1             4
Singapore                0                n.a.           1992          1999            6            45
South Africa             0                n.a.           1992          1999            4            29
Spain                    1               1977            1992          1999           12            96
Sri Lanka                1               1987            1992          1999            3            16
Sweden I                 0               1996            1992          1995            3             7
Sweden II                1               1996            1996          1999            3            12
Switzerland              1               1984            1992          1999            5            38
Taiwan                   1               1985            1992          1999           15            76
Thailand I               0               1997            1991          1996            7            35
Thailand II              1               1997            1997          1999            5            13
United Kingdom           1               1982            1992          1999           8            60
United States            1               1934            1992          1999           19           133
Zimbabwe                 0                n.a.           1993          1999            2            13
Total                                                                                390           2255
Notes: Countries that introduced deposit insurance during the sample period are reported twice – before
and after the enactment of deposit insurance. n.a. indicates “not applicable”. In Cyprus, explicit deposit
insurance was introduced in March 2000, after the sample period. Although Thailand and Malaysia do not
have an explicit deposit insurance fund, their governments introduced blanket guarantees in 1997 and
1998, respectively. In effect, these guarantees imply explicit deposit insurance.




                                                                                                          29
                                                  Table II
      Mean Leverage, Volatility, and Fair Insurance Premiums Found in Different Subsamples
The aggregate sample consists of 2,255 observations and covers risk-shifting behavior from 1991 to 1999.
B is the face value of a bank’s debt, including deposits. V is the market value of a bank’s assets. IPP is the
banks’ fair deposit insurance premium. σV is the standard deviation of the banks' asset returns.
                             (1)                      (2)                  (3)                   (4)
                                   All 56 Countries                  Countries with a change in deposit
                                                                                insurance status
                      Years without         Years with Explicit     Years without        Years with Explicit
                     Explicit Insurance         Insurance          Explicit Insurance         Insurance
Merton model with minimal forbearance

B/V                         0.879                     0.891**             0.884                  0.914**
σV                          0.049                     0.039**             0.050                  0.055
IPP (%)                     0.180                     0.127               0.211                  0.617**

Ronn and Verma (1986) with forbearance

B/V                         0.903                     0.915**             0.909                  0.939**
σV                          0.050                     0.040**             0.052                  0.056
IPP (%)                     0.357                     0.313               0.426                  1.245**

Hovakimian and Kane (2000) with forbearance

B/V                         0.879                     0.891**             0.885                  0.918**
σV                          0.050                     0.040**             0.051                  0.059
IPP (%)                     0.264                     0.211               0.325                  1.029**

Sample Size                  495                      1760                196                    155
*,** Significantly different from the value in the “Years Without Explicit Insurance” column at 5 and 1
percent, respectively.




                                                                                                           30
                                 Table III
                 Mean IPP Value for Each Sample Country
                      (Expressed as a % of Deposits)

                 Merton model with     Ronn and Verma (1986)    Hovakimian and Kane
Country          minimal forbearance      with forbearance     (2000) with forbearance
Argentina              0.361                   0.579                   0.379
Australia              0.000                   0.005                   0.000
Austria                0.000                   0.374                   0.001
Bangladesh             0.067                   0.769                   0.165
Brazil                 0.923                   1.701                   1.333
Canada                 0.013                   0.143                   0.036
Chile                  0.003                   0.018                   0.003
Colombia               0.039                   0.107                   0.056
Cyprus                 0.043                   0.097                   0.043
Czech Republic         0.057                   0.323                   0.116
Denmark                0.091                   0.178                   0.097
Ecuador                0.062                   0.176                   0.070
Finland                0.010                   0.109                   0.015
France                 0.004                   0.105                   0.006
Germany                0.000                   0.152                   0.000
Greece                 0.183                   0.408                   0.187
Hong Kong              0.441                   0.614                   0.461
Hungary                0.078                   0.422                   0.099
India                  0.192                   0.603                   0.305
Indonesia              0.466                   0.798                   0.600
Ireland                0.002                   0.018                   0.002
Israel                 0.001                   0.093                   0.002
Italy                  0.016                   0.135                   0.033
Japan                  0.090                   0.417                   0.229
Kenya                  0.708                   1.018                   0.843
Korea, Rep. of         0.280                   0.853                   0.526
Luxembourg             0.000                   0.066                   0.000
Malaysia               0.350                   0.618                   0.431
Morocco                0.002                   0.042                   0.002
Netherlands            0.003                   0.030                   0.003
Norway                 0.002                   0.174                   0.004
Pakistan               0.078                   0.403                   0.172
Peru                   0.350                   0.670                   0.436
Philippines            0.408                   0.623                   0.442
Poland                 0.155                   0.276                   0.163
Portugal               0.005                   0.058                   0.006
Russia                 1.928                   2.943                   2.205
Singapore              0.013                   0.040                   0.015
South Africa           0.054                   0.211                   0.059
Spain                  0.051                   0.073                   0.052
Sri Lanka              0.112                   0.358                   0.130
Sweden                 0.021                   0.214                   0.111
Switzerland            0.002                   0.006                   0.002



                                                                                   31
Taiwan                   0.020   0.059   0.021
Thailand                 0.780   1.189   0.956
United Kingdom           0.011   0.092   0.012
United States            0.002   0.009   0.002
Zimbabwe                 0.536   1.157   0.803
Unweighted Sample Mean   0.139   0.323   0.222




                                                 32
                                                                           Table IV
                                  Evidence of Risk-Shifting Control, Using the Merton model with minimal forbearance
Fixed-effects regressions relating a bank’s leverage, B/V, and fair deposit insurance premium, IPP, to the volatility of its return on assets, σV, and particular
deposit-insurance design features. B is the face value of a bank’s debt, including deposits. V is the market value of a bank’s assets. Regression input comes
from the Merton single-period model of deposit with minimal forbearance. The sample consists of 2,255 observations covering risk-shifting behavior from 1991
to 1999. Estimates that differ significantly from zero at 5%, and 1% levels are marked *, and **, respectively.
Panel A. Unconstrained fair deposit insurance premium regressions.
                                                       (1)                           (2)                           (3)                           (4)
                                             Coeff.          t-ratio       Coeff.          t-ratio        Coeff.         t-ratio        Coeff.         t-ratio
Leverage                                     9.600**         37.0          9.646**          37.2         9.527**          36.6         9.292**          32.2
σV                                          21.025**         57.2         22.580**          37.4        22.590**          37.6        23.238**          39.6
EI Dummy ×σV                                                               -1.985*          -3.2         -1.647*          -2.7         2.658**           3.6
Risk-Sensitive Premium Dummy ×σV                                                                        -3.266**          -3.5        -3.622**          -3.9
Coinsurance Dummy ×σV                                                                                                                  -3.510*          -2.4
Coverage Limits Dummy ×σV                                                                                                             -6.704**          -8.6
R-squared                                     0.727                         0.728                         0.730                         0.759
Sample Size                                   2255                          2255                          2255                           1981


Panel B. Leverage regressions.
                                                       (1)                           (2)                           (3)                           (4)
                                             Coeff.          t-ratio       Coeff.          t-ratio        Coeff.         t-ratio        Coeff.         t-ratio
σV                                          -0.723**         -25.9        -0.822**         -16.5        -0.806**         -16.3        -0.728**         -15.8
EI Dummy ×σV                                                               0.129*           2.4          0.177**          3.3          0.477**          7.7
Risk-Sensitive Premium Dummy ×σV                                                                        -0.478**          -5.8        -0.597**          -7.6
Coinsurance Dummy ×σV                                                                                                                 -0.692**          -5.7
Coverage Limits Dummy ×σV                                                                                                             -0.303**          -4.6
R-squared                                     0.774                         0.775                         0.779                         0.792
Sample Size                                   2255                          2255                          2255                           1981




                                                                                                                                                                 33
Panel C. Constrained IPP regressions.
                                                   (1)                        (2)                        (3)                        (4)
                                         Coeff.          t-ratio    Coeff.          t-ratio    Coeff.          t-ratio    Coeff.          t-ratio
σV                                      14.086**         34.0      14.651**         19.8      14.908**         20.3      16.470**         23.7
EI Dummy ×σV                                                        -0.737          -0.9        0.036           0.0       7.086**          7.6
Risk-Sensitive Premium Dummy ×σV                                                              -7.820**         -6.4      -9.171**         -7.8
Coinsurance Dummy ×σV                                                                                                    -9.940**         -5.5
Coverage Limits Dummy ×σV                                                                                                -9.515**         -9.7
R-squared                                0.530                      0.531                      0.541                       0.611
Sample Size                              2255                       2255                       2255                         1981




                                                                                                                                                    34
                                                                            Table V
                       Evidence of Risk-Shifting Control, Using the Adapted Ronn and Verma model with substantial forbearance
Fixed-effects regressions relating a bank’s leverage, B/V, and fair deposit insurance premiums, IPP, to the volatility of its return on assets, σV, and particular
deposit-insurance design features. B is the face value of a bank’s debt, including deposits. V is the market value of a bank’s assets. Regression input comes
from the adapted RV model of deposit insurance with forbearance. The sample consists of 2,255 observations covering risk-shifting behavior from 1991 to
1999. Estimates that differ significantly from zero at 5% and 1% levels are marked *, and **, respectively.
Panel A. Unconstrained fair deposit insurance premium regressions.
                                                       (1)                            (2)                           (3)                           (4)
                                              Coeff.         t-ratio        Coeff.          t-ratio       Coeff.          t-ratio        Coeff.         t-ratio
Leverage                                    12.640**          44.4        12.647**           44.4        12.543**          43.7        12.733**          39.8
σV                                          24.845**          59.8        25.097**           36.7        25.107**          36.8        25.987**          38.8
EI Dummy ×σV                                                               -0.321            -0.5          -0.016           0.0         3.819**           4.5
Risk-Sensitive Premium Dummy ×σV                                                                          -2.953*          -2.8         -2.705*          -2.5
Coinsurance Dummy ×σV                                                                                                                    -2.022          -1.2
Coverage Limits Dummy ×σV                                                                                                              -6.519**          -7.4
R-squared                                     0.769                         0.769                          0.770                          0.792
Sample Size                                   2255                          2255                           2255                           1981


Panel B. Leverage regressions.
                                                       (1)                            (2)                           (3)                           (4)
                                              Coeff.         t-ratio        Coeff.          t-ratio       Coeff.          t-ratio        Coeff.         t-ratio
σV                                          -0.743**         -25.8         -0.849**         -16.5        -0.833**         -16.3        -0.752**         -15.8
EI Dummy ×σV                                                                0.138*           2.5          0.186**          3.3          0.492**          7.7
Risk-Sensitive Premium Dummy ×σV                                                                         -0.492**          -5.8        -0.613**          -7.6
Coinsurance Dummy ×σV                                                                                                                  -0.705**          -5.7
Coverage Limits Dummy ×σV                                                                                                              -0.310**          -4.6
R-squared                                     0.774                         0.775                          0.779                         0.791
Sample Size                                   2255                          2255                           2255                          1981




                                                                                                                                                                  35
Panel C. Constrained IPP regressions.
                                                   (1)                        (2)                        (3)                         (4)
                                         Coeff.          t-ratio    Coeff.          t-ratio    Coeff.          t-ratio    Coeff.           t-ratio
σV                                      15.449**         30.3      14.360**         15.8      14.664**         16.2       16.408**         18.8
EI Dummy ×σV                                                        1.420           1.4        2.321*           2.4       10.085**          8.7
Risk-Sensitive Premium Dummy ×σV                                                              -9.130**         -6.1      -10.510**         -7.1
Coinsurance Dummy ×σV                                                                                                    -11.002**         -4.8
Coverage Limits Dummy ×σV                                                                                                -10.469**         -8.5
R-squared                                0.530                      0.530                      0.539                        0.596
Sample Size                              2255                       2255                       2255                         1981




                                                                                                                                                     36
                                                   Table VI
     Evidence of Risk-Shifting Control, generated from the minimal-forbearance Merton model
                     for countries changing deposit insurance status during 1991-99
Fixed-effects regressions relating a bank’s leverage, B/V, and fair deposit insurance premiums, IPP, to the
volatility of its return on assets, σV, and specified deposit-insurance design features: B is the face value of a
bank’s debt, including deposits. V is the market value of a bank’s assets. Regression input comes from
Merton’s single-period model of deposit insurance with minimal forbearance. The sample consists of 351
observations in countries that installed explicit insurance between 1991 and 1999. Estimates that differ
significantly from zero at 5% and 1% levels are marked *, and **, respectively.
Panel A. Unconstrained fair deposit insurance premium regressions.
                                                 Coeff.           t-ratio           Coeff.            t-ratio
Leverage                                       13.703**            19.3           12.297**            16.2
σV                                             32.592**            24.0           32.069**            24.1
EI Dummy ×σV                                   -4.856**            -3.9            -1.549             -1.1
Risk-Sensitive Premium Dummy ×σV                                                    8.866              0.8
Coverage Limits Dummy ×σV                                                         -7.748**            -4.5
R-squared                                        0.844                              0.854
Sample Size                                       351                                351

Panel B. Leverage regressions.
                                                 Coeff.           t-ratio           Coeff.            t-ratio
σV                                             -0.776**            -7.5           -0.712**             -7.6
EI Dummy ×σV                                   0.452**              4.6            0.798**              8.0
Risk-Sensitive Premium Dummy ×σV                                                    -0.547             -0.6
Coverage Limits Dummy ×σV                                                         -0.964**             -7.9
R-squared                                        0.624                               0.692
Sample Size                                       351                                 351

Panel C. Constrained IPP regressions.
                                                 Coeff.           t-ratio           Coeff.            t-ratio
σV                                             21.961**            11.7            23.309**           13.9
EI Dummy ×σV                                     1.341              0.7             8.264**            4.6
Risk-Sensitive Premium Dummy ×σV                                                     -2.143            0.1
Coverage Limits Dummy ×σV                                                         -19.605**           -9.0
R-squared                                        0.643                                0.722
Sample Size                                       351                                  351




                                                                                                                37
                                                 Table VII
        Differences in Risk-Shifting Control Across Environments Marked by Differences in
                   Political Freedom, using Merton Model with Minimal Forbearance
Fixed-effects regressions relating a bank’s leverage, B/V, and fair deposit insurance premium, IPP, to the
volatility of return on assets, σV. B is the face value of a bank’s debt, including deposits. V is the market
value of a bank’s assets. Regression input come from Merton’s single-period model of deposit insurance
with minimal forbearance. The sample consists of 2,192 observations covering risk-shifting behavior from
1991 to 1999. Estimates that differ significantly from zero at 5% and 1% levels are marked *, and **,
respectively. In each panel, the last row reports the p-value of the F-test that the coefficients in the
subsample regressions are the same.
Panel A. Unconstrained fair deposit insurance premium regressions.
                              Free                      Partly Free                         Not Free
                    Coeff.           t-ratio       Coeff.         t-ratio          Coeff.              t-ratio
Leverage            7.645**          26.3         7.762**           16.3         17.797**                6.1
σV                 11.969**          11.5        16.329**           13.6         31.070**                3.5
EI Dummy ×σV        4.805**          4.8         3.723**            3.5          -3.649**               -0.4
R-squared            0.812                         0.811                           0.731
Sample Size          1639                           502                             51
F-test (p-value)      0.00

Panel B. Leverage regressions.
                              Free                      Partly Free                         Not Free
                    Coeff.           t-ratio       Coeff.         t-ratio          Coeff.              t-ratio
σV                 -1.258**          -13.9       -1.317**          -12.1         -1.847**               -4.7
EI Dummy ×σV       0.417**            4.5         0.640**           5.9           1.650**                3.8
R-squared            0.850                         0.759                           0.677
Sample Size          1639                           502                              51
F-test (p-value)      0.00


Panel C. Constrained IPP regressions.
                              Free                      Partly Free                         Not Free
                    Coeff.           t-ratio       Coeff.         t-ratio          Coeff.              t-ratio
σV                   2.355*           2.0         6.104**            4.6           -1.806               -0.2
EI Dummy ×σV        7.992**           6.5         8.690**            6.6          25.710*                2.3
R-squared             0.717                        0.681                            0.458
Sample Size           1639                          502                              51
F-test (p-value)       0.00




                                                                                                                 38
                                                 Table VIII
          Evidence of Risk-Shifting Control Across Environments Marked by Differences in
                   Economic Freedom, using Merton’s Minimal-Forbearance Model
Fixed-effects regressions relating a bank’s leverage, B/V, and fair deposit insurance premium, IPP, to the
volatility of its return on assets, σV. B is the face value of a bank’s debt, including deposits. V is the
market value of a bank’s assets. Regression input comes from Merton’s single-period model of deposit
insurance with minimal forbearance. The sample consists of 1,533 observations covering risk-shifting
behavior from 1995 to 1999. Estimates that differ significantly from zero at 5% and 1% levels are marked
*, and **, respectively. In each panel, the last row reports the p-value of the F-test that the coefficients in
the subsample regressions are the same.
Panel A. Unconstrained fair deposit insurance premium regressions.
                                        Free                                       Not Free
                          Coeff.                 t-ratio                Coeff.                  t-ratio
Leverage                 6.718**                 15.2                   9.316**                  19.0
σV                      20.986**                 29.8                  14.768**                  10.2
EI Dummy ×σV            -6.013**                 -6.0                   4.791**                  3.6
R-squared                 0.765                                          0.754
Sample Size                820                                            713
F-test (p-value)           0.00

Panel B. Leverage regressions.
                                      Free                                         Not Free
                         Coeff.                  t-ratio                Coeff.                  t-ratio
σV                      -0.229**                  -3.6                 -1.354**                  -12.0
EI Dummy ×σV            -0.838**                  -9.8                 0.760**                    6.8
R-squared                 0.899                                          0.783
Sample Size                820                                            713
F-test (p-value)           0.00


Panel C. Constrained IPP regressions.
                                        Free                                       Not Free
                          Coeff.                 t-ratio                Coeff.                  t-ratio
σV                      19.451**                  23.7                   2.151                    1.3
EI Dummy ×σV            -11.646**                -10.6                 11.869**                   7.2
R-squared                 0.675                                          0.589
Sample Size                820                                            713
F-test (p-value)           0.00




                                                                                                            39
                                                   Table IX
          Evidence of Risk-Shifting Control Across Environments that Differ in Corruption
Fixed-effects regressions relating a bank’s leverage, B/V, and fair deposit insurance premium, IPP, to the
volatility of its return on assets, σV. B is the face value of a bank’s debt, including deposits. V is the
market value of a bank’s assets. Regression input comes from Merton’s single-period model of deposit
insurance with minimal forbearance. The sample consists of 1,401 observations covering risk-shifting
behavior from 1995 to 1999. Estimates that differ significantly from zero at 5% and 1% levels are marked
*, and **, respectively. In each panel, the last row reports the p-value of the F-test of the hypothesis that
the coefficients are the same across each pair of subsamples.
Panel A. Unconstrained fair deposit insurance premium regressions.
                                   Less Corrupt                                  More Corrupt
                         Coeff.                   t-ratio              Coeff.                   t-ratio
Leverage                 6.089**                   19.4               11.140**                  17.4
σV                      19.574**                  34.7                17.914**                  6.2
EI Dummy ×σV            -6.889**                  -10.6                5.965*                   2.3
R-squared                 0.795                                         0.807
Sample Size                915                                           486
F-test (p-value)           0.00



Panel B. Leverage regressions.
                                   Less Corrupt                                  More Corrupt
                         Coeff.                   t-ratio              Coeff.                   t-ratio
σV                      -0.479**                   -7.3               -2.138**                   -9.9
EI Dummy ×σV              0.061                    0.8                1.468**                    7.0
R-squared                 0.870                                         0.788
Sample Size                915                                           486
F-test (p-value)           0.00


Panel C. Constrained IPP regressions.
                                   Less Corrupt                                  More Corrupt
                         Coeff.                   t-ratio              Coeff.                   t-ratio
σV                      16.656**                  24.7                 -5.906*                   -1.7
EI Dummy ×σV            -6.517**                  -8.1                22.319**                    6.6
R-squared                 0.682                                         0.630
Sample Size                915                                           486
F-test (p-value)           0.00




                                                                                                          40
                                                     Table X
 Evidence of Risk-Shifting Control Incorporating Deposit-Insurance Design Features and Country
                                         Characteristics
Fixed-effects regressions relating a bank’s leverage, B/V, and fair deposit insurance premiums, IPP, to the
volatility of its return on assets, σV, and specified deposit-insurance design features: B is the face value of
the market value of a bank’s assets. Regression input comes from Merton’s single-period model of deposit
insurance with minimal forbearance. Higher values of political freedom index correspond to less freedom.
Higher values of economic freedom index correspond to less freedom. Higher values of corruption index
correspond to less corruption. The sample consists of observations in countries for which the included
country indices exist. Estimates that differ significantly from zero at 5% and 1% levels are marked *, and
**, respectively.
Panel A. Leverage regressions.

                                        (1)                 (2)                 (3)                (4)
                                   Coeff. t-ratio       Coeff. t-ratio     Coeff. t-ratio      Coeff. t-ratio

σV                                -1.056**    -12.6      -0.229    -1.8   -0.852**     -6.9   -1.464**    -3.5
EI ×σV                            0.646**      10.2     0.624**     9.0   0.606**       7.6    1.175**    12.3
Risk-Sensitive Premium
Dummy ×σV                         -0.564**    -7.4     -0.507**    -5.6   -0.524**     -4.9   -0.417**    -4.1
Coinsurance Dummy ×σV             -0.650**    -5.5     -0.556**    -4.7   -0.544**     -4.4   -0.521**    -4.4
Coverage Limits Dummy ×σV         -0.252**    -3.9     -0.444**    -6.2   -0.657**     -8.4    -0.263*    -2.5
Political Freedom Index ×σV         0.064      1.4                                              0.164     1.8
Economic Freedom Index ×
σV                                                     -0.218**    -4.0                        -0.059     -0.6
Corruption Index × σV                                                      0.039*      2.4     -0.030     -1.2

R-squared                          0.800                 0.857              0.847               0.866
Sample Size                        1918                  1332               1193                1092

Panel B. Fair deposit insurance premium regressions.

                                       (1)                   (2)               (3)                 (4)
                                   Coeff. t-ratio       Coeff. t-ratio     Coeff. t-ratio      Coeff. t-ratio

σV                                9.913**      7.6     14.963**    8.8    24.141**    16.6      1.084      0.2
EI ×σV                            8.525**      8.7     10.860**   11.5    6.582**      7.0    16.712**    16.6
Risk-Sensitive Premium
Dummy ×σV                         -8.565**    -7.3 -6.620** -5.4 -4.093** -3.3      -1.512                -1.4
Coinsurance Dummy ×σV             -8.706**    -4.8 -6.198** -3.9 -4.380** -3.0 -3.182**                   -2.6
Coverage Limits Dummy ×σV         -8.604**    -8.7 -13.544** -14.0 -15.759** -17.2 -8.228**               -7.4
Political Freedom Index ×σV       2.948**      4.2                                 7.140**                 7.6
Economic Freedom Index ×
σV                                                      -0.680    -0.9                         -0.001      0.0
Corruption Index × σV                                                     -1.180**    -6.2    -1.735**    -6.6

R-squared                          0.592                0.702              0.770               0.808
Sample Size                        1918                 1332               1193                1092




                                                                                                            41
                                                                            Table XI
                  Evidence of Risk-Shifting Control, generated from the minimal-forbearance Merton model allowing for self-selection
Fixed-effects regressions using Heckman’s (1976, 1978) two-step method relating a bank’s leverage, B/V, and fair deposit insurance premiums, IPP, to the
volatility of its return on assets, σV, and particular deposit-insurance design features. B is the face value of a bank’s debt, including deposits. V is the market
value of a bank’s assets. The dependent variable of the first-stage Probit model is a dummy variable that indicates whether the design feature is selected or not.
As design features we consider risk-sensitive premiums (column 1), coinsurance (column 2), and coverage limits (column 3). Regression input for the second-
stage regression comes from the minimal-forbearance Merton model of deposit insurance. Estimates that differ significantly from zero at 5% and 1% levels are
marked *, and **, respectively.
Panel A. Leverage regressions
                                                 Risk-Sensitive Premia                         Coinsurance                             Coverage limit
                                           Self-selection          OLS              Self-selection         OLS               Self-selection           OLS
                                           Coeff.    t-ratio   Coeff.  t-ratio      Coeff.    t-ratio  Coeff.  t-ratio       Coeff.    t-ratio   Coeff.   t-ratio
σV                                        -0.708**    -18.5   -0.710**     -18.4   -0.652**    -16.9   -0.670**    -17.4    -0.255**     -3.7    -0.245**     -3.6
Risk-Sensitive Premium Dummy ×σV           -0.192      -1.3    -0.205       -1.5
Coinsurance Dummy ×σV                                                              -0.426**     -3.9   -0.421**     -3.9
Coverage Limits Dummy ×σV                                                                                                   -0.506**     -5.8    -0.539**     -6.2
Lambda                                    -0.012**     -4.9                        -0.007**     -3.4                         0.539*      -2.4
R-squared                                                       0.295                                    0.300                                     0.267
Sample Size                                  928                 928                 975                  975                 541                   541
Panel B. Constrained IPP regressions
                                                 Risk-Sensitive Premia                         Coinsurance                             Coverage limit
                                           Self-selection          OLS              Self-selection         OLS               Self-selection           OLS
                                           Coeff.    t-ratio   Coeff.  t-ratio      Coeff.    t-ratio  Coeff.  t-ratio       Coeff.    t-ratio  Coeff.    t-ratio
σV                                        12.645**     20.6   12.633**     20.5    13.455**     21.8   13.175**     21.5    25.736**     23.8    25.818**     23.9
Risk-Sensitive Premium Dummy ×σV           -2.074      -0.8    -5.144*     -2.4
Coinsurance Dummy ×σV                                                              -6.656**     -3.8   -6.581**     -3.8
Coverage Limits Dummy ×σV                                                                                                  -18.495** -13.3      -18.767** -13.6
Lambda                                     -0.094*     -2.3                        -0.105**     -3.2                         -0.044   -1.3
R-squared                                                       0.316                                    0.327                                     0.533
Sample Size                                  928                 928                  975                 975                  541                  541




                                                                                                                                                                42
                                                                           Table XII
                        Switching Regression Model of Leverage Control with Sample Selection Based on Country Characteristics


Fixed-effects regressions relating a bank’s leverage, B/V, and fair deposit insurance premiums, IPP, to the volatility of its return on assets, σV, and specified
deposit-insurance design features: B is the face value of the market value of a bank’s assets. Regression input comes from Merton’s single-period model of
deposit insurance with minimal forbearance. The sample consists of observations in countries for which the included country indices exist. Estimates that differ
significantly from zero at 5% and 1% levels are marked *, and **, respectively.

Panel A. Weak institutional environment selection equation.
                                       (1)                               (2)                                (3)                                 (4)
                                Coeff.       t-ratio          Coeff.            t-ratio          Coeff.            t-ratio           Coeff.            t-ratio
Intercept                      4.126**          7.0         -1.671**             -8.7           -1.077**            -4.0            1.300**              7.7
Political freedom Index        0.695**          4.3          1.088**              7.3
Economic freedom Index        -1.176**         -7.5                                              0.329**             3.1
Corruption Index              -0.365**         -9.5                                                                                 -0.241**            -9.5
Observations                     1280                         1280                                1280                                1280

Panel B. Risk-shifting when the institutional environment is weak.
                                          (1)                            (2)                                (3)                                 (4)
                               Coeff.          t-ratio         Coeff.           t-ratio           Coeff.           t-ratio            Coeff.           t-ratio
σV                            -1.746**          -14.0        -1.674**            -12.7          -1.722**            -13.2           -1.747**            -13.6
EI×σV                         1.234**            10.6         1.272**             10.2           1.325**             10.7            1.291**             10.7
Observations                    1280                            1280                               1280                                1280

Panel C. Risk-shifting when the institutional environment is strong.
                                          (1)                            (2)                                (3)                                 (4)
                               Coeff.          t-ratio         Coeff.           t-ratio          Coeff.            t-ratio           Coeff.            t-ratio
σV                            -1.451**          -14.8        -1.418**            -11.2          -1.463**            -19.4           -1.440**            -18.6
EI×σV                         -0.282**           -2.9        -0.334**             -2.6          -0.300**             -3.9           -0.317**             -4.1
Observations                    1280                            1280                              1280                                1280




                                                                                                                                                                 43
                                                                           Table XIII
               Switching Regression Model of Fair Deposit Insurance Premiums with Sample Selection Based on Country Characteristics


Fixed-effects regressions relating a bank’s leverage, B/V, and fair deposit insurance premiums, IPP, to the volatility of its return on assets, σV, and specified
deposit-insurance design features: B is the face value of the market value of a bank’s assets. Regression input comes from Merton’s single-period model of
deposit insurance with minimal forbearance. The sample consists of observations in countries for which the included country indices exist. Estimates that differ
significantly from zero at 5% and 1% levels are marked *, and **, respectively.

Panel A: Weak institutional environment selection equation
                                       (1)                               (2)                                (3)                                (4)
                                Coeff.       t-ratio         Coeff.             t-ratio          Coeff.            t-ratio           Coeff.            t-ratio
Intercept                      1.418**         3.5         -1.657**              -16.0          -2.371**            -13.4           1.680**             15.8
Political freedom Index        0.594**          6.8         1.202**               15.4
Economic freedom Index         -0.247*         -2.2                                              0.922**            12.5
Corruption Index              -0.281**        -10.6                                                                                 -0.299**           -17.4
Observations                     1280                        1280                                 1280                                1280

Panel B: Risk-shifting when the institutional environment is weak
                                          (1)                            (2)                                (3)                                (4)
                               Coeff.          t-ratio        Coeff.            t-ratio          Coeff.            t-ratio          Coeff.             t-ratio
σV                             -0.673           -0.7          -0.655             -0.6            -0.655             -0.6            -0.676              -0.7
EI×σV                         10.322**          11.0         10.324**            10.9           10.320**            10.9           10.320**             11.0
Observations                    1280                           1280                               1280                               1280

Panel C: Risk-shifting when the institutional environment is strong
                                          (1)                            (2)                                (3)                                (4)
                               Coeff.          t-ratio         Coeff.           t-ratio          Coeff.            t-ratio           Coeff.            t-ratio
σV                             0.056*            2.1           0.049              1.6            0.050               1.9             0.053*              2.1
EI×σV                           0.032            1.2           0.041              1.3            0.040               1.5              0.034              1.4
Observations                    1280                            1280                             1280                                 1280




                                                                                                                                                                 44
                                                                          Table XIV
                                                     Evidence of Risk-Shifting Control Across Regions
Fixed-effects regressions relating a bank’s leverage, B/V, and fair deposit insurance premiums, IPP, to the volatility of its return on assets, σV, and specified
deposit-insurance design features: B is the face value of the market value of a bank’s assets. Regression input comes from Merton’s single-period model of
deposit insurance with minimal forbearance. Higher values of political freedom index correspond to less freedom. Higher values of economic freedom index
correspond to less freedom. Higher values of corruption index correspond to less corruption. The sample consists of observations in countries for which the
included country indices exist. Estimates that differ significantly from zero at 5% and 1% levels are marked *, and **, respectively.

Panel A. Unconstrained fair deposit insurance premium regressions.
              Western Europe      Eastern Europe North America        Latin America       Middle East          Africa          South Asia         East Asia             Australia
               Coeff. t-ratio     Coeff. t-ratio Coeff. t-ratio       Coeff. t-ratio     Coeff. t-ratio     Coeff. t-ratio    Coeff. t-ratio     Coeff. t-ratio       Coeff. t-ratio
Leverage        6.916     18.5    3.721      8.1     0.452     3.8     10.434    11.4     0.027     1.0     17.622     7.0     4.094     5.8     9.280     20.0        0.005      3.6
σV             10.952     9.9     23.348     21.3    1.216     4.4     34.462    23.4     0.533     9.0     21.782     3.7    14.218    13.4     21.436    21.9        0.021      4.3
EI ×σV
                3.264     3.0    -14.176    -11.7                     -17.894    -9.8    -0.262     -4.3    4.485      0.7                       4.067      4.1
R-squared       0.691             0.970              0.359             0.861              0.723             0.717              0.738             0.797                 0.416
Sample Size
                 939                62                190               177                52                 64               100                612                   59

Panel B. Leverage regressions.
              Western Europe      Eastern Europe North America        Latin America       Middle East          Africa          South Asia         East Asia             Australia
               Coeff. t-ratio     Coeff. t-ratio Coeff. t-ratio       Coeff. t-ratio     Coeff. t-ratio     Coeff. t-ratio    Coeff. t-ratio     Coeff. t-ratio       Coeff. t-ratio

σV            -1.045** -10.7      -0.418     -1.2 -2.069** -24.9 -0.481**        -3.7    -0.704*    -2.1   -0.676*    -2.2 -0.854**      -6.3   -0.843**   -9.9       -3.190**    -10.2
EI ×σV
               0.231*     2.3    -0.780*     -2.1                     -0.533**   -3.3 -1.533**      -5.9    0.512      1.5                       0.551      6.0
R-squared       0.859             0.843              0.955             0.759              0.886             0.699              0.856             0.666                  0.803
Sample Size
                 939                62                190               177                52                 64               100                612                        59




                                                                                                                                                                  1
Panel C. Constrained IPP regressions.
              Western Europe     Eastern Europe North America      Latin America     Middle East        Africa          South Asia        East Asia           Australia
               Coeff. t-ratio    Coeff. t-ratio Coeff. t-ratio     Coeff. t-ratio   Coeff. t-ratio   Coeff. t-ratio    Coeff. t-ratio    Coeff. t-ratio     Coeff. t-ratio

σV            3.724**     3.0   21.794**    13.1   0.281*   2.2   29.449** 15.2     0.515**   9.1    9.876    1.3     10.723** 10.4     13.617** 11.4       0.006*   2.1
EI ×σV
              4.864**     3.8   -17.078**   -9.6                  -23.455** -9.6 -0.303**     -6.7   13.505   1.5                       9.176**   7.1
R-squared      0.558              0.928            0.302           0.733             0.716           0.450             0.630             0.639              0.256
Sample Size
                939                62               190             177               52              64                100               612                59




                                                                                                                                                        2
