                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             BANK REGULATION AND SUPERVISION: WHAT WORKS BEST?

                                            James R. Barth
                                           Gerard Caprio, Jr.
                                             Ross Levine

                                          Working Paper 9323
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9323


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2002




This research could not have been completed without the help of Iffath Sharif and Cindy Lee, as well as
financial support from the World Bank. Xin Chen provided extraordinary research assistance. We received
helpful comments from Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, Simeon Djankov, Patrick Honohan, George Kaufman, Soledad
Martinez, Charles Calomiris, Rick Mishkin, Andrei Shleifer, Gerardo Zuniga-Villasenor, Ernst-Ludwig von
Thadden, Mitch Petersen, an anonymous referee, and seminar participants at the Banco Central de Chile, the
BIS, The World Bank’s Annual Bank Conference on Development Economics, Brookings-Wharton Financial
Services Conference, University of Minnesota, The Reserve Bank of Australia, Harvard University, Stanford
University, and University of Michigan. The findings do not necessarily represent the opinions of The World
Bank, its management, the Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by James R. Barth, Gerard Caprio, Jr. and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text,
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including
© notice, is given to the source.
Bank Regulation and Supervision: What Works Best?
James R. Barth, Gerard Caprio, Jr. and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 9323
November 2002
JEL No. G38, G21, L51

                                               ABSTRACT

        This paper uses our new database on bank regulation and supervision in 107 countries to assess
the relationship between specific regulatory and supervisory practices and banking-sector development,
efficiency, and fragility. The paper examines: (i) regulatory restrictions on bank activities and the mixing
of banking and commerce; (ii) regulations on domestic and foreign bank entry; (iii) regulations on capital
adequacy; (iv) deposit insurance system design features; (v) supervisory power, independence, and
resources, (vi) loan classification stringency, provisioning standards, and diversification guidelines; (vii)
regulations fostering information disclosure and privatesector monitoring of banks; and (viii) government
ownership. The results, albeit tentative, raise a cautionary flag regarding government policies that rely
excessively on direct government supervision and regulation of bank activities. The findings instead
suggest that policies that rely on guidelines that (1) force accurate information disclosure, (2) empower
private-sector corporate control of banks, and (3) foster incentives for private agents to exert corporate
control work best to promote bank development, performance and stability.



James R. Barth                     Gerard Caprio, Jr.               Ross Levine
Auburn Unviersity                  World Bank                       Carlson School of Management
and Milken Institute               gcaprio@worldbank.org            University of Minnesota
jbarth@business.auburn.edu                                          321 19th Avenue South
                                                                    Minneapolis, MN 55455
                                                                    and NBER
                                                                    rlevine@csom.umn.edu
I. Introduction

         The staggering scope of recent banking crises coupled with strong evidence on the beneficial
effects of well-functioning banking systems for economic growth underscore current efforts to reform
bank regulation and supervision.1 In January 2001, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision
issued a proposal for a Basel II Capital Accord that, once finalized, will replace the 1988 Basel I
Capital Accord. The proposal is based on three pillars. The first deals with improved minimum bank
capital requirements, the second focuses on better supervisory practices, and the third envisions greater
market discipline through increased information disclosed by banks. Once the Basel Committee
finalizes its list of “best practices” for the regulation and supervision of banks, countries around the
world will be urged to adopt them. The belief is that the banking sectors in countries adopting these
practices will function better, thereby promoting growth and stability.

         Unfortunately, however, there is no evidence: that any universal set of best practices is
appropriate for promoting well-functioning banks; that successful practices in the United States, for
example, will succeed in countries with different institutional settings; or that detailed regulations and
supervisory practices should be combined to produce an extensive checklist of best practices in which
more checks are better than fewer. There is no broad cross-country evidence on which of the many
different regulations and supervisory practices employed around the world work best, if at all, to
promote bank development and stability.

         This paper attempts to help close this gap by examining the relationship between bank
regulation and supervision and bank development, performance and stability using our newly
assembled database. We conducted a survey of national regulatory agencies and obtained information
on numerous bank regulations and supervisory practices in 107 countries. The data, primarily from
1999, are used to assess which regulations and supervisory practices are associated with greater bank
development, better performance, and increased stability as well as those that are not. We specifically
examine regulations on bank activities and the mixing of banking and commerce; regulations on
domestic and foreign bank entry; regulations on capital adequacy; deposit insurance; supervisory
power, independence, and resources; loan classification stringency, provisioning standards,



     1
         On crises, see Caprio and Klingebiel (1999) and Boyd, Kwak and Smith (2000). On growth, see Levine (1997).

                                                                                                                      1
diversification guidelines; regulations fostering information disclosure and private-sector monitoring
of banks; and government ownership of banks. Thus, this paper provides empirical evidence on each of
the three pillars associated with the Basel II Capital Accord.

       Economic theory provides conflicting predictions about the effects of each of these bank
regulations and supervisory practices on bank development, performance, and stability. Some argue,
for example, in favor of restricting banks from participating in securities, insurance, and real estate
activities or from owning nonfinancial firms. They stress that (i) neither private nor official entities can
effectively monitor such complex banks due to informational asymmetries and (ii) both the market and
political power enjoyed by such banks can impede competition and adversely influence policies.
Others argue the opposite, stressing that (i) informational asymmetries are not that great, (ii) potential
adverse spillovers to the entire economy are not sufficient to warrant such restrictions, and (iii) fewer
restrictions allow banks to exploit economies of scale and scope and thereby provide services more
efficiently. An examination of countries with different regulations for bank activities can help resolve
this debate. More generally, we discuss the theoretical predictions surrounding each of the regulations
and supervisory practices noted above in subsequent sections and then empirically examine its
relationship to bank development, performance and stability.

       Theory also provides more subtle predictions about the precise conditions under which
regulations and supervisory practices enhance bank development, performance and stability. Some
models, for instance, predict that the correct answer to the question as to whether countries should
restrict bank activities is “it depends on other policies and institutions.” Boyd, Chang, and Smith
(1998) argue that in a country with generous deposit insurance that intensifies moral hazard problems,
broad banking powers provide excessive opportunities for risk-taking. Thus, they conclude that
restrictions on bank activities enhance social welfare in countries with generous deposit insurance.
Similarly, while capital requirements are the mainstay of current approaches to bank regulation and
supervision, theory predicts that such requirements are particularly beneficial when (i) generous
deposit insurance distorts incentives, (ii) official supervision is weak, and (iii) complex banks are
difficult to monitor. For these reasons, analyses of individual regulations and supervisory practices
should incorporate interaction terms to assess the efficacy of each one in the presence of others. We
describe and empirically examine many of these more subtle predictions.

       We examine an extensive array of regulations and supervisory practices for a broad cross-

                                                                                                             2
section of countries at all levels of development and in all parts of the world. The issues are so
extensive that one may question our expansive approach, preferring more narrowly focused
examinations of individual issues. While recognizing the advantages of tightly focused studies, we
follow the growing literature stressing that the salient issues in bank regulation and supervision are
inextricably interrelated. Thus, there are advantages to examining an array of supervisory and
regulatory policies simultaneously to identify those that enjoy a strong, independent relationship with
financial development and stability. It is perilous, for example, to examine the efficacy of supervisory
practices without accounting for private sector monitoring. It is risky to examine restrictions on bank
securities activities without considering the power of supervisory authorities. As a final example, there
are important shortcomings with examining regulations and supervisory practices without accounting
for the degree of government ownership of banks. Furthermore, given that this paper introduces a new
database on bank regulation and supervision, it is natural to provide a first assessment of which
regulations and supervisory practices are associated with successful outcomes across countries. Thus,
we simultaneously examine the relationships between numerous regulations and supervisory practices
and selected banking-sector outcomes using a broad cross-section of countries.

       There are two particularly important methodological limitations to our study. One limitation is
that we conduct pure cross-country regressions because information on regulations and supervisory
practices is available only for one point in time. A problem with this approach is that it is difficult to
control fully for potential simultaneity bias: banking-sector outcomes may influence regulations and
supervisory practices. We do use instrumental variables to help control for simultaneity bias and these
procedures do pass basic specification tests. Nonetheless, data limitations do not allow us to use time-
series or panel procedures to examine the same relationships using complementary methods. We were
able to collect historical data for a few variables, however, and found very little change over time.
Moreover, controlling for any changes does not alter our findings. The other limitation is that only
aggregate measures of bank performance are used. Nevertheless, we are in the process of
complementing and refining our analyses by employing firm-level, industry-level, and bank-level
datasets and we make our regulation and supervisory available so that others can extend this paper’s
work. Such complementary studies will provide additional insights into the influence of bank
regulatory and supervisory practices on various banking-sector outcomes. Until then, our cross-country
study provides a first, tentative assessment of the relationships between bank development,
performance and stability and the regulation and supervision of banks around the world.

                                                                                                             3
       Before continuing, we note that this paper is naturally related to a long, vast literature on the
overall role of the government in regulating economic activity (Pigou, 1938; Stigler, 1971). Each of the
specific regulatory/supervisory issues noted above could be framed in terms of arguments for greater
government intervention -- and the form that those interventions should take -- and arguments against
direct government interventions. Many arguments in favor of government intervention are Pigouvian:
the existence of monopoly power, externalities, and informational asymmetries create a potentially
constructive role for government interventions to offset these market failures and enhance social
welfare. The Pigouvian view takes as given both that there are market failures and that the government
can and will act to ameliorate those failures. Others disagree. Some argue that market failures are not
very large. Others argue that governments act in their own interests and frequently do not ameliorate
market failures (Shleifer and Vishny, 1998). According to this view, regulations that empower the
private-sector to monitor banks will be more effective than direct government interventions at
enhancing bank performance and stability. Our analyses provide evidence regarding the efficacy of
direct government interventions in the banking sector.

       The paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the theoretical and policy debates
surrounding each of the issues noted earlier. Section III discusses our dataset and some basic
correlations. Section IV presents regression results, while Section V contains conclusions


II. Theoretical and Policy Debates

       This section discusses seven policy issues. For each issue, we: (1) stress the conflicting
theoretical predictions and policy debates, (2) emphasize that specific regulations and supervisory
practices are so inextricably interrelated it is important to examine them simultaneously.


II.A. Regulations on bank activities and banking-commerce links

       There are five main theoretical reasons for restricting bank activities and banking-commerce
links. First, conflicts of interest may arise when banks engage in such diverse activities as securities
underwriting, insurance underwriting, and real estate investment. Such banks, for example, may
attempt to “dump” securities on ill-informed investors to assist firms with outstanding loans [John,
John, and Saunders (1994) and Saunders (1985)]. Second, to the extent that moral hazard encourages
riskier behavior, banks will have more opportunities to increase risk if allowed to engage in a broader


                                                                                                           4
range of activities [Boyd, Chang, and Smith (1998)]. Third, complex banks are difficult to monitor.
Fourth, such banks may become so politically and economically powerful that they become “too big to
discipline.” Finally, large financial conglomerates may reduce competition and efficiency. According
to these arguments, governments can improve banking by restricting bank activities.

       There are alternative theoretical reasons for allowing banks to engage in a broad range of
activities, however. First, fewer regulatory restrictions permit the exploitation of economies of scale
and scope [Claessens and Klingebiel (2000)]. Second, fewer regulatory restrictions may increase the
franchise value of banks and thereby augment incentives for more prudent behavior. Lastly, broader
activities may enable banks to diversify income streams and thereby create more stable banks.

       In an earlier study, we found that greater restrictions are associated: (1) a higher probability of
suffering a major banking crisis, and (2) lower banking-sector efficiency [Barth, Caprio, and Levine,
2001a]. We found no countervailing positive effects. Restricting bank activities were not closely
associated with less concentration, more competition, or greater securities-market development.

       This paper expands and improves on our earlier research. First, we now have regulation and
supervision data for substantially (50%) more countries. Second, we assess whether the positive
association that was found between restrictions and banking crises simply reflected the effects of
significant omitted variables. Countries with more effective supervision, for example, may impose
fewer restrictions. If so, the positive relationship between regulatory restrictions and crises we initially
found might simply reflect the fact that countries with weaker supervision compensate by imposing
more restrictions on bank activities. Also, we assess whether our initial finding of a positive
association between restrictions and crises reflects another omitted variable: the deposit insurance
scheme. Countries with deposit insurance schemes that do not severely distort incentives toward
greater risk-taking may impose fewer restrictions on bank activities. If so, the positive relationship
between restrictions and crises may simply reflect the fact that countries imposing more restrictions do
so to compensate for generous deposit-insurance schemes.




                                                                                                             5
II.B. Regulations on domestic and foreign bank entry

           Economic theory provides conflicting views on the need for and the effect of regulations on
entry into banking. Some argue that effective screening of bank entry can promote stability. Others
stress that banks with monopolistic power possess greater franchise value, which enhances prudent
risk-taking behavior [Keeley (1990)]. Others, of course, disagree, stressing the beneficial effects of
competition and the harmful effects of restricting entry [Shleifer and Vishny, 1998].

          This paper assesses whether greater restrictions on the entry of foreign and domestic banks are
associated with less bank development, worse performance and more fragility. This helps fill a lacuna
because existing cross-country studies do not use direct measures of entry policies.2 Also, we assess
whether the relationship between bank development and competition policies depends on regulatory
restrictions on bank activities, the power and independence of bank supervisory authorities, the deposit
insurance scheme, capital adequacy requirements, the degree of equity market development, and the
extent of government ownership of banks. Our dataset enables us to explore whether the relationships
between competition and bank development, performance, and stability depend on these other factors.


II.C. Regulations on capital adequacy

          Traditional approaches to bank regulation emphasize the positive features of capital adequacy
requirements [Dewatripont and Tirole (1994)]. Capital serves as a buffer against losses and hence
failure. Furthermore, with limited liability, the proclivity for banks to engage in higher risk activities is
curtailed with greater amounts of capital at risk. Capital adequacy requirements, especially with
deposit insurance, play a crucial role in aligning the incentives of bank owners with depositors and
other creditors [Berger, Herring and Szego (1995) and Keeley and Furlong (1990)].

          As reviewed in Santos (2001), however, theory provides conflicting predictions as to whether
the imposition of capital requirements reduces risk-taking incentives. For instance, Koehn and
Santomero (1980), Kim and Santomero (1988), and Blum (1999) argue that capital requirements may
increase risk-taking behavior. Given (i) conflicting theoretical predictions, (ii) Alan Greenspan’s
(1998) view that existing capital requirements are arbitrary and inadequate, and (iii) the controversy
over the attempt to set new risk-based capital requirements in the Basel II Capital Accord, it seems


      2
          It is crucial to focus on entry policies since one may simultaneously observe increasing concentration and

                                                                                                                       6
especially timely and important to examine the association between capital requirements and banking–
sector outcomes across countries.

         This paper examines the relationship between capital regulations and bank development and
stability. Moreover, we do not consider the relationships between capital regulations and banking-
sector outcomes in isolation. We consider counterfactuals in which these relationships may depend on
other regulations and supervisory practices. The degree to which capital requirements are associated
with bank development, performance and fragility, for example, may depend upon the specific features
of any deposit insurance scheme [e.g., Mullins and Pyle, 1994]. The marginal relationship between
capital regulations and bank behavior may also depend importantly on the powers granted supervisors.


II.D. Deposit insurance design

         Countries adopt deposit insurance schemes to prevent widespread bank runs.3 If depositors
attempt to withdraw their funds all at once, illiquid but solvent banks may be forced into insolvency.
To protect payment and credit systems from contagious bank runs, many favor deposit insurance plus
powerful official oversight of banks to augment private-sector monitoring of banks.

         Deposit insurance schemes come at a cost, however. They may encourage excessive risk-taking
behavior, which some believe offsets any stabilization benefits. Yet, many contend that regulation and
supervision can control the moral-hazard problem by designing an insurance scheme that encompasses
appropriate coverage limits, scope of coverage, coinsurance, funding, premia structure, management
and membership requirements.4

         We examine the relationship between deposit insurance and bank development and efficiency
and also assess whether this relationship depends on the extent of capital regulations, official
supervisory powers, regulatory restrictions on bank activities, and on the extent to which private-sector
monitoring of banks is promoted. Recently, Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2002) made a

__________________________________________________________________________
increasing competition [e.g., Boot and Thakor, 1997, 2000; Berger, Demsetz, and Strahan, 1999].
       3
         After the adoption of a national deposit insurance system in the United States in 1934, other countries adopted
explicit systems slowly for the first 30 years, with only 6 being established. Then adoptions accelerated: 22 formal systems
existed by the 50th anniversary of the U.S. system, about 70 systems were in place by the close of 2000, and many other
countries are planning on adopting explicit deposit insurance schemes.
       4
         As Dewatripont and Tirole (1994) show for risk-based capital requirements, it is possible theoretically that risk-
based deposit insurance will induce greater risk-taking. Once the (capital requirement or) risk-based deposit insurance
premia is fixed, bankers may respond by taking greater risk in an attempt to earn their 'required' return.

                                                                                                                           7
substantial contribution to the banking literature by measuring the effects of the design of deposit
insurance on bank fragility.5 Due to data limitations, however, their analysis could not control for other
aspects of regulation and supervision. With our new database, we control for a wide variety of
regulations and supervisory practices in assessing the relationship between deposit insurance and bank
development, performance and fragility.


II.E. Supervision

          Some theoretical models stress the advantages of granting broad powers to supervisors. The
reasons are as follows. First, banks are costly and difficult to monitor. This leads to too little
monitoring of banks, which implies sub-optimal performance and stability. Official supervision can
ameliorate this market failure. Second, because of informational asymmetries, banks are prone to
contagious and socially costly bank runs. Supervision in such a situation serves a socially efficient
role. Third, many countries choose to adopt deposit insurance schemes. This situation: (1) creates
incentives for excessive risk-taking by banks, and (2) reduces the incentives for depositors to monitor
banks. Strong, official supervision under such circumstances can help prevent banks from engaging in
excessive risk-taking behavior and thus improve bank development, performance and stability.

          Alternatively, powerful supervisors may exert a negative influence by using their powers to
benefit favored constituents, attract campaign donations, and extract bribes [Shleifer and Vishny, 1998;
Djankov, et. al., 2002; and Quintyn and Taylor, 2002]. If so, there will be less interest in overcoming
market failures and more interest in seeking personal gain. Powerful supervision under these
circumstances will be positively related to corruption and will not improve bank development,
performance and stability.

          Countries in practice may assign very different priorities to bank supervision. We can use our
database to assess the relationships of official supervisory resources, powers, and independence to
banking-sector outcomes with: (a) the extent of private-sector monitoring, (b) restrictions on bank
activities, and (c) the degree of moral hazard created by deposit insurance schemes. We can also assess
the relationships between loan classification and provisioning policies and bank development,
performance, and stability. Furthermore, we can examine restrictions on international lending that may


      5
         Briefly, they find that high coverage limits and scope, having a funded scheme, and exclusively public-sector
participation and management all positively contribute to the likelihood of a crisis.

                                                                                                                         8
hinder diversification.

       Although these supervisory practices form the core of many recommendations to improve
supervision, this paper provides the first cross-country evidence on which supervisory practices are
positively associated with greater bank development, performance and stability.


II.F. Regulations on private-sector monitoring of banks

       Supervisory agencies may encourage private monitoring. Our data indicate that some
supervisory agencies require banks to obtain certified audits and/or ratings from international-rating
agencies. Some supervisory agencies require banks to produce accurate, comprehensive and
consolidated information on the full range of their activities and risk-management procedures. Some
countries even make bank directors legally liable if information is erroneous or misleading. Also, some
countries credibly impose a “no deposit insurance” policy to stimulate private monitoring.

       There are disagreements about the role of the private sector in monitoring banks. Some
advocate more reliance on private-sector monitoring, expressing misgivings with official supervision
of banks. Recently, for instance, the Shleifer and Vishny (1998) view of government regulations
specifically holds that banks will pressure politicians who, in turn, can unduly influence supervisory
oversight. Furthermore, in some countries, supervisors are not well compensated and hence quickly
move into banking, resulting in a situation in which they may face mixed incentives when it comes to
strictly adhering to the rules. Since supervisors do not have their own wealth invested in banks, they
also have different incentives than private creditors insofar as monitoring and disciplining banks. There
are countervailing arguments, however. Countries with poorly-developed capital markets, accounting
standards, and legal systems may not be able to rely effectively on private monitoring. Furthermore,
the complexity and opacity of banks may make private sector monitoring difficult even in the most
developed economies. From this perspective, therefore, excessively heavy reliance on private
monitoring may lead to the exploitation of depositors and poor bank performance.

       This paper examines the relationships between regulations and supervisory practices designed
to promote private-sector monitoring and bank development, performance, and stability, while
controlling for other regulations and supervisory practices. It also assesses the private-monitoring
relationships in countries with particular types of policies and institutions as will be discussed below.


                                                                                                            9
II.G. Government ownership of banks

       Economists hold different views about the impact of government ownership of banks. One
view holds that governments help overcome capital-market failures, exploit externalities, and invest in
strategically important projects (e.g., Gerschenkron, 1962). According to this view, governments have
adequate information and incentives to promote socially desirable investments.

       Shleifer and Vishny (1998), in contrast, argue that governments do not have sufficient
incentives to ensure socially desirable investments. Government ownership instead politicizes resource
allocation, softens budget constraints, and hinders economic efficiency. Thus, government ownership
facilitates the financing of politically attractive projects, not economically efficient ones.

       In an influential study, LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002) piece together data on
government ownership of banks from an assortment of sources. They find that countries with higher
initial levels of government ownership tend to have subsequently less financial development and
slower economic growth. In a related paper, Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001a) use government
ownership data from Bankscope and find that greater government ownership is generally associated
with less efficient and less well-developed financial systems. The data used in both papers, however,
do not cover all banks operating in a country and the degree of coverage varies across countries.

       We make two improvements to existing studies of government-owned banks. First, we use data
collected from national regulatory agencies. The data cover all banks and the definition of
“government owned” is consistent across countries. Second, we control for differences in regulations
and supervisory practices. Thus, we assess whether government ownership is associated with better
banking-sector outcomes than private ownership with weak regulation and supervision.


III. Data

III.A. Dataset

       We designed and implemented a survey funded by the World Bank to collect information on
bank regulations and supervisory practices for 107 countries. Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001b)
describe the survey questions and data collection process in detail. The completion of the survey
entailed numerous steps: collecting initial survey responses, reconciling conflicting responses from


                                                                                                        10
different officials in the same country, cross-checking the data with a survey by the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency (OCC), which included some overlap in the information requested,
further reconciling any inconsistencies, and checking our data with information collected by the
Institute of International Bankers, and the Financial Stability Forum’s Working Group on Deposit
Insurance, which provided input on the accuracy of responses for deposit insurance schemes. Thus, in
numerous cases, we repeatedly communicated with authorities to obtain accurate information.

        The regulatory and supervisory data are primarily from 1999.6 We frequently group the
responses to individual questions into aggregate indexes that we define below. This paper uses those
countries with more than one million people, but confirms the results when restricting the sample to
countries with more than 200,000 people. We make the data available at the following website:
www.worldbank.org/research/interest/intrstweb.htm.


III.B. Variable Definitions

        Since Table 1 provides information on the data, sources, and specific survey questions used to
construct the variables for this paper, we only briefly define them here in the text.

    1. Bank Activity Regulatory Variables. We measure the degree to which national regulatory
        authorities allow banks to engage in the following three fee-based rather than more traditional
        interest-spread-based activities:
        a. Securities Activities: the ability of banks to engage in the business of securities
           underwriting, brokering, dealing, and all aspects of the mutual fund industry.
        b. Insurance Activities: the ability of banks to engage in insurance underwriting and selling.
        c. Real Estate Activities: the ability of banks to engage in real estate investment,
           development, and management.
    2. Mixing Banking / Commerce Regulatory Variables. We construct two measures of the degree of
        regulatory restrictiveness on the mixing of banking and commerce.
        a. Banks Owning Nonfinancial Firms measures restrictions on the ability of banks to own
           and control nonfinancial firms.
        b. Nonfinancial Firms Owning Banks measures restrictions on the ability of nonfinancial
           firms to own and control banks


6
  Of the 107 responses received, 13 were received in November 1998, 65 were received in 1999, and 29 in 2000, with 19 of
the latter received in either January or February.

                                                                                                                      11
   In addition, we also construct an overall bank restrictiveness variable as follows:

        Restrictions on Bank Activities: includes restrictions on securities, insurance, and real
        estate activities plus restrictions on the banks owning and controlling nonfinancial firms.

3. Competition Regulatory Variables.
   a. Limitations on Foreign Bank Entry/Ownership: whether there are any limitations placed
      on the ownership of domestic banks by foreign banks and whether there are any limitations
      placed on the ability of foreign banks to enter the domestic banking industry. If there are
      any limitations, this variable is assigned a value of 1 and a value of 0 otherwise.
   b. Entry into Banking Requirements: measures the specific legal requirements for obtaining
      a license to operate as a bank.
   c. Fraction of Entry Applications Denied: fraction of applications denied.
        (1) Foreign Denials: fraction of foreign applications denied.
        (2) Domestic Denials: fraction of domestic applications denied.
4. Capital Regulatory Variables. We use three measures of capital regulatory stringency.
   a. Overall Capital Stringency measures the extent of regulatory requirements regarding the
      amount of capital banks must hold.
   b. Initial Capital Stringency measures whether the source of funds that count as regulatory
      capital can include assets other than cash or government securities, borrowed funds, and
      whether the regulatory/supervisory authorities verify the sources of capital.
   c. Capital Regulatory Index incorporates the previous two measures of capital stringency.
5. Official Supervisory Action Variables.
   a. Official Supervisory Power measures the extent to which official supervisory authorities
      have the authority to take specific actions to prevent and correct problems.
   We also decompose this variable into three constituent parts:
       (1) Prompt Corrective Power measures the extent to which the law establishes pre-
           determined levels of bank solvency deterioration that forces automatic enforcement
           actions, such as intervention, and the extent to which supervisors have the requisite,
           suitable powers to do so.
       (2) Restructuring Power measures the extent to which supervisory authorities have the
           power to restructure and reorganize troubled banks.
       (3) Declaring Insolvency Power measures the extent to which supervisory authorities have
           the power to declare a deeply troubled bank insolvent.
   b. Supervisory Forbearance Discretion measures the degree to which supervisory authorities

                                                                                                      12
       may engage in forbearance when confronted with violations of laws or regulations or with
       other imprudent behavior on the part of banks.
   c. Loan Classification Stringency measures the degree to which loans that are in arrears must
       be classified as sub-standard, doubtful, or loss.
   d. Provisioning Stringency measures the degree to which a bank must provision against a loan
       that is classified first as sub-standard, then as doubtful, and lastly as loss.
   e. Diversification Index measures whether regulations support geographical asset
       diversification. It is based on two variables:
       (1) Diversification Guidelines: whether there are there explicit, verifiable, and quantifiable
           guidelines for asset diversification.
       (2) No Foreign Loans: whether banks are prohibited from making loans abroad.
6. Official Supervisory Experience and Structure. We attempt to measure the experience and
    structure of the supervisory regime with the following variables:
   a. Supervisor Tenure: equals the average years of tenure of professional bank supervisors.
   b. Independence of Supervisory Authority-Overall: measures the degree to which the
       supervisory authority is independent.
              1. Independence of Supervisory Authority-Political: measures the degree to
                  which the supervisory authority is independent from the government.
              2. Independence of Supervisory Authority-Banks: measures the degree to which
                  the supervisory authority is independent from lawsuits from banks and others.
   c. Multiple Supervisors: indicates whether there is a single official regulatory of banks, or
      whether multiple supervisor share responsibility for supervising the nation’s banks. This
      variable is assigned a value of 1 if there is more than one supervisor and 0 otherwise.
7. Private Monitoring Variables. We measure private-sector monitoring with four indicators.
   a. Certified Audit Required: This variable captures whether an outside licensed audit is
      required of the financial statements issued by a bank. Such an audit would presumably
      indicate the presence or absence of an independent assessment of the accuracy of financial
      information released to the public.
   b. Percent of 10 Biggest Banks Rated by International Rating Agencies: The percentage of
      the top 10 banks that are rated by international credit-rating agencies. The greater the
      percentage, the more the public may be aware of the overall condition of the banking
      industry as viewed by an independent third party.
   c. No Explicit Deposit Insurance Scheme: takes a value of 1 if there is an explicit deposit
      insurance scheme, and 0 otherwise. Lower values indicate more private monitoring.
   d. Bank Accounting: this variable takes a value of 1 when the income statement includes

                                                                                                   13
               accrued or unpaid interest or principal on nonperforming loans and when banks are required
               to produce consolidated financial statements.
           e. Private Monitoring Index: includes (a), (b) [which equals 1 if the percentage is 100; 0
              otherwise], (c), and (d). In addition, three other measures are included in the index based on
              ‘yes or no’ answers. Specifically, a 1 is assigned if off-balance sheet items are disclosed to
              the public; if banks must disclose risk management procedures to the public; and if
              subordinated debt is allowable (required) as a part of regulatory capital. Higher values
              indicating more private oversight.
     8. Deposit Insurance Scheme Variables. Three variables capture deposit insurance regime:
           a. Deposit Insurer Power: based on the assignment of 1 (yes) or 0 (no) values to three
              questions assessing whether the deposit insurance authority has the authority: (1) to make
              the decision to intervene in a bank, (2) to take legal action against bank directors or
              officials, or (3) has ever taken any legal action against bank directors or officers. The sum
              of the assigned values ranges from 0 to 3, with higher values indicating more power.
           b. Deposit Insurance Funds-to-Total Bank Assets: the size of the deposit insurance fund
              relative to total bank assets. In the case of the U.S. savings and loan debacle during the
              1980s, the insurance agency itself reported insolvency. This severely limited its ability to
              effectively resolve failed savings and loan institutions in a timely manner [Barth (1991)].
           c. Moral Hazard Index: based on Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2002), who used
              principal components to capture the presence and design features of explicit deposit
              insurance systems, with the latter including: no coinsurance, foreign currency deposits
              covered, interbank deposits covered, type of funding, source of funding, management,
              membership, and the level of explicit coverage. Higher values imply greater moral hazard.
     9. Market Structure Indicators
           a. Bank Concentration: the fraction of deposits held by the five largest banks.
           b. Foreign-Owned Banks: fraction of system’s assets that are 50% or more foreign owned.
           c. Government-Owned Banks: fraction of system’s assets 50% or more government owned.
       10. Outcomes:7
           a. Bank Development: equals claims on the private sector by deposit money banks as a share
              of GDP and is the average value over the 1997-99 period.8
           b. Net Interest Margin: equals net interest income divided by total assets, 1997.
           c. Overhead Costs: equals total bank overhead costs as a share of total banks assets, 1997.


7
 For bank development, we update Levine, Loayza, and Beck, (2000). The net interest margin and overhead cost variables
are from Beck, Demirgüç-Kunt, and Levine (2001). Nonperforming loans are from this paper’s survey.
8
    We average over the 1997-99 period to smooth business cycle fluctuations and obtain the same results using 1999 data.

                                                                                                                            14
       d. Nonperforming Loans: nonperforming loans as a share of total assets, 1999.
       e. Crisis: whether a country suffered a major banking crisis according to Caprio-Klingebiel
          (1999) during the 1990s or late 1980s.

III.C. Indexes
       We use two methods to construct indexes of regulations and supervisory practices that
incorporate the answers to several questions from our survey, with the specific questions listed in
Table 1. First, many of the questions can be specified as simple zero/one variables. Thus, our first
method simply sums the individual zero/one answers. This method gives equal weight to each of the
questions in constructing the index. The second method involves the construction of the first principal
component of the underlying questions. In constructing this component, the factor analytic procedure
produces a principal component with mean zero and standard deviation one. An advantage of this
method is that equal weights for the individual questions are not specified. A disadvantage is that it is
less transparent how a change in the response to a question changes the index.

       We only report the results using the principal component indexes. Nevertheless, we have
confirmed all this paper’s conclusions using both methods.


III.D. Summary Statistics

       There is great cross-country, cross-regional, and cross-income group diversity in bank
regulatory and supervisory practices. For instance, many countries - such as Australia, Austria,
Germany, India, Russia, the United Kingdom, and Zambia - impose no restrictions on the ability of
banks to engage in securities activities (Securities Activities). In contrast, Cambodia, China, and
Vietnam prohibit banks or their subsidiaries from conducting securities activities. More generally,
poorer countries place tighter restrictions on bank activities than richer countries. Also, some countries
during the year prior to the survey had no new banks, including Chile, Egypt, Korea, and Gambia.
Other countries had more than 25 new banks, such as the United States, Italy, India, Switzerland,
Netherlands, Japan, Germany, and Romania. Barth, Caprio, and Levine (2001b) illustrate additional
cross-country differences.

       This paper’s main messages are contained in Table 2’s correlations. These are as follows:

       First, the percentage of the banking system owned by the government (Government-Owned


                                                                                                        15
Banks) is positively associated with tighter restrictions on bank activities (Restrictions on Bank
Activities), positively associated with the percentage of entry applications denied (Entry Applications
Denied), positively associated with prohibitions against making foreign loans (No Foreign Loans), and
negatively associated with regulatory variables that promote private monitoring of banks (Private
Monitoring Index). Thus, greater government ownership is associated with policies that restrict bank
activities, reduce bank competition, erect barriers to international financial integration, and impede
private-sector corporate control of banks. Such ownership is not associated with either stricter capital
regulations (Capital Regulatory Index) or greater prompt corrective power (Prompt Corrective Power
Index).

          Second, we do not observe the simple regulatory/supervisory tradeoffs stressed by many
 theoretical models. For instance, we expected to find that countries that adopt generous deposit
 insurance regimes (high values of the Moral Hazard Index) would also have powerful official
 supervisors, extensive prompt corrective powers, stringent capital requirements, extensive private
 monitoring, and perhaps greater restrictions on bank activities to ameliorate the bad incentives
 associated with generous deposit insurance. We did not confirm these expectations, however.
 Although the generosity of the deposit insurance regime is significantly correlated with the stringency
 of capital regulations, it is not significantly correlated with indexes of Prompt Corrective Power,
 Official Supervisory Power, Private Monitoring, or Restrictions on Bank Activities. Similarly, we did
 not find that countries with higher levels of the Private Monitoring Index had correspondingly lower
 levels of Official Supervisory Power.

           Third, while not uniform, the correlations suggest that countries tend to take either an open,
   private-sector oriented approach to regulation and supervision, or a more closed, government-
   controlled approach. Thus, the Private Monitoring Index is negatively associated with the Entry into
   Banking Requirements Index, Restrictions on Bank Activities, and Government Ownership. In turn,
   the Entry Applications Denied is positively associated with Restrictions on Bank Activity and No
   Foreign Loans.

           Fourth, the correlations are consistent with the view that countries with more open, private-
   sector-oriented approaches to regulation and supervision tend to have greater bank development,
   better performance and more stable banks. Specifically, better developed banks as measured by
   greater Bank Development are associated with higher levels of the Private Monitoring Index, fewer

                                                                                                            16
     Restrictions on Bank Activities, less Prompt Corrective Power by supervisors, and lower levels of
     Government Ownership. Similarly, more efficient banking systems (as measured by lower levels of
     the Net Interest Margin index) are associated with higher levels of the Private Monitoring Index,
     fewer Restrictions on Bank Activities, and lower levels of Government Ownership. We also find
     that bank Overhead Costs are negatively correlated with (i) ease of bank entry (Entry into Banking
     Requirements Index), (ii) greater Private Monitoring, and (iii) less Government Ownership. Finally,
     Major Banking Crises are much more frequent in countries with generous deposit insurance (Moral
     Hazard Index) and extensive government ownership of the banking industry.

           Fifth, the correlations are consistent with the view that government corruption (lower levels of
    Government Integrity) tends to be higher in countries where the government plays a large role in
    supervising, regulating, and owning banks. In particular, corruption is associated with powerful
    official supervision (Official Supervisory Power), weak private-sector monitoring, limited entry
    (Entry Applications Denied), restricted foreign loans, high levels of government ownership of banks,
    restricted bank activities, and weak capital regulations.9

           These correlation results are informative but due to their bivariate nature they do not control
    for other aspects of regulation and supervision. We therefore explore whether these relationships
    change when simultaneously including a variety of regulations and supervisory practices.


IV. Regression Results

IV.A. Banking sector outcomes and regulation / supervision: Multivariate Analyses

           Tables 3 and 4 present our basic regression results when simultaneously including a wide
    range of bank regulation/supervision indicators. There are two types of regressions. First, we use
    ordinary least squares regressions to examine the relationships between bank outcomes and bank
    regulation and supervision. In these regressions, we regress each of the four outcome variables (Bank



9
 Note, in early versions of this paper, we examined whether particular types of regulations and supervisory practices are
positively associated with government corruption. We did indeed find a very strong, positive relationship between
corruption and countries with powerful supervisory agencies, tight restrictions on bank activities, entry barriers that limit
competition and a negative relationship between corruption and countries that promote private-sector monitoring of banks
when (i) controlling for many other country characteristics and (ii) using instrumental variables, but do not pursue this line
of investigation here because it is tangential to the paper’s main message.

                                                                                                                            17
     Development, Net Interest Margin, Overhead Costs, and Nonperforming Loans) on various
     supervisory and regulatory indicators. Since La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998)
     find that legal origin helps account for cross-country differences in financial development, we also
     include legal origin dummy variables as exogenous control variables. The legal origin variables
     jointly enter all of the Table 3 regressions significantly. The results do not depend on including these
     controls, however. Moreover we obtain the same results when controlling for religious composition
     and latitudinal distance from the equator, which some theories suggest influence financial
     development (Stulz and Williamson, 2002; Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine, 2002).10

           Second, Table 4 presents logit regressions that examine the relationships between banking
crises and bank regulation and supervision. Since many consider macroeconomic instability to be an
important determinant of banking crises, we include the average inflation rate during the five years
prior to the crisis in countries that experienced a banking crisis. In countries that did not, we include
the average inflation rate during the five years prior to the survey, 1993-1997. In many cases, we
include interaction terms to examine whether the association of one regulatory or supervisory indicator
with bank stability depends on other aspects of regulation and supervision.

           We organize the discussion around each of the specific issues discussed in Section II.
Furthermore, in each case, we focus on only one or two key regulatory/supervisory variables. For
example, when discussing banking powers, we focus on Restrictions on Bank Activities, which is an
aggregate measure of restrictions on bank activities. Nevertheless, we examined each of the
components of the indexes (see Appendix available on request). In cases where the individual
components produce different results from the aggregate index, we discuss these below.




10
  There are five possible legal origins: English Common Law, French Civil Law, German Civil Law, Scandinavian Civil
Code, and Socialist/Communist Law. To assess whether there is an independent association between bank
development/performance and bank regulations and supervisory practices, we include dummy variables for each country’s
legal origin (except the Scandinavian law countries). Legal origin is the source of the Company Law or Commercial Code
for each country. Note, due to data limitations, there are some regressions in which there are no Socialist legal origin
countries. To measure religious composition, we the measure of the percentage of the population in each country that is
Roman Catholic, Protestant, Muslim, or belongs to “other denominations.” The numbers are in percent and sum to 100 (so
we omit Protestant from the regressions). Latitude is measured as the (absolute value) of the latitudinal distance from the
equator.

                                                                                                                         18
1. Regulations on bank activities and mixing banking-commerce

       Table 3 indicates that restricting bank activities is negatively associated with bank
development, but there is not a robust link between regulatory restrictions on bank activities and net
interest margins or overhead costs. The negative association between restrictions on bank activities and
bank development holds while controlling for capital regulations, official supervisory power, the
private-monitoring index, regulations on the entry of banks, and government ownership of banks. Bank
development is a particularly important indicator because it is positively associated with economic
growth (King and Levine, 1993a,b; Levine and Zervos, 1998; Levine, Loayza, and Beck, 2000).

       The size of the coefficient is economically large. For instance, the coefficients suggest that in a
country like Egypt that imposes tight restrictions on bank activities (i.e., its value is more than one
standard deviation above the mean, 1.2) a loosening of these restrictions to the sample mean (0) is
associated with an increase in bank development of 0.14(=1.2*0.118). This means Egypt’s bank
development increases from 0.49 to 0.63, which is about the level in Italy (whose restrictions index
equals the mean). We do not present this as an exploitable policy experiment but rather as an indicator
of the economic size of the coefficient. We also examine the individual components of the aggregate
Restrictions on Bank Activities index. The results indicate that restricting banks from engaging in
securities activities is strongly, negatively associated with bank development.

       The results also indicate that restricting bank activities is associated with an increase in the
likelihood of suffering a major crisis (Table 4). In the full sample, we find a weak, positive relationship
between the likelihood of a crisis and restricting bank activities (Regression 1). The ability of banks to
stabilize income flows by diversifying activities, however, may only work in countries with sufficient
securities market development. When restricting the sample to countries for which the World Bank has
been able to collect at least some data on stock market transactions, we find that greater regulatory
restrictions are indeed strongly, positively associated with the likelihood of suffering a crisis
(Regression 2). The other regressions in Table 4 do not restrict the sample. Somewhat anomalously,
regulatory restrictions on bank activities are not positively associated with non-performing loans.
While diversifying across non-loan making activities is positively associated with bank stability (Table
4), diversification into non-loan making lines of business does not translate into higher quality loans
(Table 3). In sum, while recognizing this result on non-performing loans, the crisis regressions are
consistent with the view that diversification of income through nontraditional activities is positively

                                                                                                          19
associated with bank stability, especially in economies with active nonbank-financial markets.11

         We examine whether restricting bank activities and the mixing of banking and commerce is
associated with positive outcomes under specific conditions. For example, Boyd, Chang, and Smith’s
(1998) model predicts that restricting bank activities may reduce financial fragility in the presence of
generous deposit insurance. Thus, we entered an interaction term into the regressions in Table 3 and
Table 4 that equals Restrictions on Bank Activities * Moral Hazard Index, where Moral Hazard Index
is the Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2002) measure of deposit insurance generosity. The
conclusions do not change. Restrictions on Bank Activities retains its negative association with bank
development, and its positive association with the likelihood of a crisis, while the interaction term is
not significant. Similarly, some argue that in weak institutional environments – environments where
the public sector lacks the ability to monitor banks (either because of weak Official Supervisory
Powers, absence of Prompt Corrective Powers, or insufficient Capital Regulations) - it is important to
restrict bank activities. When we include interaction terms for these variables, we again find no support
for this contention.12 We do not find any support for more subtle theories regarding the efficacy of
restricting bank activities. Thus, the bank fragility results remain broadly consistent with the view that
there are diversification benefits from allowing banks to engage in non-traditional activities. These
conclusions must be tempered, however, by the fact that with such diversification one would have
expected to find a positive correlation between restrictions on bank activities and both overhead costs
and nonperforming loans. But this is not the case (Table 3).




11
  We collected historical data on restrictions on bank activities. For each country that experienced a major banking crisis,
we identified the country’s policies toward bank activities prior to the crisis. Using pre-crisis policies strengths this paper’s
conclusions. The vast majority of countries that experienced a crisis did not change their policies. In the few cases that did
change, virtually all of them changed toward removing restrictions on bank activities after the crisis. Thus, using current
observations biases the results against those that we report (Barth, Caprio, and Levine, 2001a).
12
  We also experimented with an interaction term that equals Restrictions on Bank Activities * Corrupt. The reason is that
some may argue that in corrupt environments it is important to limit the range of permissible bank activities. Our results do
not support this suspicion. We continue to find a negative association between Restrictions on Bank Activities and both
bank performance and stability when including Restrictions on Bank Activities*Corrupt, with this interaction term entering
insignificantly. All these results are in an Appendix that is available upon request.

                                                                                                                               20
2. Regulations on domestic and foreign bank entry

         Table 3 indicates that tighter restrictions on entry into banking are positively associated with
overhead costs, but there is not a significant link between entry restrictions on net interest margins.
Furthermore, the relationship between overhead costs and restricting entry is economically small. For
instance, a one standard deviation increase in the Entry into Banking Requirements Index is associated
with an increase in Overhead Costs of only 0.003 (=1*0.003), which is small insofar as the mean value
is 0.039 and the standard deviation is 0.023.13

         Table 4 indicates that in several regressions the likelihood of a major banking crisis is
positively associated with greater Limitations on Foreign Bank Entry/Ownership. We find that foreign-
bank ownership per se is not associated with the likelihood of a crisis. Rather, it is limitations on
foreign-bank entry and ownership that are positively associated with bank fragility.

         We examine whether restricting bank entry is associated with favorable outcomes in particular
environments. Specifically, we assess whether there are positive associations between bank outcomes
and restricting bank entry - both domestic and foreign bank entry - with weak official supervision. We
examine the following interaction terms: (Entry into Banking Regulations)*(Official Supervisory
Power), (Limitations on Foreign Bank Entry/Ownership)*(Entry into Banking Regulations), and
(Limitations on Foreign Bank Entry/Ownership)*(Official Supervisory Power). We find no evidence
of favorable relationships between restricting bank entry and bank development, performance or
stability under any of these conditions.


3. Regulations on capital adequacy

         Table 3’s results do not suggest a strong, independent relationship between capital regulatory
stringency and bank development, net interest margins, or overhead cost when controlling for other
regulations and supervisory practices. While capital stringency is positively correlated with bank
development (Table 2), this relationship is not robust to controlling for other supervisory and
regulatory policies. In terms of bank stability, there is a significantly negative relationship between


13
  Note, although regulatory restrictions on competition are significantly positively associated with overhead costs, we did
not find a significant relationship between overhead costs and the actual level of bank concentration. Specifically, when we
include bank concentration in the Table 3 regressions instead of the Entry into Banking Requirements Index, bank
concentration is not significantly associated with overhead costs.

                                                                                                                          21
capital stringency and nonperforming loans. However, when examining banking crises, there are some
specifications in which capital stringency enters with a negative and significant coefficient (Table 4).
Yet, alterations in the conditioning information set suggest that this relationship is not very robust.
Thus, the evidence is somewhat mixed. While more stringent capital regulations are associated with
fewer nonperforming loans, capital stringency is not robustly linked with banking crises or bank
development or efficiency when controlling for other supervisory/ regulatory policies.

        As we discussed above, there is a rich theoretical literature on bank capital requirements
indicating that particular settings influence their desirability and effect. Consequently, we also examine
whether more stringent requirements are positively associated with favorable banking-sector outcomes
in particular regulatory/supervisory environments. In particular, strict capital adequacy regulations may
be especially important in countries with generous deposit insurance schemes. We find no evidence for
the proposition that capital regulations ameliorate the risk-taking incentives produced by generous
deposit insurance (see regression 9, Table 4). Similarly, capital regulations may be especially
important in countries with weak Official Supervisory Powers, or a regulatory environment that does
not spur Private Monitoring. Yet, when we include these interaction terms, we find no evidence for
these more subtle theories of the effectiveness of capital regulation.

        These results do not suggest that bank capital is unimportant for bank fragility. They do,
however, suggest that there is not a strong relationship between the stringency of official capital
requirements and the likelihood of a crisis after controlling for other features of the regulatory and
supervisory regime. These results may help inform the evolution of the Basel II Capital Accord.


4. Deposit insurance design

        We find a positive association between the generosity of the deposit insurance scheme and
bank fragility (Table 4). This is consistent with recent work by Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache
(2002). The positive relationship, moreover, is robust to alterations in the control variables as we show
below. This result is consistent with the view that deposit insurance not only substantially aggravates
moral hazard but also produces deleterious effects on bank stability.14




14
  We examined the link between the moral hazard index and bank development, though this is not shown in Table 3 to save
space. We did not find a strong association between the generosity of the deposit insurance system (Moral Hazard Index)

                                                                                                                    22
         Importantly, Demirgüç-Kunt and Detragiache (2002) use annual data to show that deposit
insurance generosity predicts future banking crises. They, however, were unable to control for other
features of the regulatory/supervisory environment because these data were unavailable. We find that
deposit insurance generosity is positively associated with the likelihood of a crisis while controlling for
many features of regulation and supervision. Given that we do not have time-series data, however, we
are not able to assess whether deposit insurance generosity predicts future banking crises.

         The relationship between deposit insurance and bank fragility is economically large. For
instance, using regression 3 (Table 4) we can compute the drop in the probability of a banking crisis
for Mexico. When its quite generous deposit insurance scheme (3.9) is reduced to the sample mean of
0, then Mexico’s probability of a crisis falls by 12 percentage points, using Mexico’s values for all the
variables in regression 3. Again, we stress that our study does not identify an exploitable relationship.
This illustrative example simply confirms the Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2002) conclusion that
the adverse incentive effects created by generous schemes may be economically substantial.

         Some suggest that strong official oversight and stringent capital requirements can mitigate the
moral hazard created by a generous deposit insurance scheme. Others disagree, believing these do not
work. We find that official supervisory power and tighter capital regulations do not mitigate the
negative relationship between generous deposit insurance and bank fragility (Table 4). However,
better-developed private property rights - as proxied by greater adherence to the rule of law (Rule of
Law) – and greater political openness (Political Openness) do mitigate the negative association of
moral hazard and bank fragility.15 It is worth noting, however, that the generosity of deposit insurance
is positively associated with the probability of suffering a crisis even in countries with the highest Rule
of Law values (e.g., the cross-over point is Rule of Law =7.4, but the maximum Rule of Law value is
6). Thus, while greater Rule of Law reduces the negative association of generous deposit insurance, it
does not eliminate it. Furthermore, while many stress tighter official supervision and more stringent
capital requirements as the antidote to generous deposit insurance, we find little evidence to support
this advice.


__________________________________________________________________________
and bank development or efficiency. Later, when using instrumental variables, we present these results (Table 5).
15
  The Rule of Law is an indicator of the degree to which the country adheres to the rule of law. It ranges from 0 to 6 with
higher values indicating greater confidence in the legal system to settle disputes. It is obtained from the International
Country Risk Guide and is averaged over 1990-1999.

                                                                                                                          23
5. Supervision

         We do not find a strong association between bank development and performance and official
supervisory power (see Table 3). Specifically, the overall official supervisory power indicator is not
related to bank development or bank efficiency or the level of nonperforming loans. Declaring
insolvency power is also unrelated to development or efficiency. The prompt corrective power
indicator is negatively related to bank development (but these results are not robust to changes in the
conditioning information set or to controlling for the degree of political openness).16 There is also
some weak evidence that supervisory forbearance discretion is positively related to bank efficiency
(but this is not robust either). There is, however, a positive association between supervisory tenure and
bank development. Supervisory independence, loan classification stringency, liquidity requirements,
diversification guidelines, and restrictions on making loans abroad are not related to bank development
or efficiency or the level of nonperforming loans. In sum, those features that constitute official “core”
supervision are not strongly associated with bank development, bank efficiency, and the level of
nonperforming loans in a convincing manner.

         In terms of banking crises, the same basic message emerges with only one exception (Table 4).
Official supervisory powers – and the assortment of Official Supervisory Action Variables and Official
Supervisory Experience and Structure Variables defined above – are not statistically related to the
probability of suffering a systemic crisis.

         The one exception involves the diversification index (which aggregates diversification
guidelines and the absence of restrictions on making loans abroad). There is a negative relationship
between the diversification index and the likelihood of suffering a major crisis in small economies.


16
  Additional results, available upon request, indicate that Official Supervisory Power has less of a negative relationship to
bank development in politically open economies (i.e., those countries is which the government does not repress the media
and there is greater private-sector ownership of the media). The results imply that in a country like Korea with an
intermediate level of political openness (Political Openness is approximately 0), a one standard deviation increase in
Official Supervisory Power would be associated with a decrease in bank development of 0.09 (=1*0.092). This is a large
enough change to move from Korea’s high level of bank development (0.73) down toward that of Chile’s (0.63), which is
near the sample average. In contrast, the same increase in official supervisory power in France (where the Political
Openness variable equals 2.7) would actually be associated with an increase in bank development, +0.07 (= -0.09*1 +
0.06*2.7*1). Thus, official supervisory power is particularly harmful to bank development in countries with closed political
systems. This raises a cautionary flag toward current efforts by international financial institutions to boost supervisory
power in developing countries. However, Political Openness does not mitigate the pernicious effect of any of the other
regulatory/supervisory variables, such as Restrictions on Bank Activities, Prompt Corrective Action Power, No Foreign
Loans, or Government Ownership of Banks. The political openness variable is based on the openness of the media, both
print and broadcast.

                                                                                                                          24
Specifically, we include the diversification index and an interaction term. The interaction term equals
the diversification index multiplied by the logarithm of real per capita GDP in 1995 (these are
Purchasing Power Parity adjusted figures from the Penn World Tables.). As shown in Table 4,
diversification is negatively associated with the likelihood of a crisis but diversification guidelines
have less of a stabilizing effect in bigger countries. The cut-off is high; diversification guidelines have
stabilizing effects in all but the nine largest countries.

        One may, of course, argue that we do not have sufficiently detailed information on: (a)
regulations and supervisory practices, (b) their actual implementation (except that independence may
proxy for the vigor with which policies are implemented), or (c) the transparency and accountability of
the regulatory/supervisory process to evaluate cross-country differences in regulation and supervision.
While sympathetic to this criticism, we do note that this paper’s data on regulations and supervisory
practices is more extensive than any existing study. Thus, while by no means definitive, these initial
findings augment our understanding of the relationships between bank supervision and regulation and
banking sector development, performance, and stability.


6. Regulations on easing private-sector monitoring of banks

        Private monitoring is strongly, positively associated with bank development and negatively
associated with net interest margins and the level of nonperforming loans (Table 3). While private
monitoring is negatively correlated with overhead costs (Table 2), the link between private monitoring
and overhead costs is not robust to controlling for other regulatory and supervisory policies (Table 3).
The relationship between bank development and private monitoring seems economically large. For
instance, a one standard deviation increase in the Private Monitoring Index in a country like
Bangladesh with both weak private monitoring and low bank development (0.28), is associated with an
increase in bank development of about 32% (= (0.09*1/0.28)*100). We again stress the purely
illustrative nature of this experiment. There is a negative association between private monitoring and
overhead costs, but it becomes insignificant when controlling for government ownership.

        In terms of crises, there is no significant association between private-sector monitoring and the
likelihood of a banking crisis when controlling for other variables (Table 4). Since capital regulations
are a possible vehicle for encouraging prudent behavior by banks, we decided to exclude the capital
regulation index from the crisis regressions. Eliminating this index does not change the results,

                                                                                                          25
however. This finding is contrary to predictions about the positive role of private-sector monitoring in
fostering banking stability and a puzzle given the positive link between private-sector monitoring and
banking sector development (Table 3).

        The results are consistent with view that those countries facilitating private-sector monitoring
of banks have better performing banks than those less focused on empowering private-sector corporate
control of banks. This is consistent with the goal of the third pillar in the Basel II Capital Accord.
However, we did not find a robust link between private-sector monitoring and bank fragility. While
recognizing this puzzle, the results, taken together with those of official supervisory power, are less
consistent with theories emphasizing direct government oversight and more consistent with theories
emphasizing private-sector corporate control.


7. Government ownership of banks

        Table 3 indicates that government ownership is positively related to the level of nonperforming
loans but not robustly linked with the other indicators of bank development and performance when
controlling for bank regulation and supervision. We also do not find a strong, positive relationship
between government ownership and the likelihood of a crisis (Table 4). These results do not confirm
those in Caprio and Martinez (2000), who find that government ownership is significantly associated
with increases in bank fragility using panel data. Due to data limitations, they are unable to control for
other features of regulation and supervision. In contrast to their work, however, while we control for
other features, we have only examined cross-country relationships because we do not have time-series
observations on the regulatory and supervisory variables.

        Overall, we do not find that greater government ownership of banks is associated with lower
banking sector development, efficiency, and stability when controlling for the regulatory and
supervisory environment (Table 3). We do, however, find a strong negative correlation between
government ownership and bank development, efficiency, and stability (Table 2).17 These results
suggest that the bank regulations and supervisory practices are closely associated with the degree of
government ownership of banks. Thus, when we include regulations and supervisory practices



17
  Note, in a simple regression of bank development or efficiency on government ownership while controlling for the legal
origins dummy variables, government ownership enters significantly.

                                                                                                                       26
together in the same regression with government ownership, the induced multi-collinearity produces
insignificant coefficients on government ownership. This is supported by our earlier finding that
government ownership is positively associated with tighter restrictions on bank activities, restrictions
on bank entry, prohibitions on foreign loans, and negatively associated with private-monitoring.


IV.B. Bank development and regulation / supervision: Causality Issues

       The empirical results from the simple correlations and multivariate regressions do not control
for the potential endogeneity of bank regulations and supervisory practices. To control for potential
simultaneity bias, we use instrumental variables to identify the exogenous component of supervision
and regulation. Given the paucity of instruments and the extensive list of regulations and supervisory
practices examined, we consider each regulatory and supervisory sequentially. That is, instead of the
multivariate analyses presented in Table 3, we regress bank development on each regulatory and
supervisory indicator while instrumenting for the regulation or supervision indicator.

       To select instrumental variables for the regulatory and supervisory variables, we use theory and
recent empirical work. First, some argue that religious composition may shape governmental
approaches to regulation and supervision. According to Landes (1998), the Catholic and Muslim
religions tend to generate hierarchical bonds of authority that shape the structure of government
institutions. Stulz and Williamson (2002) provide empirical support for this view. Thus, we include
measures of religious composition as instrumental variables. Second, as discussed and tested in Beck,
Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2002) and Easterly and Levine (2002), some argue that countries in poor
climates – tropical climates – tend to produce exploitative political regimes that gear governmental
institutions toward protecting a small elite. Thus, endowments may influence a broad array of
institutions, including bank regulatory and supervisory institutions. We use latitudinal distance from
the equator an instrument. Finally, legal origin variables are included as instruments. LLSV (1998)
argue that civil law and socialist law countries will tend to support stronger governments relative to
private property to a greater degree than common law countries. Thus, legal origin may also influence
a country’s approach to bank regulation and supervision. These instrumental variables are defined
above. Critically, the first stage regressions always reject the null hypothesis that they do not explain
any of the cross-country variation in the regulatory and supervisory variables. Thus, these instrumental
variables explain cross-country variation in bank regulations and supervisory practices.


                                                                                                            27
       Testing the validity of the instruments is crucial to ascertaining the consistency of the
parameter estimates. Specifically, we use a generalized method of moments (GMM) estimator (Two-
stage least squares produce the same results) that is robust to heteroskedasticity. The GMM estimator
amounts to imposing the set orthogonality conditions that the instrumental variables are uncorrelated
with the error term. The economic meaning of these conditions is that the instrumental variables only
affect the dependent variable through the explanatory variables. In the context of the Table 5
regressions, this implies that the instrumental variables affect bank development only through the bank
regulatory/supervisory variables. We test this condition. The Hansen (1982) test of the
overidentifying restrictions (OIR-test) assesses whether the instrumental variables are associated with
bank development beyond their ability to explain bank regulations or supervisory practices. The test
statistic is simply the sample size times the value attained for the objective function at the GMM
estimate. Under the null hypothesis that the instruments are not correlated with the error term, the test
is distributed as χ2 with degrees of freedom equal to the number instruments minus the number of
regressors. If the data do not reject the null hypothesis– if the specification passes the OIR-test – then
the data do not reject the validity of the instrumental variables. That is, failure to reject the OIR-test
implies a failure to reject the estimated coefficient on bank regulation/supervision as indicating an
effect running from bank regulation/supervision to bank development.

       Table 5 presents the instrumental variable results. They confirm three major findings from
Table 3’s ordinary least squares multivariate analysis: (a) restrictions on bank activities are negatively
associated with bank development, (b) regulations that boost private monitoring are positively
associated with bank development, and (c) the Official Supervisory Power index is not significantly
linked with bank development. Furthermore, the regressions do not reject the test of the over-
identifying restrictions; thus, the data do not reject the validity of the instruments. Also, the
instruments significantly account for cross-country variation in the supervisor/regulatory indicators in
the first-stage regressions. When moving from the multivariate approach that simultaneously controls
for many regulatory/supervisory features to the bivariate, instrumental variable analyses in Table 5,
some differences emerge. Table 5 indicates that when we do not control for many
regulatory/supervisory characteristics, we find that (1) limitations on foreign bank entry and the more
frequently denial of entry applications are associated with poor bank development, (2) more stringent
capital requirements are associated with higher levels of bank development, (3) prompt corrective
action power, restrictions on foreign loans, and government ownership of bank are all negatively

                                                                                                             28
associated with bank development.18 These results emphasize that regulation/supervision cannot be
taken in isolation. In terms of the stringency of capital requirements, Table 5 indicates a positive link
between capital requirements and bank development when not controlling for other policies. However,
the (a) positive correlation between capital requirements and regulations that promote private-sector
monitoring and the (b) negative correlation between capital requirements and restrictions on bank
activities (Table 2) imply that the stringency of capital regulations do not enjoy an independent link
with bank development when controlling for these other policies (Table 3). More broadly, government
ownership of banks is positively associated with the restrictions on the denial of entry into banking and
prohibitions on making loans abroad and negatively associated with regulations that foster private-
monitoring (Table 2), so that government ownership does not enter into the multivariate regression
significantly (Table 4) but does enter the bivariate regression significantly (Table 5).

         Thus, this attempt to control for simultaneity does not substantively alter the tentative
interpretation of our findings: countries that adopt an approach to bank regulation and supervision that
spurs private-sector monitoring enjoy greater bank development than those that adopt an approach that
stresses official restrictions on banks, powerful official oversight of banks, or government ownership
of banks. We recognize, however, that the power of the OIR-test is weak because it is based on a
failure to reject a null hypothesis. Thus, we believe that future microeconomic-based evidence that (a)
more powerfully deals with simultaneity and (b) provides more precise measures of bank performance
will greatly enhance our understanding of the causal relationship between bank regulation and
supervision and banking sector outcomes.




18
  Note, the differences between the bivariate, instrumental variable results in Table 5 and the multivariate OLS results in
Table 3 are due to the change from a multivariate to a bivariate set-up. In particular, applying OLS instead of instrumental
variables to Table 5 produces very similar results to those reported in Table 3 (available on request). Thus, the differences
between Table 3 and 5 reflects the simultaneous inclusion of many regulatory/supervisory variables.

                                                                                                                           29
V. Conclusions

       This paper examines the relationships between a broad array of bank regulations and
supervisory practices and bank development, performance and stability. We conduct this analysis using
our unique cross-country database that allows us to assess these interconnected relationships
simultaneously. Although causality issues remain, the paper nonetheless provides some new, tentative
empirical evidence on a range of contentious policy issues and theoretical debates.

       First, restricting bank activities is negatively associated with bank development and stability, as
compared to when banks can diversify into other financial activities. While theory provides conflicting
predictions about the implications of restricting the range of bank activities, the results are consistent
with the view that broad banking powers allow banks to diversify income sources and enhance
stability. As noted, restrictions on bank activities are not positively associated with non-performing
loans. While diversifying across non-loan making activities is not associated with higher loan quality,
the results are consistent with the view that diversification of income through nontraditional activities
is positively associated with bank stability. This finding, moreover, does not appear to be due to
reverse causality, though much more work needs to be done in this regard. Furthermore, since we
control for official supervisory practices, capital regulations, regulations on competition, government
ownership of banks, and the moral hazard engendered by generous deposit insurance schemes, the
negative relationship between restricting bank activities and bank development and stability does not
seem to be due to an obvious omitted variable. Furthermore, we find no evidence that restricting bank
activities is positively associated with favorable banking-sector outcomes in particular
regulatory/supervisory environments. Specifically, we do not find positive relationships between bank
development or stability and restrictions on bank activities in economies that offer more generous
deposit insurance, have weak official supervision, ineffective incentives for private monitoring, or that
lack stringent capital standards. These results must be qualified, however. We do not find that
restricting bank activities is positively associated with overhead costs or nonperforming loans.

       Second, although we do not find a strong association between restrictions on bank entry and
bank efficiency, the results indicate that barriers to foreign-bank entry are positively associated with
bank fragility. Critically, it is not the actual level of foreign presence (or bank concentration) that
matters. Instead, it is specific impediments to bank entry that are associated with bank fragility.
Finally, even when using interaction terms for numerous institutional, regulatory, and policy

                                                                                                             30
environments, we were not able to identify conditions that produced a positive relationship between
restrictions on bank entry and banking sector outcomes.

       Third, while the stringency of capital regulations is positively correlated with bank
development, stringent capital regulations are not closely associated with bank development,
performance or stability when controlling for other features of the bank regulation and supervision.
This is consistent with recent studies that offer a cautious assessment of the independent beneficial
effects of capital regulations. A cautionary note is worth raising, however. While we do not find a
significant, negative relationship between capital regulations and banking crises, bank development, or
bank efficiency, we do find that more stringent capital regulations are negatively linked with
nonperforming loans. We also examined whether capital regulations are particularly important in
countries with generous deposit insurance, weak official supervisory agencies, or ineffective
regulations concerning private-sector monitoring of banks. We find no evidence that capital
regulations are positively related to favorable banking-sector outcomes in particular institutional or
policy environments.

       Fourth, generous deposit insurance schemes are strongly and negatively associated with bank
stability. Many believe that effective regulation and supervision can mitigate the moral hazard
produced by generous deposit insurance. However, strong official supervisory agencies, stringent
capital standards, and regulations that encourage private-sector monitoring of banks are not found to
counterbalance these negative associations of generous deposit insurance.

       Fifth, with but one exception, we do not find a strong relationship between a range of official
supervisory indicators and bank performance and stability. Thus, measures of supervisory power,
resources, independence, loan classification stringency, provisioning stringency, and others are not
robustly associated with bank development, performance or stability. Again, these results do not
support the strategies of many international agencies that focus on greater official supervisory
oversight of banks. The one exception involves diversification. There is a negative relationship
between the diversification index (which aggregates diversification guidelines and the absence of
restrictions on making loans abroad) and the likelihood of suffering a major crisis, especially in small
economies. The old adage, “don’t put all your eggs in one basket,” remains relevant for modern
banking policy.



                                                                                                         31
       Sixth, regulations that encourage and facilitate private monitoring of banks are associated with
better banking-sector outcomes, i.e., greater bank development, lower net interest margins, and small
nonperforming loans. This holds even when controlling for many other institutional and policy
features. However, we did not find that regulations that foster private monitoring reduce the likelihood
of suffering a major banking crisis.

       Finally, while government ownership of banks is negatively correlated with favorable banking
outcomes and positively linked with corruption, government ownership of banks does not retain and
independent, robust association with bank development, efficiency, or stability when controlling for
other features of the regulatory and supervisory environment. There is no evidence, even in weak
institutional settings, that government-owned banks are associated with positive outcomes.

       In terms of broad implications, these findings raise a cautionary flag regarding reform strategies
that place excessive reliance on countries adhering to an extensive checklist of regulations and
supervisory practices that involve direct, government oversight of and restrictions on banks. Instead,
our findings are consistent with the view that regulations and supervisory practices that (1) force
accurate information disclosure, (2) empower private-sector corporate control of banks, and (3) foster
incentives for private agents to exert corporate control work best to promote bank development,
performance and stability. Our results do not suggest that official regulation and supervision are
unimportant. Indeed, the paper stresses that regulations and supervisory practices that force accurate
information disclosure and limit the moral hazard incentives of poorly designed deposit insurance
schemes are positively associated with greater bank development, better performance and increased
stability. As emphasized and discussed in the Introduction, much work remains. By constructing a
new database and conducting some initial analyses, this paper hopes to contribute to our understanding
of the supervision and regulation of banks.




                                                                                                         32
                                                 References

Barth, J.R. (1991). The Great Savings and Loan Debacle, The AEI Press: Washington, D.C.

Barth, J.R., G. Caprio Jr., and R. Levine. (2001a). “Banking Systems Around the Globe: Do Regulations
        and Ownership Affect Performance and Stability?” in Frederic S. Mishkin, Editor: Prudential
        Supervision: What Works and What Doesn’t, University of Chicago Press, 2001.

Barth, J.R., G. Caprio Jr., and R. Levine (2001b). “The Regulation and Supervision of Bank Around the
        World: A New Database,” in Robert E. Litan and Richard Herring, Editors, Integrating
        Emerging Market Countries into the Global Financial System, Brookings-Wharton Papers on
        Financial Services, Brookings Institution Press.

Beck, T., Demirgüç-Kunt, A., Levine, R., (2001). The financial structure database. In Demirguc-Kunt,
       A., Levine, R. (Eds.) Financial Structure and Economic Growth: A Cross-Country Comparison
       of Banks, Markets, and Development, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, pp. 17-80.

Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt, and R. Levine (2002). “Law, Endowments, and Finance,” Journal of
       Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Berger, A. N; R. S Demsetz, and P.E. Strahan (1999). “The Consolidation of the Financial Services
       Industry: Causes, Consequences, and Implications for the Future,” Journal of Banking and
       Finance 23, 135-194.

Berger, A. N., R. J. Herring, and G. P. Szegö (1995). “The Role of Capital in Financial Institutions,”
       Journal of Banking and Finance 19, 257-276.

Blum, J. (1999). “Do Capital Adequacy Requirements Reduce Risks in Banking?” Journal of Banking &
       Finance 23, 755-771.

Boot, A.W.A. and A.V. Thakor (1997). “Financial System Architecture,” Review of Financial Studies
       10(3), Fall, 693-733.

Boot, A.W.A. and A.V. Thakor (2000). “Can Relationship Banking Survive Competition?” Journal of
       Finance 55(2), April, 679-713.

Boyd, J. H.; C. Chang, and B.D. Smith (1998). “Moral Hazard Under Commercial and Universal
       Banking,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking 30(3.2), 426-468.

Boyd, J.H.; S. Kwak, and B.D. Smith (2000). “Banking Crises : What Comes After?,” University of
       Minnesota (Carlson School of Management), Department of Finance, mimeo.

Caprio, G. Jr., and D. Klingebiel (1999). “Episodes of Systemic and Borderline Financial Crises,” World
       Bank, mimeo.

Caprio, G. Jr., and Martinez (2000). “Avoiding Disaster: Policies to Reduce the Risk of Banking
       Crises,” World Bank mimeo and Egyptian Center for Economic Studies Working Paper No. 47.

Claessens, S. and D. Klingebiel (2000). “Competition and Scope of Activities in Financial Services,”

                                                                                                         33
       Washington D.C.: World Bank, mimeo, April.

Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and E. Detragiache (2002). Does Deposit Insurance Increase Banking System
      Stability? An Empirical Investigation,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Dewatripont, M. and J. Tirole (1994). The Prudential Regulation of Banks, Cambridge: MIT Press.

Djankov, S., R. La Porta, F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer (2002). “The Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 117, 1-37.

Easterly, W. and R. Levine (2002). “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence Economic
       Development,” Journal of Monetary Economics, forthcoming.

Gerschenkron, A. (1962). Economic Backwardness in Historical Perspective: A Book of Essays.
      Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap Press of Harvard University Press.

Greenspan, A. (1998). “The Role of Capital in Optimal Banking Supervision and Regulation,” in
      Federal Reserve Bank of New York, “Financial Services at the Crossroads: Capital Regulation in
      the Twenty-First Century, Proceedings of a Conference,” FRBNY Economic Policy Review 4:3,
      October.

Hansen, L.P. (1982). “Large Sample Properties of Generalized Method of Moment Estimators,”
      Econometrics, 50, 1029-1054.

John, K.; T.A. John and A. Saunders (1994). “Universal Banking and Firm Risk Taking,” Journal of
       Banking and Finance 18, 307-23.

Keeley, M. C. (1990). “Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power in Banking,” American Economic
       Review 80:5, 1183-1200.

Keeley, M.C., and F. T. Furlong (1990). “A Reexamination of Mean-Variance Analysis of Bank Capital
       Regulations.” Journal of Banking and Finance 14, 69-84.

King, R. G., and R. Levine (1993a). “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 108, 717-38.

King, R. G., and R. Levine (1993b). “Finance, Entrepreneurship, and Growth: Theory and Evidence,”
       Journal of Monetary Economics 32, 513-42.

Kim, D. and A. M. Santomero (1988). “Risk in Banking and Capital Regulation.” Journal of Finance 35,
      1219-1233.

Koehn, M. and A. M. Santomero (1980). “Regulation of Bank Capital and Portfolio Risk.” Journal of
      Finance 35, 1235-1250.

Landes, D. (1998). The Wealth and Poverty of Nations (W.W. Norton, New York, NY).

La Porta, R.; Lopez-de-Silanes, F.; and Shleifer, A. (2002). “Government Ownership of Commercial
       Banks”, Journal of Finance, 57(1), 265-301.


                                                                                                    34
La Porta, R.; Lopez-de-Silanes, F.; Shleifer, A.; and Vishny, R. W. (1998). "Law and Finance," Journal
       of Political Economy, 106(6), pp. 1113-1155
Levine, R.; N. Loayza, and T. Beck (2000). “Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and
       Causes,” Journal of Monetary Economics.

Levine, R., and S. Zervos (1998). “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,” American Economic
       Review 88, 537-558.

Levine, R. (1997). “Financial Development and Economic Growth: Views and Agenda,” Journal of
       Economic Literature 35, 688-726.

Mullins, M. H., and D. H. Pyle (1994). “Liquidation Costs and Risk-Based Bank Capital,” Journal of
       Banking and Finance 18, 113-138.

Pigou, Arthur C. (1938). The Economics of Welfare, 4th Edition. London: MacMillan & Co.
Quintyn, Marc, and Michael Taylor, (2002). Regulatory and Supervisory Independence and Financial
      Stability, International Monetary Fund Working Paper No. 02/46, March.
Santos, J.A.C. (2001). “Bank Capital Regulation in Contemporary Banking Theory: A Review of the
       Literature,” Financial Markets, Institutions and Instruments 10(2), 41-84.

Saunders. A. (1985) “Conflicts of Interest: An Economc View”, in I. Walter (Ed.), Deregulating Wall
      Street: Commercial Bank Penetration of the Corporate Securities Market, (New York: John
      Wiley & Sons), 207-30.

Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny (1998). The Grabbing Hand: Government Pathologies and their Cures,
       Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Stulz, R. and R. Williamson (2002). Culture, openness, and finance. Journal of Financial Economics,
        forthcoming.

Stigler, G.J. (1971). “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics and
        Management Science 2, 3-21.




                                                                                                      35
                                                                               Table 1
                                              Information on Bank Regulatory, Supervisory and Deposit Insurance Variables
                           Variable                                        Definition                                      Source and Quantification                                      World Bank Guide Questions


1. Bank Activity Regulatory Variables

                                                                                                              OCC and WBG 4.1 (higher values, more restrictive)

                                                                                                              Unrestricted = 1 = full range of activities can be
                                                                                                              conducted directly in the bank; Permitted = 2 = full     4.1 What is the level of regulatory restrictiveness for bank
                                                     The extent to which banks may engage in
                                                                                                              range of activities can be conducted, but some or all    participation in securities activities (the ability of banks to engage
    (a) Securities Activities                        underwriting, brokering and dealing in securities, and
                                                                                                              must be conducted in subsidiaries; Restricted = 3 =      in the business of securities underwriting, brokering, dealing, and
                                                     all aspects of the mutual fund industry.
                                                                                                              less than full range of activities can be conducted in   all aspects of the mutual fund industry)?
                                                                                                              the bank or subsidiaries; and Prohibited = 4 = the
                                                                                                              activity cannot be conducted in either the bank or
                                                                                                              subsidiaries.

                                                                                                              OCC and WBG 4.2 (higher values, more restrictive)

                                                                                                              Unrestricted = 1 = full range of activities can be
                                                                                                              conducted directly in the bank; Permitted = 2 = full     4.2 What is the level of regulatory restrictiveness for bank
                                                     The extent to which banks may engage in insurance        range of activities can be conducted, but some or all    participation in insurance activities (the ability of banks to engage
    (b) Insurance Activities
                                                     underwriting and selling.                                must be conducted in subsidiaries; Restricted = 3 =      in insurance underwriting and selling)?
                                                                                                              less than full range of activities can be conducted in
                                                                                                              the bank or subsidiaries; and Prohibited = 4 = the
                                                                                                              activity cannot be conducted in either the bank or
                                                                                                              subsidiaries.

                                                                                                              OCC and WBG 4.3 (higher values, more restrictive)

                                                                                                              Unrestricted = 1 = full range of activities can be
                                                                                                              conducted directly in the bank; Permitted = 2 = full     4.3 What is the level of regulatory restrictiveness for bank
                                                     The extent to which banks may engage in real estate      range of activities can be conducted, but some or all    participation in real estate activities (the ability of banks to engage
    (c) Real Estate Activities
                                                     investment, development and management.                  must be conducted in subsidiaries; Restricted = 3 =      in real estate investment, development, and management)?
                                                                                                              less than full range of activities can be conducted in
                                                                                                              the bank or subsidiaries; and Prohibited = 4 = the
                                                                                                              activity cannot be conducted in either the bank or
                                                                                                              subsidiaries.


2. Mixing Banking / Commerce Regulatory Variables

                                                                                                              OCC and WBG 4.4 (higher values, more restrictive)

                                                                                                              Unrestricted = 1 = a bank may own 100 percent of
                                                                                                              the equity in any nonfinancial firm; Permitted = 2 = a
                                                                                                              bank may own 100 percent of the equity of a              4.4 What is the level of regulatory restrictiveness for bank
                                                     The extent to which banks may own and control
    (a) Bank Owning Nonfinancial Firms                                                                        nonfinancial firm, but ownership is limited based on     ownership of nonfinancial firms?
                                                     nonfinancial firms.
                                                                                                              a bank's equity capital; Restricted = 3 = a bank can
                                                                                                              only acquire less than 100 percent of the equity in a
                                                                                                              nonfinancial firm; and Prohibited = 4 = a bank may
                                                                                                              not acquire any equity investment in a nonfinancial
                                                                                                              firm.
                                                                                  Table 1
                                                 Information on Bank Regulatory, Supervisory and Deposit Insurance Variables
                         Variable                                             Definition                                    Source and Quantification                                     World Bank Guide Questions

                                                                                                                OCC and WBG 2.3 (higher values, more restrictive)

                                                                                                                Unrestricted = 1 = a nonfinancial firm may own 100
                                                                                                                percent of the equity in a bank; Permitted = 2 =        2.3 What is the level of regulatory restrictiveness of ownership by
                                                        The extent to which nonfinancial firms may own and
    (b) Nonfinancial Firms Owning Banks                                                                         unrestricted with prior authorization or approval;      nonfinancial firms of banks?
                                                        control banks.
                                                                                                                Restricted = 3 = limits are placed on ownership, such
                                                                                                                as a maximum percentage of a bank's capital or
                                                                                                                shares; and Prohibited = 4 = no equity investment in
                                                                                                                a bank.


3. Competition Regulatory Variables
                                                        Whether foreign banks may own domestic banks and
                                                                                                                OCC
    (a) Limitations on Foreign Bank Entry/Ownership     whether foreign banks may enter a country's banking
                                                                                                                Yes = 1; No = 0
                                                        industry.

                                                                                                                                                                        1.8 Which of the following are legally required to be submitted
                                                                                                                                                                        before issuance of the banking license?
                                                                                                                                                                        1.8.1 Draft by-laws? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                                        1.8.2 Intended organization chart? Yes / No
                                                                                                                WBG 1.8.1 -1.8.8                                        1.8.3 Financial projections for first three years? Yes / No
                                                        Whether various types of legal submissions are                                                                  1.8.4 Financial information on main potential shareholders? Yes /
    (b) Entry into Banking Requirements
                                                        required to obtain a banking license.                   Yes = 1; No = 0                                         No
                                                                                                                Higher values indicating greater stringency.            1.8.5 Background/experience of future directors? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                                        1.8.6 Background/experience of future managers? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                                        1.8.7 Sources of funds to be disbursed in the capitalization of new
                                                                                                                                                                        banks? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                                        1.8.8 Market differentiation intended for the new bank? Yes / No

                                                                                                                                                                        1.9 In the past five years, how many applications for commercial
                                                                                                                                                                        banking licenses have been received from domestic entities?
                                                        The degree to which applications to enter banking are                                                           1.9.1 How many of those applications have been denied?
    (c) Fraction of Entry Applications Denied                                                                   WBG (1.9.1 + 1.10.1) / (1.9 + 1.10) (pure number)
                                                        denied.                                                                                                         1.10 In the past five years, how many applications for commercial
                                                                                                                                                                        banking licenses have been received from foreign entities?
                                                                                                                                                                        1.10.1 How many of those applications have been denied?

                                                                                                                                                                        1.9 In the past five years, how many applications for commercial
                                                        The degree to which foreign applications to enter
       (1) Domestic Denials                                                                                     WBG 1.9.1 / 1.9 (pure number)                           banking licenses have been received from domestic entities?
                                                        banking are denied.
                                                                                                                                                                        1.9.1 How many of those applications have been denied?

                                                                                                                                                                        1.10 In the past five years, how many applications for commercial
                                                        The degree to which domestic applications to enter
       (2) Foreign Denials                                                                                      WBG 1.10.1 / 1.10 (pure number)                         banking licenses have been received from foreign entities?
                                                        banking are denied.
                                                                                                                                                                        1.10.1 How many of those applications have been denied?


4. Capital Regulatory Variables




                                                                                                                                                                                                                               37
                                                                            Table 1
                                           Information on Bank Regulatory, Supervisory and Deposit Insurance Variables
                          Variable                                      Definition                                    Source and Quantification                                     World Bank Guide Questions

                                                                                                                                                                  3.1.1 Is the minimum capital-asset ratio requirement risk weighted
                                                                                                                                                                  in line with the Basel guidelines? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                                  3.3 Does the minimum ratio vary as a function of market risk? Yes
                                                                                                          WBG 3.1.1 + 3.3 + 3.9.1 + 3.9.2 + 3.9.3 + (1 if 3.6 <
                                                  Whether the capital requirement reflects certain risk                                                           / No
                                                                                                          0.75)
                                                  elements and deducts certain market value losses from                                                           3.9.1 Are market value of loan losses not realized in accounting
    (a) Overall Capital Stringency
                                                  capital before minimum capital adequacy is                                                                      books deducted? Yes / No
                                                                                                          Yes = 1; No = 0
                                                  determined.                                                                                                     3.9.2 Are unrealized losses in securities portfolios deducted? Yes /
                                                                                                          Higher values indicating greater stringency.
                                                                                                                                                                  No
                                                                                                                                                                  3.9.3 Are unrealized foreign exchange losses deducted? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                                  3.6 What fraction of revaluation gains is allowed as part of capital?

                                                                                                                                                                  1.5 Are the sources of funds to be used as capital verified by the
                                                                                                                                                                  regulatory/supervisory authorities? Yes / No
                                                  Whether certain funds may be used to initially          WBG 1.5: Yes = 1, No = 0: WBG 1.6&1.7: Yes=0,           1.6 Can the initial disbursement or subsequent injections of capital
    (b) Initial Capital Stringency                capitalize a bank and whether they are officially       No=1.                                                   be done with assets other than cash or government securities? Yes /
                                                  verified.                                               Higher values indicating greater stringency.            No
                                                                                                                                                                  1.7 Can initial disbursement of capital be done with borrowed
                                                                                                                                                                  funds? Yes / No

                                                                                                          (a) + (b)
    (c) Capital Regulatory Index                  The sum of (a) and (b).
                                                                                                          Higher values indicate greater stringency.


5. Official Supervisory Action Variables




                                                                                                                                                                                                                          38
                                                                  Table 1
                                 Information on Bank Regulatory, Supervisory and Deposit Insurance Variables
                     Variable                                 Definition                                     Source and Quantification                                   World Bank Guide Questions

                                                                                                                                                       5.5 Does the supervisory agency have the right to meet with
                                                                                                                                                       external auditors to discuss their report without the approval of the
                                                                                                                                                       bank? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       5.6 Are auditors required by law to communicate directly to the
                                                                                                                                                       supervisory agency any presumed involvement of bank directors or
                                                                                                                                                       senior managers in elicit activities, fraud, or insider abuse? Yes /
                                                                                                                                                       No
                                                                                                                                                       5.7 Can supervisors take legal action against external auditors for
                                                                                                                                                       negligence? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       6.1 Can the supervisory authority force a bank to change its
                                                                                                                                                       internal organizational structure? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       10.4 Are off-balance sheet items disclosed to supervisors? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       11.2 Can the supervisory agency order the bank's directors or
                                                                                                 WBG 5.5 + 5.6 + 5.7 + 6.1 + 10.4 + 11.2 + 11.3.1 +    management to constitute provisions to cover actual or potential
                                                                                                 11.3.2 +11.3.3 + 11.6 + 11.7 + 11.9.1 + 11.9.2 +      losses? Yes / No
                                        Whether the supervisory authorities have the authority   11.9.3                                                11.3 Can the supervisory agency suspend the directors' decision to
(a) Official Supervisory Power          to take specific actions to prevent and correct                                                                distribute:
                                        problems.                                                Yes = 1; No = 0                                       11.3.1 Dividends? Yes / No
                                                                                                 Sum of these assigned values, with higher values      11.3.2 Bonuses? Yes / No
                                                                                                 indicating greater power.                             11.3.3 Management fees? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       11.6 Can the supervisory agency legally declare-such that this
                                                                                                                                                       declaration supersedes the rights of bank shareholders-that a bank
                                                                                                                                                       is insolvent? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       11.7 Does the Banking Law give authority to the supervisory
                                                                                                                                                       agency to
                                                                                                                                                       intervene that is, suspend some or all ownership rights-a problem
                                                                                                                                                       bank? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       11.9 Regarding bank restructuring and reorganization, can the
                                                                                                                                                       supervisory agency
                                                                                                                                                       or any other government agency do the following: ? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       11.9.1 Supersede shareholder rights? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       11.9.2 Remove and replace management? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       11.9.3 Remove and replace directors? Yes / No

                                                                                                                                                       11.8 Does the Law establish pre-determined levels of solvency
                                                                                                                                                       deterioration which forces automatic actions (like intervention)?
                                                                                                                                                       Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       11.1 Are there any mechanisms of cease and desist-type orders,
                                                                                                 WBG 11.8 * (11.1 + 11.2 + 11.3.1 + 11.3.2 + 11.3.3
                                                                                                                                                       whose infraction leads to the automatic imposition of civil and
                                                                                                 + 6.1)
                                                                                                                                                       penal sanctions on the bank's directors and managers? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       11.2 Can the supervisory agency order the bank's directors or
                                        Whether the law establishes predetermined levels of      Yes = 1; No = 0
                                                                                                                                                       management to constitute provisions to cover actual or potential
   (1) Prompt Corrective Power          bank solvency deterioration that force automatic         Principal component of the assigned values for the
                                                                                                                                                       losses? Yes / No
                                        actions, such as intervention.                           items in parenthesis multiplied by 1 if there is a
                                                                                                                                                       11.3 Can the supervisory agency suspend the directors' decision to
                                                                                                 legally pre-determined level of solvency
                                                                                                                                                       distribute:
                                                                                                 deterioration forcing automatic actions and by 0 if
                                                                                                                                                       11.3.1 Dividends? Yes / No
                                                                                                 not.
                                                                                                                                                       11.3.2 Bonuses? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       11.3.3 Management fees? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                       6.1 Can the supervisory authority force a bank to change its
                                                                                                                                                       internal organizational structure? Yes / No


                                                                                                                                                                                                              39
                                                                              Table 1
                                             Information on Bank Regulatory, Supervisory and Deposit Insurance Variables
                            Variable                                       Definition                                      Source and Quantification                                     World Bank Guide Questions

                                                                                                                                                                      11.9 Regarding bank restructuring and reorganization, can the
                                                                                                              WBG 11.9.1 + 11.9.2 + 11.9.3                            supervisory agency or any other government agency do the
                                                    Whether the supervisory authorities have the power to                                                             following:
       (2) Restructuring Power
                                                    restructure and reorganize a troubled bank.               Yes = 1; No = 0                                         11.9.1 Supersede shareholder rights? Yes / No
                                                                                                              Higher values indicate greater restructuring power      11.9.2 Remove and replace management? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                                      11.9.3 Remove and replace directors? Yes / No

                                                                                                                                                                      11.6 Can the supervisory agency legally declare-such that this
                                                                                                              WBG 11.6 + 11.7                                         declaration supersedes the rights of bank shareholders-that a bank
                                                    Whether the supervisory authorities have the power to                                                             is insolvent? Yes / No
       (3) Declaring Insolvency Power
                                                    declare a deeply troubled bank insolvent.                 Yes = 1; No = 0                                         11.7 Does the Banking Law give authority to the supervisory
                                                                                                              Higher values indicating greater power.                 agency to intervene-that is, suspend some or all ownership rights-a
                                                                                                                                                                      problem bank? Yes / No

                                                                                                                                                                      11.9.4 Can the supervisory agency or any other government agency
                                                                                                              WBG 11.9.4 + (12.10 - 1) * (-1) + (11.8 -1) * (-1) +    forbear certain prudential regulations? Yes / No
                                                                                                              (12.11 -1) * (-1)                                       11.8 Does the Law establish pre-determined levels of solvency
                                                    Whether the supervisory authorities may engage in
                                                                                                                                                                      deterioration which forces automatic actions (like intervention)?
    (b) Supervisory Forbearance Discretion          forbearance when confronted with violations of laws
                                                                                                              Yes = 1; No = 0                                         Yes / No
                                                    and regulations or other imprudent behavior.
                                                                                                              Sum of these assigned values such that higher values    12.10 If an infraction of any prudential regulation is found by a
                                                                                                              indicate greater discretion.                            supervisor, must it be reported? Yes / No
                                                                                                                                                                      12.11 Are there mandatory actions in these cases? Yes / No

                                                                                                              WBG 9.2.1 - 9.2.3 (days)
                                                                                                                                                                      9.2 Classification of loans in arrears based on their quality: after
                                                                                                              If there is a loan classification system, the actual    how many days is a loan in arrears classified as:
                                                    The classification of loans in arrears as sub-standard,
    (c) Loan Classification Stringency                                                                        minimum number of days beyond which a loan in           9.2.1 Sub-standard ?
                                                    doubtful and loss.
                                                                                                              arrears must be classified as sub-standard, then        9.2.2 Doubtful?
                                                                                                              doubtful, and finally loss are summed. Higher           9.2.3 Loss?
                                                                                                              values indicate less stringency.

                                                                                                              WBG 9.3.1 - 9.3.3 (percent)
                                                                                                                                                                      9.3 What are the minimum required provision as loans become:
                                                                                                              The sum of the minimum required provisioning
                                                    The minimum required provisions as loans become                                                                   9.3.1 Sub-standard?
    (d) Provisioning Stringency                                                                               percentages when a loan is successively classified as
                                                    sub-standard, doubtful and loss.                                                                                  9.3.2 Doubtful?
                                                                                                              substandard, doubtful, and loss. If a range is
                                                                                                                                                                      9.3.3 Loss?
                                                                                                              provided, the minimum percentage is used. Higher
                                                                                                              values indicate greater stringency.

                                                                                                              WBG 7.1 + (7.2 - 1) * (-1)
                                                    Whether there are explicit, verifiable, quantifiable                                                              7.1 Are there explicit, verifiable, and quantifiable guidelines
                                                                                                              Yes = 1; No = 0
    (e) Diversification Index                       guidelines for asset diversification, and banks are                                                               regarding asset diversification? Yes / No
                                                                                                              Sum of these assigned values, with higher values
                                                    allowed to make loans abroad.                                                                                     7.2 Are banks prohibited from making loans abroad? Yes / No
                                                                                                              indicating more diversification.


6. Official Supervisory Resource Variables

                                                                                                                                                                      12.8 What is the average tenure of current supervisors (i.e., what is
    (a) Supervisor Tenure                           The average tenure of a professional bank supervisor.     WBG 12.9.1 (years)                                      the average number of years current supervisors have been
                                                                                                                                                                      supervisors)?



                                                                                                                                                                                                                               40
                                                                                    Table 1
                                                   Information on Bank Regulatory, Supervisory and Deposit Insurance Variables
                          Variable                                                 Definition                                      Source and Quantification                                      World Bank Guide Questions

                                                                                                                                                                                12.2 To whom are the supervisory bodies responsible or
                                                                                                                      WBG 12.2, 12.2.1 and 12.2.2                               accountable?
                                                             The degree to which the supervisory authority is
                                                                                                                                                                                12.2.1 How is the head of the supervisory agency (and other
    (b) Independence of Supervisory Authority-Political      independent within the government from political
                                                                                                                      1 = low independence; 2 = medium independence; 3          directors) appointed?
                                                             influence.
                                                                                                                      = high independence                                       12.2.2 How is the head of the supervisory agency (and other
                                                                                                                                                                                directors) removed?

                                                             The degree to which the supervisory authority is         WBG 12.14
    (c) Independence of Supervisory Authority - Banks        protected by the legal system from the banking                                                                     12.14 Are supervisors legally liable for their actions?
                                                             industry.                                                Yes=0; No=1

                                                             The degree to which the supervisory authority is
                                                                                                                      WBG (b) + (c)
    (d) Independence of Supervisory Authority - Overall      independent from the government and legally
                                                                                                                      Higher values signify greater independence
                                                             protected from the banking industry.

                                                                                                                                                                                12.1 What body/agency supervises banks?
                                                                                                                                                                                12.1.1 Is there more than one supervisory body?
                                                             This variable indicates whether there is a single                                                                  12.2 To whom are the supervisory bodies responsible or
                                                             official regulatory of banks, or whether multiple        This variable is assigned a value of 1 if there is more   accountable?
    (e) Multiple Supervisors
                                                             supervisor share responsibility for supervising the      than one supervisor and 0 otherwise.                      12.2.1 How is the head of the supervisory agency (and other
                                                             nation’s banks.                                                                                                    directors) appointed?
                                                                                                                                                                                12.2.2 How is the head of the supervisory agency (and other
                                                                                                                                                                                directors) removed?


7. Private Monitoring Variables

                                                                                                                                                                                5.1 Is an external audit a compulsory obligation for banks? Yes /
                                                             Whether there is a compulsory external audit by a
    (a) Certified Audit Required                                                                                      WBG 5.1 * 5.3 (Yes = 1; No = 0)                           No
                                                             licensed or certified auditor.
                                                                                                                                                                                5.3 Are auditors licensed or certified? Yes / No

    (b) Percent of 10 Biggest Banks Rated by International   The percentage of the top ten banks that are rated by                                                              10.7.1 What percent of the top ten banks are rated by international
                                                                                                                      WBG 10.7.1 (percent)
    Rating Agencies                                          international credit rating agencies.                                                                              credit rating agencies (e.g., Moody's, Standard and Poor)?

                                                                                                                      WBG 1 if 8.1 = 0 and 8.4 = 0; 0 otherwise                 8.1 Is there an explicit deposit insurance protection system? Yes /
                                                             Whether there is an explicit deposit insurance scheme
                                                                                                                                                                                No
    (c) No Explicit Deposit Insurance Scheme                 and, if not, whether depositors were fully compensated
                                                                                                                      Yes =1; No =0                                             8.4 Were depositors wholly compensated (to the extent of legal
                                                             the last time a bank failed.
                                                                                                                      Higher values indicate more private supervision           protection) the last time a bank failed? Yes / No

                                                                                                                                                                                10.1.1 Does accrued, though unpaid interest/principal enter the
                                                             Whether the income statement includes accrued or         WBG (10.1.1 - 1)*(-1) + 10.3 + 10.6                       income statement while the loan is still non-performing?
                                                             unpaid interest or principal on nonperforming loans      Yes=1; No=0                                               10.3 Are financial institutions required to produce consolidated
    (d) Bank Accounting
                                                             and whether banks are required to produce                Sum of assigned values, with higher values                accounts covering all bank and any non-bank financial
                                                             consolidated financial statements.                       indicating more informative bank accounts.                subsidiaries? 10.6 Are bank directors legally liable if information
                                                                                                                                                                                disclosed is erroneous or misleading?




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          41
                                                                                  Table 1
                                                 Information on Bank Regulatory, Supervisory and Deposit Insurance Variables
                         Variable                                              Definition                                        Source and Quantification                                  World Bank Guide Questions

                                                                                                                                                                          10.4.1 Are off-balance sheet items disclosed to the public? Yes /
                                                        Whether (a) occurs, (b) equals 100%, (c) occurs, (d)         WBG: (a) + [1 if (b) equals 100% ; 0 otherwise] +
                                                                                                                                                                          No
                                                        occurs, off-balance sheet items are disclosed to the         (c) + (d) + 10.4.1 + 10.5 + 3.5
                                                                                                                                                                          10.5 Must banks disclose their risk management procedures to the
    (e) Private Monitoring Index                        public, banks must disclose risk management
                                                                                                                                                                          public? Yes / No
                                                        procedures to the public, and subordinated debt is           Yes = 1; No = 0
                                                                                                                                                                          3.5 Is subordinated debt allowable (required) as part of capital? Yes
                                                        allowable (required) as a part of regulatory capital.        Higher values indicating more private supervision.
                                                                                                                                                                          / No


8. Deposit Insurance Scheme Variables
                                                                                                                     WBG 8.1.5 + 8.6 + 8.7                                8.1.5 Does the deposit insurance authority make the decision to
                                                        Whether the deposit insurance authority has the
                                                                                                                                                                          intervene a bank? Yes / No
                                                        authority to make the decision to intervene in a bank,
                                                                                                                                                                          8.6 Can the deposit insurance agency/fund take legal action against
    (a) Deposit Insurer Power                           take legal action against bank directors or officials, and
                                                                                                                     Yes = 1; No = 0                                      bank directors or other bank officials? Yes / No
                                                        has ever taken any legal action against bank directors
                                                                                                                     Sum of assigned values, with higher values           8.7 Has the deposit insurance agency/fund ever taken legal action
                                                        or officers.
                                                                                                                     indicating more power.                               against bank directors or other bank officials? Yes / No

                                                        The size of the deposit insurance fund relative to total
    (b) Deposit Insurance Funds-to-Total Bank Assets                                                                 WBG 8.1.2 (pure number)                              8.1.2 What is the ratio of accumulated funds to total bank assets?
                                                        bank assets.
                                                                                                                     Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2002)
    (c) Moral Hazard Index                              The degree to which moral hazard exists.
                                                                                                                     Higher values indicate more moral hazard.

9. Market Structure Indicators
                                                        The degree of concentration of deposits in the 5 largest                                                          2.6 Of deposit-taking institutions in your country, what fraction of
    (a) Bank Concentration                                                                                           WBG 2.6 (pure number)
                                                        banks.                                                                                                            deposits is held by the five (5) largest banks?

                                                        The extent to which the banking system's assets are                                                               3.8 What fraction of the banking system's assets is in banks that are
    (b) Foreign-Owned Banks                                                                                          WBG 3.8 (percent)
                                                        foreign owned.                                                                                                    50% or more foreign owned?

                                                        The extent to which the banking system's assets are                                                               3.7 What fraction of the banking system's assets is in banks that are
    (c) Government-Owned Banks                                                                                       WBG 3.7 (percent)
                                                        government owned.                                                                                                 50% or more government owned?



         Note: WBG denotes World Bank Guide, which is available at www.worldbank.org/research/interest/intrstweb.htm




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 42
                                                                                                  Table 2
                                                                                   Correlations Among Selected Variables


                                                                                Restrictio
                                   Entry into                                                                                            Prompt
                                                    Entry          Capital       ns on        Private        Moral         Official                    No        Government-                        Net                        Major
                                    Banking                                                                                             Corrective                                  Bank                      Overhead
                                                  Applications    Regulatory     Bank        Monitoring      Hazard      Supervisory                 Foreign       Owned                          Interest                    Banking
                                  Requirements                                                                                           Power                                   Development                   Costs
                                                    Denied          Index       Activities    Index          Index       Power Index                  Loans        Banks                          Margin                       Crisis
                                     Index                                                                                                Index
                                                                                 Index

                                     -0.02             1
Entry Applications Denied
                                    (0.904)

Capital Regulatory Index              0.02           -0.47**          1
                                    (0.853)          (0.000)

Restrictions on Bank Activities      0.04            0.36**          -0.20*         1
Index                               (0.757)          (0.003)        (0.072)

Private Monitoring Index             -0.16           -0.47**         0.23*       -0.35**          1
                                    (0.201)          (0.000)        (0.060)      (0.004)

Moral Hazard Index                   -0.21            -0.19         0.29**        -0.23         0.18           1
                                    (0.152)          (0.247)        (0.046)      (0.110)       (0.230)

Official Supervisory Power            0.01             0.08          -0.19        -0.05          0.07          0.18           1
Index                               (0.937)          (0.620)        (0.215)      (0.720)       (0.685)       (0.375)

                                     0.10             0.14           -0.04        0.13          -0.21*         0.23        0.48**           1
Prompt Corrective Power Index
                                    (0.388)          (0.284)        (0.700)      (0.269)       (0.094)       (0.122)       (0.001)

No Foreign Loans                      0.03           0.26**          -0.02       0.23**         -0.21*        -0.17          0.03          0.09         1
                                    (0.820)          (0.034)        (0.840)      (0.040)       (0.081)       (0.243)       (0.847)       (0.408)

Government-Owned Banks               -0.13           0.39**          -0.15       0.33**        -0.36**        -0.06         -0.06         -0.09       0.27**          1
                                    (0.273)          (0.003)        (0.209)      (0.005)       (0.005)       (0.700)       (0.677)       (0.431)      (0.021)

Bank Development                     -0.11            -0.20          0.21*       -0.39**       0.48**          0.07         -0.09        -0.24**       -0.08       -0.29**            1
                                    (0.325)          (0.122)        (0.070)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.627)       (0.546)       (0.040)      (0.513)      (0.014)

Net Interest Margin                   0.18             0.11          -0.18       0.28**        -0.37**        -0.03          0.12          0.14        0.19*       0.26**           -0.57**          1
                                    (0.120)          (0.418)        (0.125)      (0.014)       (0.002)       (0.852)       (0.459)       (0.249)      (0.095)      (0.037)          (0.000)

Overhead Costs                      0.23**            -0.02          -0.03         0.04        -0.25**         0.12          0.11          0.09        -0.02       0.30**           -0.58**       0.76**          1
                                    (0.041)          (0.857)        (0.823)      (0.715)       (0.044)       (0.415)       (0.496)       (0.453)      (0.836)      (0.014)          (0.000)       (0.000)

Major Banking Crisis                 -0.17             0.14          -0.11         0.18         -0.07        0.43**          0.13          0.15         0.17       0.26**            -0.21*         0.13         0.14            1
                                    (0.123)          (0.278)        (0.326)      (0.116)       (0.569)       (0.002)       (0.398)       (0.197)      (0.131)      (0.027)          (0.061)       (0.275)      (0.237)

Government Integrity                 -0.09           -0.48**        0.31**       -0.55**       0.62**         0.11          -0.26        -0.24*      -0.37**       -0.42**          0.54**        -0.44**      -0.42**        -0.41**
                                    (0.509)          (0.001)        (0.018)      (0.000)       (0.000)       (0.455)       (0.154)       (0.067)     (0.005)       (0.002)          (0.000)       (0.001)      (0.002)        (0.002)

           Note: P-values are in parentheses. ** indicates significant at the 0.05 level, while * indicates significant at the 0.10 level. And the following indices are principal component versions: Entry into Banking
                      Requirements, Capital Regulatory Index, Restrictions on Bank Activities, Private Monitoring Index, and Official Supervisory Power.



                                                                                                                                                                                                                         43
                                                               Table 3
                                             Bank Development and Performance Regressions

                                                                           Official      Entry into       Restrictions
                                                Capital      Private                                                      Government-
                                                                         Supervisory      Banking          on Bank                                   R-
 Dependent Variable           Constant1        Regulatory   Monitoring                                                      Owned           N
                                                                           Power        Requirements       Activities                              Square
                                                 Index       Index                                                          Banks
                                                                            Index          Index            Index
 Bank Development             0.189**            -0.011       0.089**       -0.042          0.002           -0.118**                        75      0.597
                              (0.004)           (0.725)       (0.003)      (0.172)         (0.939)           (0.001)
 Net Interest Margin          0.042**            -0.003      -0.010**        0.000          0.003              0.004                        75      0.264
                              (0.000)           (0.373)       (0.012)      (0.870)         (0.190)           (0.241)
 Overhead Costs               0.032**            0.001        -0.006*        0.000         0.003**            -0.001                        75      0.201
                              (0.000)           (0.789)       (0.077)      (0.965)         (0.042)           (0.731)
 Nonperforming Loans          0.074*            -0.035*      -0.042**        0.004          0.006             -0.011                        68      0.247
                               (0.063)          (0.058)      (0.007)       (0.799)          (0.586)          (0.567)



                                                                           Official      Entry into       Restrictions
                                                Capital      Private                                                      Government-
                                         1                               Supervisory      Banking          on Bank                                   R-
 Dependent Variable           Constant         Regulatory   Monitoring                                                      Owned           N
                                                                           Power        Requirements       Activities                              Square
                                                 Index       Index                                                          Banks
                                                                            Index          Index            Index
 Bank Development             0.232**            -0.028       0.071**       -0.029          -0.002          -0.119**          -0.169        68      0.623
                              (0.000)           (0.428)       (0.025)      (0.322)         (0.926)           (0.002)         (0.154)
 Net Interest Margin          0.041**            -0.002      -0.009**       -0.001           0.003           0.006**           0.006        66      0.310
                              (0.000)           (0.660)       (0.045)      (0.713)         (0.156)           (0.075)         (0.760)
 Overhead Costs               0.029**            0.003         -0.004        0.000         0.004**             0.000           0.022        66      0.298
                              (0.000)           (0.289)       (0.282)      (0.889)         (0.036)           (0.984)         (0.209)
 Nonperforming Loans           0.029            -0.034*       -0.028*       -0.005           0.011            -0.021         0.160**        63      0.318
                               (0.366)          (0.096)      (0.085)       (0.713)          (0.235)          (0.209)         (0.030)



Notes: with P-values are in parentheses under the estimated coefficients, using heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors from an OLS regression. ** indicates significant at the
0.05 level, while * indicates significant at the 0.10 level. Each row is a separate regression. Each regression also contains legal origin dummy variables (Common Law, French Civil
Law, German Civil Law, and Socialist Law). And the following indices are principal component versions: Entry into Banking Requirements, Capital Regulatory Index, Restrictions
on Bank Activities, Private Monitoring Index, and Official Supervisory Power.




                                                                                                                                                                                44
                                                                                         Table 4
                                                                                Banking Crises Regressions

                                                                   1              2              3              4              5              6              7              8               9
        N                                                           52            46              43             51             40             40             41             43             43
                                                                 -0.566         -0.210         -0.314          0.764       -2.732**         -1.409          1.760         -0.308         -0.094
        Constant
                                                                (0.323)        (0.799)        (0.626)        (0.505)        (0.011)        (0.345)         (0.450)       (0.637)        (0.905)
                                                                0.631*         1.158**         0.647         0.771*         1.709**        1.880**          0.735         0.656          0.627
        Restrictions on Bank Activities Index
                                                                (0.073)        (0.016)        (0.174)        (0.083)        (0.034)        (0.043)         (0.265)       (0.168)        (0.193)
                                                                 -0.183         -0.279          0.125         -0.309         -0.704          0.398          0.249          0.127          0.164
        Entry into Banking Requirements Index
                                                                (0.495)        (0.381)        (0.614)        (0.350)        (0.142)        (0.279)         (0.432)       (0.613)        (0.599)
                                                                 -0.264         -0.749        -1.035*         -0.155         -0.107         -1.268        -1.075**       -1.026*        -1.201*
        Capital Regulatory Index
                                                                (0.471)        (0.173)        (0.069)        (0.735)        (0.885)        (0.340)         (0.033)       (0.081)        (0.054)
                                                                  0.391         -0.016                         0.169          1.168
        Private Monitoring Index
                                                                (0.431)        (0.980)                       (0.709)        (0.121)
                                                                 -0.270         -0.224         -0.243                        -0.655         -1.190         -0.222         -0.246          -0.241
        Official Supervisory Power Index
                                                                (0.388)        (0.492)        (0.566)                       (0.316)        (0.224)        (0.598)        (0.567)         (0.582)
                                                                  2.312        5.269*          2.846          1.537           3.414          9.477          3.963          2.761           2.869
        Government-Owned Banks
                                                                (0.195)        (0.087)        (0.185)        (0.496)        (0.256)        (0.114)        (0.191)        (0.222)         (0.172)
                                                                0.051*         0.064**         0.031         0.051*         0.138**         0.025          0.023          0.031           0.030
        Inflation
                                                                (0.084)        (0.009)        (0.168)        (0.051)        (0.010)        (0.307)        (0.232)        (0.176)         (0.179)
                                                                                              0.719**                                      1.442**        2.132**        0.716**        0.769**
        Moral Hazard Index
                                                                                              (0.000)                                      (0.009)        (0.002)        (0.000)        (0.001)
                                                                                                            -13.443**
        Diversification Index
                                                                                                              (0.012)
                                                                                                             0.497**
        Diversification Index*Ln (GDP)
                                                                                                              (0.014)
                                                                                                                            1.911*
        Limitations on Foreign Bank Entry/Ownership
                                                                                                                            (0.052)
                                                                                                                                           -0.513**
        Moral Hazard Index*Political Openness
                                                                                                                                            (0.013)
                                                                                                                                             0.762
        Political Openness
                                                                                                                                            (0.141)
                                                                                                                                                          -0.288**
        Moral Hazard Index*Rule of Law
                                                                                                                                                           (0.035)
                                                                                                                                                            -0.295
        Rule of Law
                                                                                                                                                           (0.535)
                                                                                                                                                                         -0.031
        Moral Hazard Index*Official Supervisory Power
                                                                                                                                                                         (0.842)
                                                                                                                                                                                            -0.131
        Moral Hazard Index*Capital Regulatory Index
                                                                                                                                                                                            (0.600)
Note: Each column gives complete logit results and the P-values in parentheses under the estimated coefficients are based on Huber/White robust standard errors. ** indicates significant at the 0.05 level,
          while * indicates significant at the 0.10 level.
The sample for regression 2 is restricted to countries with some equity market activity (i.e., to countries where the IFC obtains trading data) and the following indices are principal component versions:
          Entry into Banking Requirements, Capital Regulatory Index, Restrictions on Bank Activities, Private Monitoring Index, and Official Supervisory Power.

                                                                                                                                                                                                        45
                                                                                Table 5
                                               Bank Development, Regulation and Supervision: Instrumental Variables
                                         Dependent Variable: Bank Development (Bank Credit to the Private Sector as Share of GDP)

                                                             1             2             3              4             5                 6     7            8             9            10           11           12        13
Entry into Banking Requirements Index                     -0.536
                                                         (0.390)
Limitations on Foreign Bank Entry/Ownership                            -0.388*
                                                                       (0.092)
Entry Applications Denied                                                            -0.785**
                                                                                      (0.004)
Capital Regulatory Index                                                                            0.340**
                                                                                                    (0.024)
Restrictions on Bank Activities Index                                                                             -0.145**
                                                                                                                   (0.010)
Private Monitoring Index                                                                                                         0.252**
                                                                                                                                 (0.001)
Moral Hazard Index                                                                                                                           0.109
                                                                                                                                            (0.387)
Official Supervisory Power Index                                                                                                                        -0.167
                                                                                                                                                        (0.148)
Prompt Corrective Power Index                                                                                                                                         -2.419
                                                                                                                                                                      (0.518)
No Foreign Loans                                                                                                                                                                    -0.624*
                                                                                                                                                                                    (0.080)
Government-Owned Banks                                                                                                                                                                          -2.075**
                                                                                                                                                                                                 (0.044)
Supervisory Independence                                                                                                                                                                                      0.162*
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (0.080)
Multiple Supervisory Agencies                                                                                                                                                                                            2.498
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        (0.295)

Constant                                                 -0.210        0.290**        0.460**        0.394*        0.308**       0.216**     0.296       0.137        -0.598        0.421**     0.575**        0.146    0.420**
                                                         (0.835)       (0.000)        (0.000)        (0.077)       (0.000)       (0.002)    (0.139)     (0.494)       (0.742)       (0.000)     (0.002)       (0.421)   (0.000)

OIR-Test1                                                  2.30          2.07           1.89          1.14           4.76          1.69      4.41         5.15          0.34         4.85         2.82          6.76     0.30

N                                                           77              59           61             76             76       77            49           77            75           77           69            76       76
    Notes: P-values are in parentheses under the estimated coefficients, using a GMM instrumental variables regression. ** indicates significant at the 0.05 level, while * indicates significant at the 0.10 level.
    Each column represents a separate regression of Bank Development on Common Law, French Civil Law, German Civil Law, Socialist Law, and the variable listed in the first column.
    Instruments: Regious composition variables (Catholic, Muslim, and Other Denomination variables), Legal origin dummy variables (Common Law, French Civil Law,
     German Civil Law, and Socialist Law), and latitudinal distance from the equator.
    1 Over Identifying Restriction Test: Tests null hypothsis that the instruments are uncorrelated with the residual.
       5% Critical Values for OIR Test (3 d.f.): 7.82.

    For regressions 2 and 7, there are no socialist legal origin countries with data so the Socialist Law dummy variable is excluded.

    The following indices are principal component versions: Entry into Banking Requirements, Capital Regulatory Index, Restrictions on Bank Activities, Private Monitoring Index,
    Official Supervisory Power, and Prompt Corrective Power.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                           46
