                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




              THE VALUE OF INFORMATION IN INTERNATIONAL TRADE:
                  GAINS TO OUTSOURCING THROUGH HONG KONG

                                         Robert C. Feenstra
                                         Gordon H. Hanson
                                           Songhua Lin

                                         Working Paper 9328
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9328


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2002




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Robert C. Feenstra, Gordon H. Hanson, and Songhua Lin. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Value of Information in International Trade: Gains to Outsourcing through Hong Kong
Robert C. Feenstra, Gordon H. Hanson, and Songhua Lin
NBER Working Paper No. 9328
November 2002
JEL No. F1, D8

                                           ABSTRACT

       In this paper, we estimate the benefits to countries that purchase goods from China of having
access to intermediary services provided by Hong Kong. Traders in Hong Kong supply information on
markets and producers in China, which provides welfare gains to foreign firms using these services.

During the 1990s, Hong Kong intermediated about half of the goods that China exported to the rest of
the world. Our results suggests that gains to intermediary services provided by Hong Kong equal 16%

of the value of goods that China exports to other countries through Hong Kong, and range between 10%
and 21% of this export value for various manufacturing goods and across different years.



Robert C. Feenstra              Gordon H. Hanson                       Songhua Lin
Department of Economics         IR/PS                                  Department of Economics
University of California        University of California, San Diego    Denison University
Davis, CA 95616                 9500 Gilman Drive                      Granville, OH 43023
and NBER                        La Jolla, CA 92093-0519                lins@denison.edu
rcfeenstra@ucdavis.edu          and NBER
                                gohanson@ucsd.edu
1. Introduction

        Among the fastest growing countries of the world, China’s entry into global markets

during the past two decades has already brought large changes to the pattern of world trade.

These changes will no doubt be accelerated by its pending entry into the World Trade

Organization. But China’s large and growing trade volumes have not been achieved through

liberalization and growth alone. To a substantial extent, its trade has been intermediated by the

entrepôt economy of Hong Kong. Over the period 1988-1998, an average of 53% of Chinese

exports were re-exported through Hong Kong.1 Recent theoretical literature emphasizes the

importance of intermediaries in reducing informational barriers to international trade (Casella

and Rauch, 2003, Rauch and Casella, 2003, Rauch and Trindade, 2000, Rauch and Watson,

2002, Wan and Weisman, 1999). This is confirmed by empirical studies, such as Gould (1994),

Head and Ries (1998), and Rauch and Trindade (2002), who find that bilateral trade volumes are

higher between countries that share large immigration flows and/or ethnic populations.

Presumably, these networks serve as conduits of information about trading opportunities.

        Hong Kong traders engage in a range of activities that benefit their clients. Large trading

houses such as Li and Fung identify firms on the mainland that can engage in “outward

processing,” whereby inputs are imported into China duty-free and processed there, with the

final outputs re-exported through Hong Kong (Sung, 1991).2 The markups on Hong Kong re-

exports of Chinese goods averaged 24% over 1988-96 (Hanson and Feenstra, 2000). For Hong



1
   Re-exporting means that the goods did not receive “substantial transformation” en-route, but did benefit from
sorting, packaging, or the application of service activities such as marketing or transport. Goods that are simply
shipped through Hong Kong, without being removed from their carriers, are not counted among re-exports.
2
   In addition, firms in Hong Kong broker inflows of foreign direct investment and international loans to China, and
advise foreign firms doing business in China (Sung, 1991). Naughton (1999) suggests Hong Kong firms engage in
“property rights arbitrage”: they use their specific knowledge of business conditions in China and the security of
property rights in Hong Kong to broker deals with agents who want access to China's market but are wary about its
insecure property rights.
                                                          2

Kong overall, Young (1999) and Enright et al (1997) estimate that trading services accounted for

about 20% of Hong Kong GDP in 1994, whereas manufacturing accounted for only 7% of GDP

in that year. The large value of these trading services suggest that substantial gains accrue to the

mainland provinces engaged in processing, as well as the partner countries overseas. For

mainland China, Lin (2002) estimates the impact of processing trade on provincial wages. She

uses the methodology of Redding and Venables (2000), which involves estimating a gravity

equation in the first stage and then using the coefficients from this in a second-stage regression

that has wages as the dependent variable. Lin finds that about one-quarter of the wage disparity

between coastal provinces can be explained by their access to international markets.

         Our goal in this paper is to estimate the benefits to countries that purchase goods from

China of having access to intermediary services provided by Hong Kong. Traders in Hong

Kong supply information on markets and producers in China, which provides welfare gains to

foreign firms using these services. We think of a foreign firm that is considering purchasing an

input from China as making a discrete choice over whether to purchase from China directly or

via Hong Kong. Data on “outward processing” trade from China is used to measure inputs

purchased by foreign firms.3 Thinking of the decision problem as a discrete choice over

organizational forms – whether to outsource to China directly or through intermediaries in Hong

Kong – is consistent with recent theoretical work on trade and organizations, such as Rauch and

Trindade (2000) and Grossman and Helpman (2002a,b).4



3
  Until the early 1990s, China had two regimes for exporters (Naughton, 1996). Those doing outward processing for
foreign buyers could import inputs duty free and export abroad directly. Other exporters faced barriers on imported
inputs and had to export through state-controlled foreign trade corporations. In 1992, the government began to lift
these restrictions, but the customs data from China still maintains the distinction between “processing trade” (which
is duty free) and “ordinary trade” (which is subject to duties). We only use data on the former, a substantial portion
of which is handled by intermediaries in Hong Kong.
4
  Empirical literature on transactions costs also uses a discrete-choice framework to examine make-or-buy decisions.
See Baker and Hubbard (2001) and Whinston (2000) for discussion and references.
                                                 3

       In section 2 we describe the discrete choice model, and in section 3 we specify our

estimating equations. While we do not observe the actions of individual firms in deciding how

to purchase from China, we do observe the country-level flows that are re-exported through

Hong Kong. The discrete choice made by each foreign firm purchasing goods from China is

aggregated over all such firms in a given country, so that we obtain constant elasticity of

substitution (CES) demand functions for exports from China versus Hong Kong, by each

province. Thus, we will be using these aggregate trade data to infer the benefits of the discrete

choices made by firms. This approach to estimating a discrete choice model is analogous to that

used by Berry (1994) for models of product differentiation, except that our functional form

(nested CES) will differ from those more used typically (nested or mixed logit).

       Our estimating method consists of two stages, described in section 4. First, we estimate

gravity equations for Chinese provincial exports to various destination countries. This is done

for processed goods that are either exported by China directly or re-exported by Hong Kong.

These gravity equations include indicator variables for each source province and destination

country pair, which measure the aggregate prices of direct Chinese exports and Hong Kong re-

exports. In the second stage, we regress each country’s purchases of Chinese goods from Hong

Kong relative to China on the coefficient of the indicator variables obtained from the gravity

equations, which give estimates of price elasticities. We expect that these elasticities should be

greater than unity, and we find support for this prediction. In section 5 we use these elasticities

to impute the welfare gains from foreign firms being able to purchase Chinese goods through

Hong Kong. These gains are about 16% of the Hong Kong re-export value in the aggregate, and

range between 10% and 21% of the re-export value for various manufacturing goods (and across

different years). In section 6 we conclude.
                                                       4


2. Discrete Choice Model

        In our application, we are interested in the decision by a firm to process a good in China.

This activity involves producing an intermediate input in a foreign country (e.g., the parts of a

shoe) and sending the input to China to be processed into a final good (e.g., assembled into a

finished shoe). We present a model of the firm’s input sourcing decision and then use this

framework to derive aggregate Chinese exports of processed goods, either direct from China or

through traders in Hong Kong, to firms in foreign countries. In the next section, we use these

results to specify estimating equations for Chinese exports.

        We examine the decision of a firm from country m to use China as a partner to acquire a

good. We recognize that there are a range of possible suppliers in China, which differ according

to their quality and complementarity with the purchasing firm. Previous work (McLaren, 2000;

Rauch and Trindade, 2000; Grossman and Helpman, 2002a,b) models this sort of decision using

an “idea varieties” approach in which there is product differentiation around a unit-circle. We

instead exploit two other equivalent approaches to modeling product differentiation: (i)

obtaining “random utility” from various product varieties, and (ii) using a representative agent

who purchases all varieties.5 We start with the first approach as applied to a purchasing firm,

where the random errors measure transaction costs that differ across suppliers. We then show

how to aggregate over input sourcing decisions by individual firms in a given country, to obtain

a representative firm that chooses over two organizational modes: whether to purchase inputs

from China directly or use an intermediary in Hong Kong.

        The decision tree for a firm in country m is shown in Figure 1. Firms can either have an

input processed in China or have it processed elsewhere. This decision occurs at the first level,
5
  The equivalence between the ideal-variety and representative consumer approach in international trade models
was described most fully by Helpman and Krugman (1985). The equivalence between all three approaches in the
consumer context was demonstrated by Anderson, de Palma and Thisse (1992).
                                                 5

where h = 1 refers to sending inputs to China for further processing, and h = 2 refers to sending

inputs elsewhere to be processed. This first choice is implicit in our analysis and not one we

examine empirically. We reference this choice here to acknowledge that there are previous

decision stages that we do not analyze. At the next level, the firm must decide whether to use

intermediaries in Hong Kong (i=1), or purchase inputs from China directly (i=2). At the final

level, the firms (or its intermediaries in Hong Kong) must decide from which province j∈ J im in

China to purchase the good. The set of supplying provinces Jim depends on whether or not Hong

Kong is used as an intermediary and on the destination country m. As illustrated in Figure 1, this

problem involves three levels of nesting. Since we focus on the second and third levels, we

suppress subscript h in what follows.

       Suppose that firms in country m commit to spend the amount Cm to produce an input,

including material purchases and any additional labor needed. We will suppose that these costs

are given by a Cobb-Douglas function of the prices pijm paid in Chinese province j, and the

prices of other inputs qim paid in the home country:

                                           α i 1− α i
                              Cm = y m ( p ijm q im ) ,         j ∈ J im ,                 (1)


where ym is the production of the finished input. For the outward-processing trade, qim denotes

the cost of the raw materials sent from home and pijm denotes production wages in Chinese

province j ∈ J im . The firm may choose to use Hong Kong as an intermediary (i=1) or buy

directly from China (i=2). Note that the cost share of the inputs purchased in China, αi, depends

on whether Hong Kong is used as an intermediary or not.
                                                   6


        The output ym shown in (1) is the expected value of production, which differs from the

actual quantity of production yijm due to a random error:

                                       ln yijm = ln ym + εijm ,                            (2)

where εijm reflects transaction costs arising from outsourcing to a Chinese or Hong Kong partner.

The term εijm in (3) is a random component of production that is observable ex ante to firms.

That is, each firm in country m receives a different draw from the distribution for εm, and makes

its optimizing decisions based on this draw. Let us normalize the price of home labor or

materials at unity, qim ≡ 1. Then solving for expected production ym from (1), and substituting

this into (2) gives:

                       ln yijm = ln C m − αi ln p ijm + ε ijm ,   j∈ J im .                (3)


        In (3), there are two potential advantages to purchasing inputs through Hong Kong rather

than from China directly. First, the quality of production for inputs purchased through Hong

Kong may be higher, implying a lower effective cost of production, p1jm. This might occur if

Hong Kong traders have better information about the quality of producers in China than do

foreign firms. Second, transaction costs could differ for purchases through Hong Kong. If

foreign firms have limited experience in dealing directly with Chinese suppliers or with

importing and exporting goods in the country, they might perceive these transaction costs as high

relative to those from purchasing through Hong Kong, so that the Hong Kong price p1jm is again

low.
                                                                7


         The firm will choose the mode of purchase i=1,2 and supplier province j∈Jim to

maximize its production given costs of Cm. The probability that each firm will choose mode i

and province j is:


         Prob ijm = Prob[ lny ijm ≥ ln y i ' j'm , for all i, i' = 1,2; j ∈ J im , j'∈ J i'm ]
                   = Prob[ − α i ln p ijm + ε ijm ≥ −α i ln p i ' j'm + ε i ' j'm , for all i, i' , j, j' ]     (4)
                   = Prob[ ε ijm − ε i ' j'm ≥ α i (ln p ijm − ln p i ' j'm ),        for all i, i' , j, j' ]


We can think of (4) as the probability that a firm in country m chooses alternative (i,j), or

equivalently, as the expected fraction of the firms in country m choosing that alternative. If

alternative (i,j) is chosen, then the quantity purchased from province j is determined from the

Cobb-Douglas cost function in (1), using Shepard’s Lemma:


                                                      ∂C m    αC
                                            xijm =           = i m .                                            (5)
                                                      ∂p ijm   p ijm


It follows that expected exports from a representative firm in province j to country m are:6


                                                 Xijm = xijm Probijm .                                          (6)


         In general, computing the choice probabilities from (4) can be difficult since it requires

integration over various subsets of the domain of the random terms εm. However, McFadden

(1978, 1981) shows that as long as εm has a generalized extreme value distribution, the discrete

choice problem for the agents can be aggregated to obtain market-level demand quite easily. The

most common application of McFadden’s theorem is to a consumer setting in which the good in

6
  We normalize the population of firms in each province at unity, so that (6) is also total exports from province j to
country m, using mode of outsourcing i.
                                                            8

question is purchased in quantity 0 or 1. In that case, if the random errors in utility are

distributed as iid extreme value, then the solution for demand is the familiar logit formulation. If

instead the random errors in utility were distributed as extreme value but correlated within some

groups, then the solution for demand is the nested logit form.

          Our formulation of the firm’s problem in (3) and (4) of maximizing production given

costs is analogous to the consumer problem of maximizing utility given income. It is more

general than the typical discrete choice problem in that we are also allowing the firm to make a

continuous choice of the inputs purchased in China (and at home). This falls into the category of

so-called “continuous/discrete” models (see Train, 1986). Our formulation of the problem is

simplified, however, because there is no uncertainty over the quantity of purchases in (5): the

random term in production affects only the choice of supplier in (4).7 It turns out that in this

setting, the aggregation results of McFadden (1978, 1981) still apply, as we now describe.

          Suppose that the random term in (3) is distributed as extreme value but correlated within

and across the modes of outsourcing. The distribution function for these errors is,


                                                                          (1− ρ i )  (1− ρ 0 )
                                          2
                                          i =1
                                                 [im
                                                      − ε /(1− ρ i )
                            F(ε m ) = exp ∑ ∑ j∈J − e ijm                 ]
                                                                           (1− ρ 0 ) 
                                                                                     
                                                                                     
                                                                                                   ,      (7)
                                                                                    


where ρi measures the correlation between random terms εijm within each mode of outsourcing

i=1,2, while ρ0 measures the correlation of errors across modes.8 An implication of the discrete



7
  In contrast, Dubin and McFadden (1984) consider an application where there is uncertainty in both the discrete
choice of the product and the continuous amount to consume.
8
    This distribution function is used by McFadden (1981). Johnson and Kotz (1972) report that with ρ0=0, the
parameters (1-ρi ) equal 1−corr (εijm ,εikm ) , for j,k ∈ Jim and j ≠ k.
                                                        9


choice literature is that the correlation should satisfy 0 < ρ0 < ρi < 1, meaning that the errors are

more highly correlated across provinces within a mode of outsourcing than across outsourcing

modes. That is, the uncertainty in transaction costs that a U.S. firm faces when securing a

supplier in Yunan versus Shangxi province is more highly correlated than that between the U.S.

firm and a Hong Kong intermediary when securing a supplier in the same province.

        With the error structure in (7), let Ym ≡ exp[E(ln ym)] denote the expected value of

production for a firm in country m that has spent Cm on outsourcing. Then it can be shown that

expected production (up to a constant) takes on the nested CES form:9


                                                                 (1- ρ i )  (1- ρ 0 )
                                   2
                                   i =1
                                          ( im
                                               − α /(1− ρ i )
                          Ym = C m  ∑ ∑ j∈J p ijmi             )(1- ρ 0 ) 
                                                                          
                                                                                       .                 (8)



This formulation can be thought of as an “indirect production function” of the firm, giving

expected production Ym conditional on costs Cm and input prices. Inverting (8), we obtain the

cost function for the representative firm in country m outsourcing to China,


                                                                 (1- ρ i )  ( ρ 0 -1)
                                   2
                                   i =1
                                          ( im
                                               − α /(1− ρ i )
                          C m = Ym  ∑ ∑ j∈J p ijmi             )(1- ρ 0 ) 
                                                                           
                                                                                       .                  (9)



        We are now in a position to derive exports by suppliers in Chinese provinces to foreign

countries, which will form the basis for the estimating equations. Applying Shepard’s Lemma to

(9), we can compute expected exports from province j to country m, denoted by Xijm as in (6):

9
  A principal result of Anderson, de Palma and Thisse (1989, 1992) is that the CES indirect utility function is
obtained from a discrete choice model using Cobb-Douglas utility with extreme value errors. This is also shown in
Feenstra (2003, Appendix B), though the functions in (7) and (8) are somewhat more general than considered there.
                                                                                10



                                                                                     − α /(1−ρi )         [(1−ρi ) /(1−ρ0 )]
                                              ∂C m  α i C m  p ijm
                                                                      i
                                                                                                        I im
                                    X ijm   =       =                                                                                 ,   (10)
                                              ∂p ijm  p ijm       I im                                     (1−ρi ) /(1−ρ0 )
                                                                                                    [∑2h =1 I hm                  ]


                              − α i /(1− ρ i )
where the term I im ≡ ∑ j∈J p ijm              appearing in (10) is an “inclusive value”. This term is
                                         im


closely related to the price index for Hong Kong re-exports (i=1) or direct Chinese exports (i=2),

which we define as:

                                    Pim ≡     [∑   j∈J im
                                                            p ijmi               ]
                                                              − α /(1− ρ i ) − (1− ρ i ) / α i         − (1− ρ i ) / α i
                                                                                                    = I im                 , i=1,2.       (11)


Comparing (10) with (5) and (6), we see that the final two ratios on the right of (10) equal

Probijm, the probability that province j and mode i are chosen by a firm in country m.10 These

two ratios would also appear in a nested logit system, so that the new feature of exports in (10) is

the term (αiCm/pijm), which reflects the continuous quantity choice of inputs.

            We can use demand in (10) to solve for the elasticity of substitution between products.

For two supplying provinces j, k ∈ J im , we obtain the relative demand from country m,


                                                                           −[ α i /(1− ρ i )]−1
                                               X ijm            pj   
                                                            =                                 , j, k ∈ J im .
                                               X ikm            pk    


Thus, the elasticity of substitution between two provincial suppliers, using either Hong Kong as

an intermediary (i=1) or purchasing directly from China (i=2), is 1+[αi/(1–ρi )] > 1.




                   − α /(1−ρi )
10
     The ratio [ p ijmi           / I im ] is the probability that province j is chosen given that outsourcing mode i is used, and
           (1−ρi ) /(1−ρ0 )              (1−ρ ) /(1−ρ0 )
the ratio Iim               /[ ∑ 2h =1 I hm i            ] is the probability that the mode of outsourcing i=1,2 is chosen.
                                                     11

        In addition, we can use (10) to compute the ratio of country m expenditure on all

products from Hong Kong versus all products imported directly from China. Define the total

value of exports to country m in each mode as,


                                        E im =    ∑ p ijm X ijm ,     i=1,2.                    (12)
                                                 j∈J im



Then from (10) we have that Hong Kong relative to China exports to country m are:


                                                   (1− ρ ) /(1− ρ )
                                        E1m I1m 1           0
                                            = (1− ρ ) /(1− ρ ) .
                                        E 2m I 2m 2         0




This can be re-written in real terms using the price indexes from (11):

                                                           −[ α /(1− ρ )] −1
                                        E1m / P1m P1m 1          0
                                                    = −[ α /(1− ρ )] −1 .                       (13)
                                        E 2 m / P2 m P2 m 2      0




        The left-side of (13) is ratio of purchases from Hong Kong versus purchases from China

directly, deflated by their price indexes, and so can be interpreted as a ratio of real exports. We

see that this depends on the ratio of price indexes for the two modes of outsourcing, and the

elasticities with respect to each price index are 1+[αi/(1–ρ0 )] > 1. With 0 < ρ0 < ρi < 1, these

higher-level elasticities are less than or equal to the lower-level elasticities of substitution,

1+[αi/(1–ρ0 )] < 1+[αi/(1–ρi )].

        In (10) we have an expression for exports of processed goods from a Chinese province,

under either mode of outsourcing (direct from China or through Hong Kong), to purchasing

country m, and in (13) we have an expression for total exports to purchasing country m by the
                                                        12

direct China outsourcing mode relative to total exports to country m by the Hong Kong

outsourcing mode. These two equations are the basis for our empirical work.


3. Estimating Equations

       Equations (10) and (13) contain variables that are difficult to measure empirically. With

some modification, we can convert these expressions into a specification that we can estimate

with available data. Rather than use the quantity of exports from (10) in our empirical work, we

convert it to a value Eijm = pijm Xijm, which is exports from province j to country m using the

mode of outsourcing i=1,2. The total value of exports to country m in each mode is as in (12).

Then the provincial and total exports are computed from (10) as:


                                                        p − α i /(1− ρ i ) 
                                                = E im                     ,
                                                           ijm
                                        E ijm                                                 (14)
                                                              I im         
                                                                           

and,
                                                I (1− ρ i ) /(1− ρ 0 ) 
                               E im   = αi C m  2 im (1− ρ ) /(1− ρ )  .                    (15)
                                                                      0 
                                                ∑ h =1 I hm
                                                               i
                                                                         


       We will let the c.i.f. prices pijm from province j in China differ according to destination

country m, due to transportation costs. These are modeled as a simple function of distance:


                               p ijm = p ij (1 + d ijm ) β ,                                  (16)



where dijm is the distance from province j to country m, and pij is the f.o.b. price in province j net

of any transport costs. Substituting these prices into (14) and (15), we can write exports as:
                                                          13


        ln( E ijm / E im ) = −[ αi /(1 − ρ i )] ln p ij − ln I im − [αiβ /(1 − ρi )] ln(1 + d ijm )   (17)

and,
                              E           α   1 − ρ1               1 − ρ2 
                           ln 1m  = ln 1  +        ln I1m −          ln I 2 m .       (18)
                               E 2m       α 2   1 − ρ0              1 − ρ0 


        Equation (17) gives exports from province j to country m relative to total Chinese exports

to country m, either via Hong Kong (i=1) or directly (i=2). These relative exports depend on the

f.o.b. price in province j, ln pij, which we do not observe. But in a dataset with observations on

provincial exports to many purchasing countries, we can estimate this first variable on the right

of (17) as the coefficient on indicator variable for province j, δ ij ≡ −[ αi /(ρ i − 1)] ln p ij , depending

on the mode of outsourcing. The second variable on the right of (17) is the inclusive value for

exports of mode i to country m. Again, with data on exports to purchasing countries from many

provinces we can estimate this as the coefficient on a indicator variable for purchasing country

m, δ im ≡ − ln I im , depending on the mode of outsourcing. Then we re-write (17) to obtain our

first regression equation:


                 ln(E ijm / E im ) = δ ij + δ im + γ i ln(1 + d ijm ) + µ ijm , j∈ J im , m=1,…,M, (19)


where γ ij ≡ −[α i β /(ρ i − 1)] . The error term in (19) reflects the fact that the c.i.f. price may differ

randomly from the f.o.b. price due to unobserved trade costs.

        The second regression equation is (18), which includes as data a constant term and the

indicator variables δ im ≡ − ln I im , i=1,2. Of course, the estimated value of these from the first

equation must be used, so that (18) is re-written as:
                                                           14


                       E               1 − ρ1  ˆ       1 − ρ1  ˆ
                    ln 1m  = α 0 −         δ1m +         δ 2 m + µ m , m=1,…,M,                     (20)
                        E 2m           1 − ρ0          1 − ρ0 


where the signs of the coefficients on the right have changed from (18) due to the substitution

δ im ≡ − ln I im , i=1,2.11

          In the first stage of estimation, we shall estimate (19) while pooling over Chinese

provinces j=1,…,Jim and destination countries m=1,…,M. Separate regressions are estimated

depending on whether the Chinese exports go through Hong Kong or not (i=1,2), and also for

each year of data. The estimates of δ im ≡ − ln I im , i=1,2, are obtained as the coefficients of

indicator variables for each source-province and destination-country pair in (19), leaving

distance as the remaining independent variable. In the second stage, these inclusive values are

used in (20) to estimate the relative expenditure on exports from Hong Kong versus directly from

China, using the data m=1,…,M over destination countries. We will also pool data over multiple

years to estimate (20), on the assumption that the parameters ρi and ρ0 are constant over time.

          We can compare (19) with a conventional estimation of the gravity equation, under which

exports are regressed on country GDPs and the distance between them. Anderson and Van

Wincoop (2001) have correctly criticized this conventional approach since it fails to take account

of the price indexes that should appear in the equation. They show how to solve implicitly for

the price index using observed trade data, and build this into their estimation. The inclusive

values that we have used are very similar to their price indexes: in logs the price indexes in (11)

are ln Pim = −[(1 − ρi ) / αi ] ln I im = [(1 − ρ i ) / αi ]δim , so the indicator variables δim are directly

proportional to the prices indexes.


11
     Since the regressors in (20) are estimated, we use bootstrapped standard errors to compute the t-statistics.
                                                      15


        By including the indicator variables δim in equations (19) and (20),we are effectively

including the price indexes, consistent with the critique of Anderson and van Wincoop (2001).

This approach is similar to Redding and Venables (2000), who show how a correct estimation of

the gravity equation can be obtained by using indicator variables for source and destination

countries; in comparison, we are including indicator variables for each source province and each

destination country. After estimating these indicator variables in a first stage, Redding and

Venables proceed by specifying a second-stage regression that uses these indicator variables to

estimate wages in exporting countries. In this formulation, trade benefits exporters by raising

wages. In contrast, we shall use the estimates from (20) to impute benefits to importers from

having Hong Kong available as an intermediary in outsourcing to China. The details of this

welfare calculation will be discussed after presenting estimates of (19) and (20).


4. Data and Estimation

        Data on direct trade between Chinese provinces and destination countries is obtained

from the Customs General Administration of the People’s Republic of China, which provides the

value and quantity of exports and imports under the ordinary and processing trade regime by

province and year for 1988 to 1998. To compile indirect exports of Chinese goods that are sent

to Hong Kong and then re-exported, we use Hong Kong imports, exports, and re-exports from

the Hong Kong Census and Statistical Office for 1988 to 1998.

        We measure distance between Chinese provinces and the rest of the world in two

different ways: arc distance,12 which is the minimum-length arc that connects each Chinese

province to a destination country, and “internal-external” distance, which assumes that goods


12
  We obtain each location’s latitude and longitude from http://www.mapblast.com/myblast/index.mb ,
and http://www.nau.edu/~cvm/latlongdist.html provides the distance calculation.
                                                 16

from an interior province must pass through a transportation hub in a coastal province (internal

distance), and then be delivered to the rest of the world (external distance). Internal distance is

in terms of rail distance, obtained from Chinese railroad timetables. External distance is the arc

distance between a Chinese port and the destination country.

       Table 1 shows total China exports, China outward processing exports, and Hong Kong

re-exports of Chinese goods for 1988-1998. Total China exports (direct trade plus re-exports)

have risen dramatically over time. Outward processing and shipments through Hong Kong are a

substantial part of this total. The outward processing share of China’s total exports in column (6)

increases from 32% in 1988 to 55% by 1998. The re-export share of China’s total exports in

column (2) increases from 43% in 1988 to 61% in 1993 and then declines to 45% by 1998. The

decline in the later period may be due in part to increases in exports by Chinese regions distant

from Hong Kong (Sung, 1997). The re-export share of Chinese outward processing exports

shown in column (3) also rises and then falls, from 67% in 1988 to 83% in 1993 and then down

to 61% by 1998. Columns (4)-(6) show that the outward processing share of direct Chinese

exports is smaller than for Hong Kong re-exports, though both have been rising over time.

       Table 2 shows the distribution of total Chinese exports and Hong Kong re-exports of

Chinese goods across one-digit SITC (Standard Industrial Trade Classification) industries.

About 43% of total exports are in miscellaneous manufactured articles (SITC 8), whose major

sub-sectors are apparel, footwear and toys. Machinery and transport equipment (SITC 7) and

manufactured goods classified by material (SITC 6), which include leather, metal, paper, rubber,

textile and wood products, are two additional important sources of exports, each accounting for

17% of shipments. SITC 7 and 8 are the two industries in which re-exports account for the
                                                  17

largest fraction of total exports, with re-export shares of 70%. These are also the two industries

in which outward-processed goods dominate China's shipments to Hong Kong.

       Table 3 shows the distribution of direct exports and Hong Kong re-exports across regions

and the average share of re-exports in total exports by region. For both direct exports and re-

exports, the major destinations are the relatively large markets of North America, Western

Europe, and East Asia. The regions for which re-exports account for most trade include the

relatively rich and distant regions of North America (71%) and Western Europe (62%), the

relatively rich and near region of Oceania (61%), and the relatively poor and distant regions of

Latin America (65%) and Africa (50%). Evidently, the benefits of using Hong Kong as an

intermediary are less important for other nearby countries in Asia, and Eastern Europe.


4.1 Gravity Equation

       In the first stage regression, we estimate the gravity equation in (19). We show results

for both measures of distance. Table 4 reports OLS coefficient estimates for 1995. Estimates for

other years are very similar. The dependent variable is direct Chinese exports or indirect Hong

Kong re-exports from Chinese provinces to destination countries. All exports are of goods

related to outward processing. The independent variables are the log of arc distance or the log of

internal distance plus the log of external distance, as well as indicator variables for the

destination country and the Chinese province. For direct exports from China, coefficients on arc

distance and internal-external distance are negative and precisely estimated. For Hong Kong re-

exports, coefficients on internal-external distance are negative and precisely estimated, but the

coefficient on arc distance has a positive sign. We constructed arc distance for Hong Kong re-

exports as the sum of the arc distance between the Chinese province and Hong Kong and the arc

distance between Hong Kong and rest of the world. We suspect that the arc distance between the
                                                  18

Chinese province and Hong Kong may be a poor indicator of true transportation cost because of

uneven rail, road, and water links within the country. Internal-external distance is likely to be a

better measure of this type of transportation costs.

       To see whether coefficient estimates vary across industries, Table 5 presents regression

results on the gravity equation in 1995 for one-digit SITC industries. We first show results for

direct Chinese trade and then for Hong Kong re-exports. In both cases, the distance measure is

the internal-external variable. There are more observations for Hong Kong re-exports than for

direct China trade, which suggests that Chinese provinces are able to trade with a larger number

of countries when firms use traders in Hong Kong as intermediaries. For direct China trade, in

most industries internal and external distance are negatively correlated with exports. A few

industries, such as beverages and tobacco, have anomalous results.

       For Hong Kong re-exports, in most industries internal distance is negative and precisely

estimated but external distance is estimated quite imprecisely. It appears that Hong Kong re-

exports of Chinese goods are only weakly correlated with distance to the destination country.

One explanation of this result is that since external distance is the arc distance from Hong Kong

to the destination country it may be a noisy measure of transportation cost. A second

explanation is that internal distance, the distance from a Chinese port to the exporting province,

is the primary concern of purchases in importing countries. Given large costs of transporting

goods from China’s interior to the coast, firms in destination countries prefer to purchase goods

from provinces that have a geographic advantage in delivering the goods to Hong Kong.


4.2 Hong Kong Re-exports versus Direct Chinese Exports

       In the second-stage regression, equation (20), we use the estimated coefficients on the

destination-country indicator variables, δ̂ im , i=1,2, obtained from estimation of the first-stage
                                                           19

gravity equation (using the internal-external distance variable). These coefficients are

proportional to the price indexes for either direct purchases from China or indirect purchases

through Hong Kong. The dependent variable in (20) is the ratio of Hong Kong re-exports to

direct China exports to a given destination country. An increase in the Hong Kong inclusive

value (price index) should lower the relative Hong Kong share, while an increase in the direct

China inclusive value (price indexes) should raise the relative Hong Kong share.13 Therefore,

the Hong Kong inclusive value (price index) should enter with a negative sign in (20), and the

direct China inclusive value should enter with a positive sign. We run this regression with data

pooled over 11 years, all destination countries, and all industries.

         Table 6 presents the estimation results for the second-stage regression. The implication

of the discrete choice literature that 0 < ρ0 < ρi < 1 means that the estimated coefficients on

inclusive values (price indexes) should both be less than unity in absolute value. The results are

consistent with this restriction under either specification of distance. In addition the signs of the

estimated coefficients are all as expected and are all precisely estimated.

         Table 7 reports the second-stage estimation results at the one-digit SITC level. The first

column of Table 7 indicates that for most industries the Hong Kong inclusive values have the

expected negative sign and are precisely estimated. The exceptions are manufacturing goods

classified by material, which has the wrong sign, and miscellaneous manufacturing articles,

which is imprecisely estimated.14 In the second column, the inclusive values for direct Chinese

trade have the expected positive sign and are precisely estimated for five industries and are

imprecisely estimated for three industries.

13
    Recall from (13) that the elasticities of the relative expenditures with respect to each price index is greater than
one in absolute value.
14
    When the second-stage regression for manufacturing goods classified by material is run using the inclusive
values obtained from the first-stage using arc distance, the second-stage results are stronger, as indicated in the notes
to Table 7. Those results are used for the calculations in Table 9.
                                                                    20



5. Welfare Benefits from China’s Trade with Hong Kong

        We turn now to the question posed at the outset of the paper: what is the welfare gain to

a country from being able to purchase Chinese goods through Hong Kong rather than from China

directly? Going through Hong Kong gives purchasers access to intermediary services they might

not have, otherwise. We utilize the indirect production function in (8) for the representative firm

                                                           − α i /(1− ρ i )
in country m. Using the indicator variables I im ≡ ∑ j∈J p ijm              , we can write this value as,
                                                                                   im



                           Ym = C m I1m   [   (1− ρ1 ) /(1− ρ 0 )
                                                                    + I2m                    ]
                                                                       (1− ρ 2 ) /(1− ρ 0 ) (1− ρ 0 )
                                                                                                           .   (20)


        The benefits to a purchasing country from having Hong Kong available can be computed

as the log of the ratio of expected production with and without this intermediary, or,



                      [(   (1− ρ1 ) /(1− ρ 0 )
           (1 − ρ 0 ) ln I1m
                                                    (1− ρ 2 ) /(1− ρ 0 )
                                                 + I2m                     )I   (1− ρ 2 ) /(1− ρ 0 )
                                                                                2m                     ]
                                                   = (1 − ρ 0 ) ln[(E1m + E 2m ) E 2 m ] ,                     (21)


where the second line is obtained by making use of Hong Kong re-exports and China exports,

E1m and E2m, as in (15). This welfare expression can be re-written as,


        (1 − ρ 0 ) ln[(E1m + E 2m ) E 2 m ] = (ρ 0 − 1) ln[E 2 m (E1m + E 2m )]


                                  {                                        }
                = (ρ 0 − 1) ln 1 − [E1m (E1m + E 2 m )] > (1 − ρ 0 ) [E1m (E1m + E 2m )] ,                     (22)


where the final inequality follows from the concavity of the natural log function.

        From (22), a lower-bound to the welfare gain is the share of Hong Kong re-exports in

total Chinese trade times the coefficient (1-ρ0), which is inversely related to the upper-level
                                                         21


elasticity 1+[αi/(1-ρ0)]. The result that the welfare gain from a “new product” equals its share of

expenditure times a term inversely related to the elasticity is obtained for CES functions by

Feenstra (1994). The expression in (22) is completely analogous to this CES result, where the

“new product” is the Hong Kong intermediaries. The more valuable is the information provided

by these traders, the higher will be expenditure on Hong Kong re-exports, and the greater is the

welfare gain in (22); conversely, the higher is the elasticity, the lower is the welfare gain.15

         To compute this gain, however, we need to have an estimate of ρ0. Our second-stage

estimation in (20) provides us with estimates of the ratios (1-ρ1)/(1-ρ0) and (1-ρ2)/(1-ρ0). In

order to obtain ρ0, therefore, we need some independent estimates of ρ1 or ρ2. To obtain this, we

note that from (10) the coefficient 1+α1/(1-ρ1) equals the own-price elasticity of demand for a re-

export from any province through Hong Kong. Consider a trader in Hong Kong who buys some

good k in China and then re-exports it. The trader will choose price p1k (where i=1 indicates

Hong Kong re-exports k denotes the good) to maximize profits. From the first-order conditions

to the trader’s profit-maximization problem, we can express the markup of price over marginal

cost as inversely related to the price elasticity of demand:


                                     p1k − c1k           1
                                               =                     .                                      (23)
                                        p1k      1 + [α1 /(1 − ρ1 )]

where p1k is the f.o.b. price for good k in Hong Kong, and c1k is the marginal cost to the trader of

obtaining good k from China.


15
    We prefer using the lower-bound on the right of (22) to the expression in (21), because it can be argued that (22)
is robust to having alternative options for outsourcing beyond just Hong Kong and China directly. Recall from
Figure 1 that a firm in country m first has the choice over whether to purchase from China (directly or via Hong
Kong) or from another country. Even if we take these alternative countries into account, the welfare gain from using
Hong Kong is still bounded from below by the share of Hong Kong in total expenditure on outsourcing.
                                                           22

         We calculate the markup on the left of (23) based on the price at which Hong Kong

imports disaggregate goods from China, and the price at which it re-exports them, as described in

Feenstra, et al (1998, 1999). Denoting these markups by π1k , we obtain the simple equation,

                                                     1
                                     π1k =                       + ε1k ,                                     (24)
                                             1 + [α1 /(1 − ρ1 )]


where the error term reflects inaccuracies in measuring the markups across goods. Therefore, an

estimate of the elasticity of demand for products re-exported through Hong Kong is:

                                                               1
                                              π1 =                           ,                               (25)
                                                     1 + [αˆ 1 /(1 − ρˆ 1 )]


where we take the mean of the markups over all products. The mean Hong Kong markups for

each of the years in our sample is shown in column (1) of Table 8. With these, we calculate the

elasticity of demand as 1 + αˆ 1 /(1 − ρˆ 1 ) = 1 / π1 .

         Next, we obtain an estimate of the cost-share α1 by using Chinese trade data on

processing trade. Specifically, we compute α1 as the difference between Chinese processing

exports and processing imports from Hong Kong, divided by the value of processing exports.

This calculation reflects the value-added of processing goods in China, relative to their final

export value, and the results are shown in column (2) of Table 8.16 The value-added in China

was about 12% of exports in 1989, rising to one-third of export value in 1998. Using these

estimates, the implied value of (1 − ρˆ 1 ) in column (3) is obtained as αˆ 1 /[(1 / π1 ) − 1] .



16
  We make this calculation for processing goods imported to China from Hong Kong, and then exported back to
Hong Kong. A much smaller value of processing goods enter China from other countries, which would provide us
with an estimate of α2 rather than α1. We find that α2 is more than twice as high as α1 in early years, but similar in
recent years.
                                                          23


         Finally, we divide (1 − ρˆ 1 ) by the absolute coefficient on the Hong Kong indicator

variable in regression (20), which was 0.28 in Table 6, to obtain an estimate of (1 − ρˆ 0 ) . These

values are shown in column (4) of Table 8, and fluctuate between 0.1 and 0.4. Multiplying these

by the Hong Kong share of total processing exports from China, in column (5), we obtain the

welfare gains shown in column (6). These gains are between 9% and 24% of expenditure on

processing exports, averaging 16% over the sample years. The variation around this average

reflects annual fluctuations in the markups charged on Hong Kong re-exports, as well as the

value-added in China on processing goods.

         In Table 9, we perform the same calculation using the one-digit SITC industries.                      In

several industries, such as food and live animals, beverages and tobacco, and mineral fuels, re-

exports through Hong Kong are so low that there is little gain to this activity. But for many

manufactured goods (SITC 6 and 7), we obtain sizable estimates of the welfare gain: 10% for

the large category of manufactured goods classified by material, and 21% for machinery and

transportation equipment.17 Unfortunately, in the category of miscellaneous manufactured

articles (SITC 8) we did not obtain a coefficient on the Hong Kong inclusive value of the correct

sign, so we cannot make the welfare calculation in this industry. Across all industries, we utilize

the aggregate second-stage regression coefficients in Table 6, and again find a welfare gain of

16%, as obtained when we averaged the annual data.




17
   In manufactured goods classified by material, we use the absolute coefficient on the Hong Kong indicator
variable of 0.23, reported in the notes to Table 7. This is obtained using arc distance in the gravity equation. In
addition, we use the aggregate cost share α1= 0.23, which is the average over 1988 - 1998 from Table 8. This cost
share cannot be calculated at the industry level from our data.
                                                24


6. Conclusions

       Recent theoretical work in international trade emphasizes the importance of traders:

agents who are able to match clients across different countries. Among the largest traders in the

world economy are those located in Hong Kong, who intermediate a huge volume of trade for

China and other Asian countries. This intermediation surely brings significant gains to their

clients, and in this paper we estimate the welfare gains to countries that use Hong Kong to

outsource to China. Such outsourcing can be measured by outward processing trade in China.

       Our theoretical model allows us to impute price indexes (or “inclusive values”) for Hong

Kong re-exports versus direct Chinese exports to various destination countries. The demand for

each of these two modes of outsourcing is elastic (due to the presence of the other alternative), so

an increase in either price should reduce the share of expenditure on those exports. We obtain

price elasticities of the anticipated sign for Hong Kong re-exports of processing goods. Using

these, the gains are calculated at 16% of the Hong Kong re-export value of processing goods, and

range between 10% and 21% of the re-export value for specific manufacturing goods. For

example, China’s total exports of processing goods (either directly or via Hong Kong) was

nearly US$ 100 billion in 1998. Applying the welfare estimate of 16%, this yields gains of US$

16 billion to the purchasing countries. About one-third of these gains would accrue to firms in

North America, and another one-quarter to firms in Western Europe. These represent efficiency

gains to the firms involved in outsourcing, due to savings in transaction costs that would arise

from dealing directly with firms in China. The efficiency gain of 16% is sizable by any standard,

and would be passed onto consumers worldwide in lower prices for goods outsourced through

Hong Kong.
                                              25


References

Anderson, James and Eric van Wincoop, 2001, “Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
       Puzzle,” NBER working paper no. 8079.
Anderson, Simon P., Andre de Palma, and Jacques-Francois Thisse, 1992, Discrete Choice
       Theory of Product Differentiation, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Baker, George P. and Thomas N. Hubbard, 2001, “Empirical Strategies in Transaction Cost
       Economics: Information and the Boundary of the Firm.” American Economic Review 91:
       184-188.
Casella, Alessandra, and James E. Rauch, 2003, “Anonymous Market and Group Ties in
       International Trade,” Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
Dubin, Jeffrey A. and Daniel L. McFadden, 1984, “An Econometric Analysis of Residential
       Electric Appliance Holdings and Consumption,” Econometrica, 52(2). March, 345-362.
Enright, Michael J., Edith E. Scott, and David Dodwell. 1997. The Hong Kong Advantage.
       Hong Kong: Oxford University Press.
Feenstra, Robert C., 2003. Advanced International Trade: Theory and Evidence. Princeton:
       Princeton University Press.
Feenstra, Robert C, 1994, “New Product Varieties and the Measurement of International Prices,”
       American Economic Review, 84(1), March, 157-177.
Feenstra, Robert, Wen Hai, Wing T. Woo, and Shunli Yao, 1998, “The U.S.-China Bilateral
       Trade Balance: Its Size and Determinants,” NBER Working Paper no. 6598, June.
Feenstra, Robert, Wen Hai, Wing T. Woo, and Shunli Yao, 1999, “Discrepancies in International
       Data: An Application to China-Hong Kong Entrepôt Trade,” American Economic Review
       Papers and Proceedings, May.
Gould, David M, 1994, “Immigrant Links to the Home Country: Empirical Implications for
       U.S. Bilateral Trade Flows.” Review of Economics and Statistics 76: 302-316.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, 2002a, “Integration versus Outsourcing in Industry
       Equilibrium,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117(1), May, 85-120.
Grossman, Gene M. and Elhanan Helpman, 2002b, “Outsourcing in a Global Economy, “NBER
       Working Paper No.8728.
Hanson, Gordon H. and Robert C. Feenstra, 2001, “Intermediaries in Entrepôt Trade: Hong
       Kong Re-Exports of Chinese Goods,” NBER Working Paper no. 8088.
                                               26


Head, Keith and John Ries, 1998, “Immigration and Trade Creation: Econometric Evidence
       from Canada.” Journal of International Economics 31(1): 47-62
Helpman, Elhanan and Paul R. Krugman, 1985, Market Structure and Foreign Trade.
       Cambridge: MIT Press.
Johnson, Norman Lloyd and Samuel Kotz, 1972, Distributions in Statistics: Continuous
       Multivariate Distributions. New York: Wiley.
Lin, Songhua, 2003, Ph.D. Dissertation, University of California, Davis.
McFadden, Daniel, 1978, “Modeling the Choice of Residential Location,” in Anders Karlqvist,
       L. Lundqvist, F. Snickars, and J. Weibull, eds., Spatial Interaction Theory and Planning
       Models, Amsterdam: North-Holland, 75-96.
McFadden, Daniel, 1981, “Econometric Models of Probabilistic Choice,” in Charles F. Manski
       and Daniel McFadden, eds., Structural Analysis of Discrete Data with Econometric
       Applications, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 198-272.
Naughton, Barry, 1996, “China’s Emergence and Prospects as a Trading Nation,” Brookings
       Papers on Economic Activity, 2: 1996, pp. 273-343.
Naughton, Barry, 1999, “Between China and the World: Hong Kong’s Economy Before and
       After 1997,” in Gary Hamilton, ed., Cosmopolitan Capitalists: Hong Kong and the
       Chinese Diaspora at the End of the Twentieth Century. Seattle: University of Washington
       Press.
Rauch, James E. and Alessandra Casella, 2003, “Overcoming Informational Barriers to
       International Resource Allocation: Prices and Group Ties,” Economic Journal,
       forthcoming.
Rauch, James E. and Vitor Trindade, 2000, “Information and Globalization: Wage Co-
       Movements, Labor Demand Elasticity, and Conventional Trade Liberalization” NBER
       Working Paper no. 7671.
Rauch, James E. and Vitor Trindade, 2002, “Ethnic Chinese Networks in International Trade,”
       Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(1), February, 116-130.
Rauch, James E. and Joel Watson, 2002, “Entrepreneurship and International Trade,” NBER
       Working Paper no. 8708.
                                               27


Redding, Stephen and Anthony Venables, 2000, “Economic Geography and International
       Inequality,” CEPR Discussion paper no. 2568.
Sung, Yun-Wing, 1991, The China-Hong Kong Connection, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
       University Press.
Train, Kenneth, 1986, Qualitative Choice Analysis. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Young, Alwyn, 1999, “Transport, Processing and Information: Value Added and the Circuitous
       Movement of Goods,” May, Univ. of Chicago, manuscript.
Wan, Henry Y, Jr., and Jason Weisman, 1999, “Hong Kong: The Fragile Economy of
       Middlemen.” Review of International Economics 7(3): 410-530.
Whinston, Michael D., 2000, “On the Transaction Cost Determinants of Vertical Integration,”
       Northwestern University, manuscript.
                                             28



            Table 1: Direct Exports and Re-exports of Chinese Goods (Percent)


              Total        Re-Export       Re-Export      Outward Processing Share of China:
         China Exports    Share of Total Share of China    Direct  Re-exports to    Total
Year:    (billions US$)   China Exports    Processing     Exports   Hong Kong      Exports
                                            Exports
              (1)              (2)             (3)           (4)          (5)            (6)

  88         38.7             43.1            66.7          12.8         49.7           32.1
  89         46.3             51.5            72.7          19.7         56.9           40.3
  90         55.4             55.2            74.4          21.9         58.5           43.4
  91         67.8             59.1            77.2          24.9         61.5           47.1
  92         84.7             60.1            79.2          24.8         63.1           47.9
  93         98.0             61.3            83.4          24.4         67.2           49.4
  94         120.2            57.7            75.1          27.4         62.1           47.7
  95         151.6            53.3            70.0          32.7         65.8           50.1
  96         161.0            49.8            69.7          38.1         76.0           54.3
  97         181.3            46.9            62.2          39.6         69.9           52.7
  98         177.7            45.4            61.3          40.7         73.8           54.7

Notes: Column (1) shows total China exports (direct exports plus re-exports through Hong
Kong) in billions of current U.S. dollars; column (2) shows Chinese re-exports through Hong
Kong as a share of total Chinese exports; column (3) shows Chinese re-exports through Hong
Kong of outward processing goods as a share of total Chinese outward processing exports;
columns (3)-(5) shows the share of exports related to outward processing in direct Chinese
exports to countries other than Hong Kong, Chinese re-exports to Hong Kong, and total Chinese
exports.
                                                 29


                 Table 2: Direct Exports and Re-exports of Chinese Goods,
                              by One-digit SITC Industry (Percent)


                             Industry   Re-Export     Re-Export       Outward Processing
                             Share of    Share of      Share of        Share of Industry:
  SITC Industry:               Total     Industry      Industry        Direct    Exports to
                             Exports     Exports      Processing      Exports Hong Kong
                                                       Exports
                               (1)         (2)            (3)            (4)         (5)

 0 Food and Live               6.5        14.2           19.8           8.9          16.0
   Animals
 1 Beverages and               0.4        35.1           51.3           6.7          17.0
   Tobacco
 2 Crude Materials             3.9        22.0           51.8           2.8          11.6

 3 Mineral Fuels               4.8         0.6            3.3           3.9          15.8

 4 Animal and                  0.1        17.1            0.0           15.1         72.5
   Vegetable Oils
 5 Chemical Products           4.7        21.9           30.5           12.9         27.6

 6 Manufactured Goods         17.8        41.6           44.4           28.0         42.1
   Classified by Material
 7 Machinery and              17.2        69.5           75.4           44.7         84.4
   Transport Equip.
 8 Misc. Manufactured         43.4        70.1           73.6           43.9         71.4
   Articles


Notes: Column (1) shows each one-digit SITC industry's share of total Chinese exports ; column
(2) shows the share of re-exports in each industry’s total exports; column (3) shows re-exports
through Hong Kong of outward processing goods as a share of industry outward processing
exports; and columns (4)-(5) shows the share of exports related to outward processing in direct
industry exports to countries other than Hong Kong, and industry re-exports to Hong Kong. All
figures are averages over the 1988-1998 period
                                               30



Table 3: Direct Exports and Re-Exports of Chinese Goods by Region (Percent)


                                     Region           Region        Re-Export
          Region                    Share of         Share of        Share of
                                 Direct Exports     Re-Exports     Total Exports
                                       (1)               (2)             (3)

          Africa                       3.2               2.6            49.9
          East Asia                   36.8              18.0            35.6
          Eastern Europe               4.2               0.9            24.8
          Latin America               2.5               4.2             65.0
          Middle East                  4.0              2.6             42.8
          North America               16.7              37.3            71.4
          Oceania                      1.7               2.4            61.2
          South Asia                  2.7               1.0             30.6
          Southeast Asia              11.2              6.0             37.8
          Western Europe              16.9              24.9            62.1

Notes: This table shows each region’s share of Chinese direct exports in column (1) and of total
re-exports of Chinese goods by Hong Kong in column (2). Column (3) shows the share of re-
exports in Chinese exports to each region. All figures are averages over the period 1988-1998.
                                          31




              Table 4: Gravity Equation at Aggregate Level, 1995



                        Direct China Trade                 Hong Kong Re-exports


     Using Arc Distance
     Arc Distance                -1.08                                1.56
                                (-5.73)                              (6.39)
     Observations                1920                                 4154
     R-squared                   0.62                                 0.84

     Using Internal-External Distance
     Internal Distance        -0.59                                   -3.44
                             (-9.91)                                (-87.87)
     External Distance        -0.86                                   -0.23
                             (-4.38)                                 (-3.91)
     Observations             1920                                    4154
     R-squared                0.61                                    0.85

Notes: This table shows regressions results for the specification in equation (19). The
dependent variable is the log ratio of outward processing exports by Chinese province,
industry, and destination country to total outward processing exports by industry and
destination country (regressions are run separately for each year). The independent
variables are log distance, indicator variables for the destination country, and indicator
variables for the Chinese province. The regressions are run separately for two
outsourcing modes, direct exports from China and re-exports of Chinese goods through
Hong Kong. T-statistics are in parentheses.
                                                   32




                     Table 5: Gravity Equation for SITC Industries, 1995



                            Direct China Trade                    Hong Kong Re-Exports
                       Internal External                       Internal External
                       Distance Distance Obs. R2               Distance Distance Obs. R2

Food and                 -0.44     -1.59     338        0.65    -0.45      -0.04    1516 0.77
Live Animals            (-1.82)   (-3.25)                      (-7.04)    (-0.17)

Beverages and            -0.74      -0.1     83         0.73     0.90      -0.33    362   0.70
Tobacco                 (-2.57)   (-0.13)                       (9.66)    (-0.86)

Crude                    -0.07     -1.01     172        0.62    0.23       0.4      654   0.69
Materials               (-0.27)   (-1.62)                       (1.8)     (1.22)

Mineral Fuels             0.64     -1.32     76         0.72     0.19      -0.07    220   0.97
                         (1.15)   (-0.45)                       (9.19)    (-0.74)

Animal and                 -         -        -          -      -0.09      1.02     80    0.89
Vegetable Oilsa                                                (-0.38)    (1.34)

Chemical                 -0.17     -1.37     624        0.62     -0.46     0.25     2507 0.76
Products                (-1.49)   (-3.63)                      (-13.01)   (1.34)

Manufactured Goods -0.34           -0.95 1365 0.50 -0.58                   0.11     3577 0.72
Classified by Material (-2.76)    (-3.79)          (-21.54)                (0.8)

Machinery and            -0.40     -0.86 1026 0.51 -0.65                   0.06     3474 0.79
Transport Equip.        (-3.79)   (-2.21)          (-28.75)               (0.42)

Misc. Manufactured       -0.51     -1.86 1296 0.64              -0.86      0.02     3962 0.91
Articles                (-4.94)   (-5.94)                      (-56.4)    (0.18)

Notes:

a. There are insufficient observations on direct China trade for Animal and Vegetable Oils.

The regression results in this table reproduce the results in Table 4 separately for each one-digit
SITC industry. See notes to that table for further details. T-statistics are in parentheses.
                                                33


                    Table 6: Second-Stage Estimation at Aggregate Level



    Hong Kong                  China
     Indicator                Indicator                 Obs.               R2

Using Arc Distance
       -0.16                    0.19                    1582              0.04
      (-5.38)                  (6.06)

Using Internal-External Distance
       -0.28                  0.17                      1582              0.04
      (-5.08)                (5.46)


Notes: This table reports regression results for equation (20), using data over 1988-1998. The
dependent variable is the log ratio of direct China outward processing exports to Hong-Kong re-
exports of outward processed goods from China by industry and destination country (regressions
are run separately for each year). The independent variables are the coefficients on the indicator
variables for destination country from the regressions in column (1) and column (2) in Table 4.
Standard errors are corrected by using bootstrap techniques and t-statistics are in parentheses.
                                                34


                    Table 7: Second Stage Estimation for SITC Industries



                               Hong Kong               China
                                Indicator            Indicator       Obs.            R2

Food and                           -0.41               0.44           689           0.13
Live Animals                      (-3.40)             (8.80)

Beverages and                      -0.44               0.07           220           0.07
Tobacco                           (-3.63)             (0.90)

Crude                              -0.27               0.29           385           0.15
Materials                         (-2.83)             (6.68)

Mineral Fuels                      -0.16               0.22           129           0.15
                                  (-0.43)             (3.52)

Chemical                           -0.52              0.42           1080           0.22
Products                          (-7.80)            (12.32)

Manufactured Goods                 0.16                -0.03         1337           0.08
                       a
Classified by Material            (2.77)              (-0.74)

Machinery and                      -0.19              -0.005         1255           0.07
Transport Equip.                  (-4.31)             (-0.16)

Misc. Manufactured                  0.05                0.30          1359          0.15
Articles                           (0.98)             (11.99)
Notes:
a
  The estimation results using arc distance in the gravity equation are:
                                Hong Kong              China
                                 Indicator           Indicator        Obs.           R2
Manufactured Goods                  -0.23               0.12          1337          0.08
Classified by Material             (-8.61)             (3.45)

The regression results in this table reproduce the results in Table 6 separately for each one-digit
SITC industry. Standard errors are corrected by using bootstrap techniques and t-statistics are in
parentheses. See notes to that table for further details.
                                                 35



                     Table 8: Welfare Gain from Hong Kong Re-exports
                           of Processing Trade, by SITC Industry



                            Share of   Implied          Implied       Re-Export     Welfare Gain
    Year        Markups in   China     Value of         Value of       Share of        (% of
                Hong Kong Processing    (1-ρ1)           (1-ρ0)        Chinese       Processing
                           Exports (%)                               Processing       Exports)
                                                                     Exports (%)
                    (1)           (2)          (3)         (4)           (5)              (6)

     88             0.24          na           na           na           66.7             na
     89             0.26         12.2        0.043        0.152          72.7            11.0
     90             0.25         18.3        0.062        0.222          74.4            16.5
     91             0.27         16.3        0.060        0.216          77.2            16.6
     92             0.23         14.7        0.045        0.159          79.2            12.6
     93             0.17         15.2        0.030        0.109          83.4             9.1
     94             0.25         16.1        0.054        0.191          75.1            14.4
     95             0.25         22.2        0.072        0.258           70             18.0
     96             0.23         27.2        0.079        0.282          69.7            19.7
     97             0.12         31.2        0.041        0.145          62.2            9.0
     98             0.25         33.7        0.111        0.397          61.3            24.3
   Average          0.22         23.0        0.065        0.232          70.1            16.2

Notes:
Columns (1) is computed from Hong Kong trade data, and is denoted by π1 in the text. Columns
(2) is computed from Chinese processing trade data, and is denoted by α1 in the text. Column
(3) equals αˆ 1 /[(1 / π1 ) − 1] . Column (4) equals (1 − ρˆ 1 ) /0.28, where 0.28 is the absolute
coefficient of the Hong Kong indicator variable for processing trade in Table 6. Column (5) is
obtained from Table 1, and column (6) equals columns (4) times (5).
                                                  36


                      Table 9: Welfare Gain from Hong Kong Re-exports
                               of Processing Trade, by SITC Industry


                                                                            Re-export       Welfare
                                    Industry  Implied          Implied       Share of        Gain
SITC      Industry                 Markups in Value of         Value of      Industry        (% of
                                   Hong Kong (1-ρ1)             (1-ρ0)      Processing     Processing
                                                                             Exports        Exports)
                                        (1)            (2)        (3)           (4)           (5)

   0    Food and Live Animals          0.11         0.028        0.069          19.8           1.4

   1    Beverages and Tobacco          0.05         0.013        0.030          51.3           1.5

   2    Crude Materials                0.27         0.084        0.310          51.8          16.1

   3    Mineral Fuels                  0.09         0.023        0.142          3.3            0.5

   4    Animal and Vegetable           0.07         0.017          na           0.0            na
        Oils
   5    Chemical Products              0.05         0.011        0.022          30.5           0.7

   6    Manufactured Goods             0.18         0.051        0.221          44.4           9.8
        Classified by Material
   7    Machinery and                  0.19         0.053        0.277          75.4          20.9
        Transport Equip.
   8    Misc. Manufactured             0.24         0.072          na           73.6           na
        Articles
        All Industries                 0.22         0.065        0.232          70.1          16.2


Notes:
Columns (1) is computed from Hong Kong trade data, and is denoted by π1 in the text. Column
(2) equals 0.23 /[(1 / π1 ) − 1] . Column (3) equals (1 − ρˆ 1 ) divided by the coefficient of the Hong
Kong indicator variable for processing trade in Table 7. Column (4) is obtained from Table 2,
and column (5) equals columns (3) times (4).
                                          37




                                            Firm in
                                           Country m




                Process in China                       Process elsewhere
                    h=1                                    h=2




           Hong Kong               China Direct
              i=1                      i=2




Province               Province
   j=1      …..…         j=30




                   Figure 1: Decision Tree for Firm Outsourcing
