NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STATE LOTTERIES AND CONSUMER BEHAVIOR
Melissa Schettini Kearney
Working Paper 9330
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9330
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2002

The author gratefully acknowledges the helpful comments of Daron Acemoglu, Joshua Angrist,
David Autor, Peter Diamond, Amy Finkelstein, Michael Greenstone, Jonathan Gruber, Jonathan
Guryan, Mark Lewis, Sendhil Mullainathan, Cynthia Perry, and seminar participants at the
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Brown University, Princeton University, and Wellesley
College. Special thanks to the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) CEX division, especially Steve
Henderson, Eric Keil, and Wolf Weber, who were extraordinarily helpful in facilitating access to
confidential BLS data. Any opinions expressed are those of the author and not of the BLS. Dean
Gerstein of NORC went out of his way to provide confidential NORC data in a timely manner.
Thanks also to Brett Toyne of the Multi-State Lottery Association and employees at various state
lottery agencies for assistance compiling lottery jackpot and game information. Patrick Lo provided
research assistance in the processing of jackpot data. Financial assistance was provided by the
National Science Foundation and the Harry S. Truman Foundation through graduate school
fellowships. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
© 2002 by Melissa Schettini Kearney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.

State Lotteries and Consumer Behavior
Melissa Schettini Kearney

NBER Working Paper No. 9330
November 2002
JEL No. D1, H1, H3, H8
ABSTRACT
Despite considerable controversy surrounding the use of state lotteries as a means of public
finance, little is known about their consumer consequences. This project investigates two central
questions about lotteries. First, do state lotteries primarily crowd out other forms of gambling, or do they
crowd out non-gambling consumption? Second, does consumer demand for lottery games respond to
expected returns, as maximizing behavior predicts, or do consumers appear to be misinformed about the
risks and returns of lottery gambles? Analyses of multiple sources of micro-level gambling data
demonstrate that lottery spending does not substitute for other forms of gambling. Household
consumption data suggest that household lottery gambling crowds out approximately $38 per month, or
two percent, of other household consumption, with larger proportional reductions among low-income
households. Demand for lottery products responds positively to the expected value of the gamble,
controlling for other moments of the gamble and product characteristics; this suggests that consumers of
lottery products are not simply uninformed, but are perhaps making fully-informed purchases.

Melissa Schettini Kearney
Department of Economics
Wellesley College
Wellesley, MA 02481
and NBER
mkearney@wellesley.edu

1 Introduction
In the past three decades, the prevalence and scale of state lotteries have expanded dramatically.
The first modern state lottery was introduced in New Hampshire in 1964. By 1973, seven states
operated state lotteries and consumers spent a total of $2.1 billion on lottery products (in year
2000 dollars).1 By 1999, there were 38 state lotteries in operation, and consumers spent a total of
$37 billion. This total represents an annual average of $226 per adult living in a lottery state, or
$370 per household nationwide. This is more than the average household spent in 1999 on
alcoholic beverages or on tobacco products and supplies. It is more than twice the amount
households spent on reading materials. And it is roughly equal to what the average household
spent on life and other personal insurance.2
As the expansion of state lotteries continues, there is substantial public controversy
surrounding the use of lotteries as a means of raising public funds. Opponents argue that state
lotteries prey on minorities and the poor and that spending on state lotteries displaces
consumption and savings. Some worry that governments are “tricking” people with a “sucker’s
bet,” exploiting misinformation on the part of consumers.3 Supporters of state lotteries counter
that people from all demographic groups play the lottery. They argue that people demand
gambling products and a state lottery capitalizes on that demand by providing a product that
substitutes for other forms of gambling. Some characterize lottery sales as voluntary purchases of
entertainment goods.
Despite the controversy, there is virtually no empirical research into the validity of the
claims on either side of the debate. This paper fills that gap by addressing two central questions.
First, do lotteries simply crowd out other gambling expenditures, or does the presence of a state
lottery lead to a reduction in other forms of household spending? Second, does consumer
demand for lottery games respond to expected returns, as maximizing behavior predicts, or do
consumers appear to be misinformed about the risks and returns of lottery gambles?

1

Clotfelter et al. (1999), p. 100. Their figures are in year 1997 dollars.
United States Bureau of Labor Statistics (2001), Table A.
3
To cite two opponents: "In fact, state lotteries ... are mechanisms by which the state seduces its citizens with the
promise of riches, suckering them into gambling away their income and their unemployment checks on games that
offer an almost infinitesimal chance of winning big." Robyn Gearey in The New Republic, May 1997; "The lottery
may seem like ‘funny money’, but it is in effect taxation, taken through a con-trick." The Economist, Nov 18, 2000,
on Britain’s National Lottery.
2

2

The paper first investigates how household gambling behavior responds to the
introduction of a state lottery. I conduct two different analyses to answer this question. The first
is an analysis of micro-level data on household gambling from confidential Bureau of Labor
Statistics (BLS) Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) - Diary Survey files from 1982 to 1998.
During this time 21 states implemented a state lottery. I exploit the variation across states in the
timing of state lottery introduction to compare the change in gambling expenditures among
households in states that implement a lottery to the change among households in states that do
not. The data demonstrate that total household gambling is increased after a state lottery is
introduced, which implies that households are not completely financing lottery gambling by
substituting away from other forms of gambling. A complementary analysis looks at data on
adult gambling behavior from two national surveys, a 1998 survey conducted by the National
Opinion Research Council (NORC) and a 1975 survey conducted by researchers at the
University of Michigan. These data confirm that adults do not reduce their participation in
previously-existing forms of gambling after a state lottery is introduced.
If consumers respond to the presence of a state lottery with new gambling, then they must
substitute away from other consumption. I analyze BLS CEX - Interview Survey data from 1984
to 1998 to investigate to what extent this is true. I exploit the variation across states in the timing
of state lottery introduction to compare the change in household expenditures among households
in states that implement a lottery to the change among households in states that do not. The
analysis finds that household spending on lottery tickets is financed completely by a reduction in
non-gambling consumption. The introduction of a state lottery is associated with a decline of
$115 per quarter in household non-gambling consumption. This figure implies a monthly
reduction of $23 in per-adult consumption, which compares to average monthly sales of $18 per
lottery-state adult. The response is most pronounced for low-income households, which on
average reduce non-gambling consumption by three percent. Among households in the lowest
income third of the CEX sample, the data demonstrate a statistically significant reduction in
expenditures on food eaten in the home (3.1 percent) and on home mortgage, rent, and other bills
(6.9 percent).
The final analysis of the paper is an evaluation of whether lottery consumers appear to be
making informed choices. The answer to this question is important to determining whether the
shift in household consumption is consumer-welfare enhancing. Lottery gambling is part

3

investment, as consumers are making choices over risky assets, and it is part entertainment.
Assuming that the entertainment and pecuniary components of the lottery gamble are separable,
maximizing behavior predicts that consumer demand for lottery products should depend
positively on its expected return, holding constant game characteristics. To evaluate whether this
prediction holds, I analyze weekly sales and characteristics data from 91 lotto games from 1992
to 1998. The analysis suggests that sales are positively driven by the expected value of a gamble,
controlling for higher-order moments of the gamble and non-wealth creating characteristics. This
finding is robust to alternative specifications, including controlling for unobserved product fixed
effects. In addition, I find that consumers respond to non-wealth creating, “entertaining” game
features. Together, these two findings suggest that consumers are at least partly – and potentially
fully – informed, rational consumers. It is consistent with these findings to claim that consumers
derive an entertainment equal to the price of the gamble (one minus expected value), and then,
insofar as they are making investments, they are informed evaluators of gambles.
The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 presents an overview of state lotteries in the
United States. It briefly discusses the history and operation of state lotteries and then presents
micro-level evidence about lottery gambling. The section concludes with a theoretical discussion
about the market for lottery products. Section 3 reviews related evidence. Section 4 discusses the
impact of state lotteries on household expenditures, looking first at gambling behavior and then
at household non-gambling consumption. Section 5 investigates consumer demand for lottery
products as a function of game characteristics. And finally, section 6 provides concluding
comments.
2 State lotteries in the United States
2.1 History and operation
The state of New Hampshire ushered in the era of the modern lottery by introducing a state
lottery in 1964.4 Inspired by New Hampshire’s lead, New York and New Jersey soon introduced
4

Previously, lotteries played a role in raising money for such notable projects as Harvard College, the Continental
Army, and public works undertakings throughout the Colonial period. A scandal involving the Louisiana Lottery in
1894 led to the prohibition of lotteries for seven decades. See Clotfelter et al. (1999) for a more complete discussion
of the history and operation of state lotteries.
4

their own state lotteries. Cross-border lottery sales place pressure on neighboring states to
implement their own state lottery.5 Accordingly, the spread of lotteries primarily followed a
geographical pattern, spreading first across the Northeast, then to the West, and finally to the
Midwest and South. By 1996, 37 states and the District of Columbia operated a state lottery.
Appendix Table 1 lists implementation dates.
In each case the state ended its former prohibition of lotteries and established a state
agency as the sole provider of lottery products. All states use the profits from the state lottery
operation as a source of revenue. Ten of the 38 state lotteries allocate lottery revenues to general
funds; 16 earmark all or part of lottery revenues to education; and the remainder earmark for a
wide variety of uses, some specific and others broad. On average, a dollar wagered on a state
lottery game returns 33 cents of profit to the state. This profit can be likened to an excise tax
levied at a certain rate on the purchases of a particular product. Assuming a five percent average
state income tax, the implicit tax rate on state lotteries in 1997 was approximately 61 percent.6 In
spite of this, the lotteries’ contributions to state budgets are modest. In 1997, the contribution of
state lottery funds to total own-source general revenues ranged between .41 percent in New
Mexico to 4.07 percent in Georgia.7
2.2 Lottery gambling: micro-level evidence
Consumer spending on state lottery products in 1999 totaled $37 billion in year 2000 dollars. The
2000 National Gaming Survey reports that 72 percent of American adults purchased some kind
of lottery product during the year, 28 percent played at least once a week, and 14 percent played
more than once a week.

5

This explanation finds empirical support in Berry and Berry (1990), which finds that the probability that a state
will adopt a lottery increases in the number of its neighbors that have previously adopted lotteries even controlling
for internal characteristics. There is anecdotal support as well. Both Governor Don Siegelman of Alabama and
Governor Jim Hodges of South Carolina campaigned in 1998 on pro-lottery platforms. Sigelman argued, “Hundreds
of millions of Alabama dollars have left Alabama to buy lottery tickets in Florida and Georgia. I say it's time for us
to keep that money here so that our schools can have pre-kindergarten, our schools can have computers, and our
children can go to college tuition-free.”
6
Clotfelter and Cook (1989) calculate that the average excise tax on four products in 1985, including federal, state,
and local taxes was as follows: beer - 15 percent, wine - 17 percent, liquor - 43 percent, and tobacco products - 49
percent.
7
National Gambling Impact Study Commission (1999), pp. 2-4.
5

Micro-level evidence is available from two independent surveys: the 1975 National
Survey of Adult Gambling conducted by Kallick et al. at the University of Michigan and the 1998
National Survey on Gambling conducted by the National Opinion Research Council (NORC)
under contract with the National Gambling Impact Study Commission. The Kallick et. al. (1975)
data consist of 1,749 completed interviews covering participants’ lifetime and past-year
gambling behavior. The NORC (1998) data contain information about the gambling behavior of
2,417 adults from a random-digit dial sample.8 In order to develop estimates of annual lottery
expenditures from the information obtained by the NORC survey, I adopt a set of assumptions
used by Clotfelter and Cook (1999).9 Clotfelter and Cook (1999) calculate that estimates of
national expenditures based on the NORC (1998) survey and this set of assumptions amount to
only 86 percent of recorded sales. The reader should keep in mind that actual expenditures
exceed the amounts discussed in this section. The reported expenditure differences across groups
reflect true differences under the assumption that groups do not under-report lottery expenditures
differentially.
Table 1 presents descriptive information from the NORC survey. The data reveal four
general facts. First, people in all demographic groups participate in lottery gambling, where
participation is defined broadly as any gambling during the year. Fifty-five percent of males and
47 percent of females report participation. The reported participation rate is 52.4 percent among
whites, 42.3 percent among blacks, and 58.8 percent among Hispanics. Table 1 also shows that
participation extends across all income groups.
Second, black respondents spend nearly twice as much on lottery tickets as do white or
Hispanic respondents. Black women report higher average expenditures than white and Hispanic
women as well as white and Hispanic men, in all income groups. The average reported
expenditure among blacks is $200 per year, $476 among those who participate. Black men have
the highest average expenditures. In particular, the fifteen black male high-school dropouts in the
sample report average annual expenditures over $1,000; among the ten who participated in

8

Clotfelter and Cook (1999) use the NORC combined survey which includes the RDD sample and a gambling
patron sample. To preserve the representativeness of the survey sample, I only use the random sample for my
analyses.
9
These assumptions first require assigning discrete values to the reported frequencies: 300 to "about every day", 100
to "1 to 3 times per week," 18 to "once or twice a month," 8 to "a few days all year," and 1 to "only one day in the
past year". Second, if a respondent reports playing multiple types of games, it is assumed they played lotto no more
than once per week.
6

lottery gambling during the year, annual expenditures are over $2,000. In the 1999 Current
Population Survey March file, mean income among this demographic group is $10,400.
Third, average annual lottery spending in dollar amounts is roughly equal across the
lowest, middle, and highest income groups. Reported annual expenditures are $125, $113, and
$145, respectively. This implies that on average, low-income households spend a larger
percentage of their wealth on lottery tickets than other households.
Fourth, lottery participation and spending is much higher in states with state lotteries than
in states without lotteries. As shown in Table 1, participation in lottery gambling among adults
living in lottery states is 54.7 percent, versus 25.2 in non-lottery states. The difference is
statistically significant with a t-statistic of 12.0. Average annual lottery expenditures are
estimated to be $128 among residents of lottery states and $47 among residents of non-lottery
states. The difference is statistically significant, with a t-statistic of 4.62. By 1998, every
continental state without a lottery bordered at least one state with one, making out-of-state lottery
gambling feasible for a sizeable number of adults. The difference is much more pronounced in
the 1975 survey when only 12 states operated lotteries: 50 percent of adults living in states with
lotteries participated compared to only 7 percent of adults in non-lottery states.
2.3 Market conditions: theory
2.3.1 The product market and prices
In a perfect market, characterized by full competition and complete information, gambling
products are supplied competitively by private firms and priced at marginal cost. For simplicity,
assume that all gambles with the same expected value (EV) are valued equally among
consumers. There is no differential entertainment value, nor utility over risk. Define the relevant
price to be the price of a gamble with an EV of $1. Consumers take the private market price as
given, Pp = MC, and products are allocated efficiently. Contrast this environment to one in which
there is only one gambling product and it is supplied by a monopolistic state lottery agency at the
monopoly price Ps. Households face a higher price of gambling, Ps > Pp, so if demand is not fully
inelastic, they purchase fewer gambles.

7

Historically, states have not established state lottery monopolies in a previously
competitive environment. The gambling environment in a state pre-state-lottery can be described
as one in which all lottery games are illegal within the state, but households are offered a limited
supply of alternative gambling forms: illegal “numbers" betting, legal casinos, horse tracks or
charitable gambling, or out-of-state lottery products. In this “limited" market, the price of
gambling faced by household h is
P0h = min{Pn + αnh, Pc + αch, Pb + αbh }
where P0h is the minimum price of gambling among the three available options. Pn is the average
price of a $1 EV gamble offered by numbers bookkeepers; Pc is the average price of a $1 EV
gamble offered by casinos or other legal venues; and Pb is the average price of a $1 EV gamble
offered by lotteries operated in bordering states. The second component α-h is the transaction cost
to the household of the particular gambling type, which includes any transportation cost as well
as any stigma associated with the particular form of gambling.
The establishment of a monopolistic state lottery introduces a new gamble at a price to
household h of Psh = Ps+αsh. The relevant price of a $1 EV gamble for household h becomes P1h
= min{Psh, P0h }. If Psh is time-invariant, P1h - P0h <=0, since alternatives remain available. In
many cases the difference will be less than zero as lottery gambling itself involves minimal
transportation and arguably stigma. (We might suspect that Psh will change; alternatives could
become less costly if the introduction of a lottery reduces the stigma of gambling, thereby
reducing αnh, αch, and/or αoh.)
If consumers prefer a corner solution of no gambling or some fixed level of gambling
losses, there will be no effect on consumer behavior. However, under the usual assumptions
regarding consumer utility, the price and income effects work in the same direction for gambling,
and consumers will increase their gambling expenditures. Because the magnitude of the price
change varies across households, the response will be heterogeneous. (Once we acknowledge
that gambles have differential entertainment values, the household response to state lotteries
becomes more varied.) For consumption, the price and income effects work in opposite
directions; depending on preferences, spending on non-gambling consumption will fall, rise, or
stay the same. If consumers are rational and informed, and externalities are not relevant, then the
reallocation of the household budget induced by the introduction of a state lottery will increase
household welfare.

8

2.3.2 Consumer rationality and information
Among the 38 operating state lotteries in 2000, the average pay-out rate was 52 percent, ranging
from a low of 26 percent in Delaware to a high of 71 percent in Nebraska.10 When a lotto jackpot
grows sufficiently large through rollovers accumulating from a series of drawings in which no
one wins, it may be possible to place a bet with a positive return (Thaler and Ziemba, 1988). But
such occasions are rare, and most lottery bets placed are on unfavorable gambles. Why would a
risk-averse consumer purchase such a gamble?
The first explanation is that consumers know state lotteries offer unfair gambles but
derive entertainment value from playing them. In this case, consumers are fully rational and
informed decision makers and the only concern for economists is that the price is set inefficiently
high at the monopoly price. An alternative explanation is that consumers are misinformed. In
some instances, the odds of winning the jackpot might not be clear. Moreover, the advertised
prize is typically the undiscounted prize amount, not the present discounted value of the annuity
prize.11 In addition, it might be the case that consumers know that the odds of winning are very
small, but they do not actually understand the implications. Psychologists have documented an
“illusion of control,” whereby agents deny the operation of chance, believing that they can
choose winning numbers through skill or foresight (Langer 1975, 1978). According to
Kahneman and Tversky’s (1979) prospect theory, agents overweight small probabilities and
underweight large probabilities. In this line of thought, the agent is rational, but his objective
function is not the objective function of expected utility theory.12 If consumers are not making
informed decisions, the welfare consequences of raising government revenue from lottery
purchases is ambiguous.
2.3.3 Intra-household externalities
10

LaFleur's 2001 World Lottery Almanac.
For example, when the Powerball jackpot was advertised to be $266 million, the present discounted value of the
25-year annuity was $147 million (assuming a six percent interest rate.)
12
An additional concern not addressed in this paper is addiction. It is widely argued that gambling is addictive for
some people, and lottery gambling is no exception. Becker and Murphy (1988) and Gruber and Koszegi (2000)
argue that addiction does not necessarily imply irrationality. But, Gruber and Koszegi (2000) also argue that
addiction amplifies the effects of irrationality. If lottery players are addicted consumers, the welfare consequences of
state lotteries are ambiguous.
11

9

The above discussion focuses on whether the consumer makes choices that unknowingly harm
him, either because of irrationality or misinformation. An additional concern is whether the agent
makes choices that harm those around him, in particular, other members of his household.
Traditionally, economists have considered the family or household as a single unit that
maximizes a common objective function subject to the family budget constraint. But recent
evidence suggests that the household is a collective, not a unitary, entity and that expenditures
depend in part on who controls the household income (Duflo (2000), Browning and Chiaporri
(1998), Udry (1996)). If the members of the household do not share a common utility function,
any increase in gambling expenditures might come at the expense of the well-being of those not
in control of the household finances.
3 Related evidence
This paper provides to the author’s knowledge the first empirical test of the consequences of
state lotteries for consumer behavior. Imbens et al. (1999) estimate the effect of lottery winnings
on players' subsequent earnings, labor supply, consumption, and savings; this is a distinct
question from the impact of lottery exposure on consumption. Clotfelter and Cook’s 1989 book
provides a comprehensive description of the legalization, provision, marketing, and implicit
taxation of state lotteries. Clotfelter et al. (1999) provide a more recent overview of lottery
operations, with particular attention to who plays the lottery, how the lotteries are marketed, and
what kinds of policy alternatives exist for state and federal policymakers. It discusses survey
evidence on lottery gambling based on the 1998 NORC survey discussed in the previous section.
Worthington (2001) documents demographic predictors of lottery gambling in Australia and
concludes that the implicit lottery tax is regressive.
There has been some limited previous investigation into the sales of lottery products.
Clotfelter and Cook (1990a) provide a cursory look at the effect of changing prices and payoffs
on lottery ticket sales. The authors observe 170 consecutive drawings of the Massachusetts lotto
game in the mid-1980s and find that for each $1,000 increase in the predicted jackpot due to
“rollover”, sales increase by $333. Garrett and Sobel (1999) analyze the demand for lottery
games using a 1995 cross-section of 216 lottery games in the United States. The authors make a

10

series of assumptions, including indifference across lottery games, that yield the following result:
the expected utility for any lottery player in a state can be represented by equating the odds ratio
of winning the top prize in games G and g to the utility of winning the top prize in game g. The
authors use the cubic approximation of Golec and Tamarkin (1998) to estimate a model of
expected utility; they estimate the odds ratio as a linear function of the top prize, the square of
the top prize, and the cube of the top prize. The estimated coefficients on the prize and cubic
prize are significantly greater than zero, and the coefficient on the square of the prize is
significantly less than zero. The authors interpret this as evidence of a cubic utility function,
similar to that proposed by Friedman and Savage (1948) and found by Golec and Tamarkin
(1998) in the context of betting at horse tracks.
In addition to the stringency of the identifying assumptions underlying Garrett and Sobel
(1999), the empirical analysis of the paper has three major limitations. First, all on-line games
are included in the estimation sample. The result thus relies on the very strong assumption of a
representative agent across game types. Second, the authors do not control for non-wealth
creating characteristics of games. If consumers enjoy playing lottery games for reasons other
than the gamble itself, omitting game features from the estimation is problematic. And finally,
the key variable in their analysis, jackpot prize, is measured with systematic error. For games
with variable jackpots, the authors estimate average prize using annual sales data and the percent
of sales that is allocated to the prize. This approach does not incorporate the weekly variation in
jackpot size within a game for games with rolling jackpots, but it uses the true jackpot amount
for fixed jackpot games.
Gulley and Scott (1993) and Forrest, Gulley, Simmons (2000) analyze the demand for
lotteries from the perspective of revenue maximization, rather than consumer preferences. Gulley
and Scott (1993) examine drawing level sales data from four lotto games in three states from the
late eighties to early nineties. The authors estimate demand as a function of price, defined as one
minus the expected value, without controlling for higher-order moments or non-wealth creating
characteristics. The resulting price elasticities suggest that two games are setting price close to
the revenue maximizing value, one is setting price too low and the other too high. Forrest,
Gulley, Simmons (2000) similarly examine sale patterns in the first three years of the UK
National Lottery to estimate the price elasticity of demand. Their long-run estimate is close to

11

minus one, which they interpret as evidence that the UK government is maximizing lottery
revenue.
4 The impact of state lotteries on consumer expenditures
Lottery betting is widespread and substantial, as documented in Section 2.2 above. This raises
the question: does the introduction of a state lottery induce new gambling expenditures and
thereby crowd-out non-gambling consumption? Or does it merely cause substitution away from
existing gambling alternatives? I answer these questions with three separate analyses. First, I
investigate how total household gambling expenditures respond after to the introduction of a
state lottery. Second, I analyze how participation in various types of gambling changes. And
third, I investigate how household non-gambling expenditures shift in response to the
introduction of a state lottery. I investigate the impact on gambling activities and non-gambling
consumption separately because there is no single data source containing detailed information
about both household gambling and non-gambling consumption.
4.1 How do state lotteries affect total household gambling?
Evidence from consumer diaries
I investigate whether the introduction of a state lottery leads to increased household gambling
using confidential Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) Diary Survey data files from 1984 to 1999. All dollar values are adjusted to year 2000 dollars
using the BLS Consumer Price Index. These files were accessed under an agreement with the
BLS. The BLS CEX program consists of the quarterly Interview Survey and the two-week Diary
Survey, each with its own independent sample of approximately 5,000 households (7,500 after
1998). The Diary Survey collects information about weekly household expenditures on
frequently purchased small-item goods, including gambling expenditures.13

13

The data is collected through diary forms that include the following written instructions: “Record all your
consumer unit's expenses for the 7-day period indicated on the front page….Please use this diary to record purchases
or expenses, no matter how small or inexpensive they are.”
12

Unfortunately, lottery gambling is drastically underreported in the CEX Diary Survey.14
Based on 1998 sales data compiled by LeFleurs Inc., adults living in lottery states averaged $226
annually on lottery tickets. In contrast, CEX Diary respondents living in lottery states report an
average of $0.71 for the two-week interval. Assuming smooth annual expenditures, this implies
mean annual lottery expenditures of only $36. The underreporting is so severe that magnitudes
implied by an analyses of this data are not reliable. However, the data can reveal whether total
gambling expenses increase when a state lottery is introduced, even if it can not precisely tell us
by how much. Furthermore, if underreporting is proportional across demographic groups, the
CEX Diary data can reveal differential effects across groups.
Is total gambling higher in lottery states than in non-lottery states? The CEX Diary data
suggest that both the unconditional probability of engaging in any type of gambling and total
household gambling expenses are greater among residents in states with state lotteries than
among residents in non-lottery states.15 It appears that these differences are not entirely due to
differences in preferences: mean household gambling expenditures are higher post-lottery
($2.17) than pre-lottery ($0.87) among states that ever adopt lotteries; the t-statistic of the
difference is 10.4. This provides preliminary evidence that lottery gambling is not completely
financed by substitution away from other forms of gambling.
To corroborate this initial finding, we turn to regression analysis. The analysis exploits
the variation across states in the timing of state lottery introduction to evaluate whether the
presence of a state lottery is associated with a change in household gambling. (I use the same
empirical strategy in the analysis of non-gambling consumption below.) The strategy is to
compare the change in expenditures among households in states that implement lotteries to the
change in expenditures among households in states that do not make the lottery transition in the
same period. Relative to states that have not yet implemented a state lottery, or that did so in the
past, this analysis identifies the incremental change in expenditures associated with the
introduction of the lottery. During this time, 21 states switch status from non-lottery to lottery

14

Starting in 1996, the data files record lottery expenditures separately.
The mean two-week gambling participation rate is 8.5 percent in states with a lottery at the time versus 1.9
percent in non-lottery states; the t-statistic of the difference is 50.3. Unconditional mean two-week gambling
expenditures are $2.17 in lottery states versus $0.71 in non-lottery states; the t-statistic of the difference is -14.1.
15

13

state; 16 states and the District of Columbia have lotteries in place the entire period; and the
remaining 13 states are without a state lottery the entire period.16
The estimating equation takes the following form:
(1)

yijt = α + λ(LOTSTATE)jt + Xijtβ1 + Zjyβ2 + Mijtβ3 + γjt + ωy + υj + εijt.

In the first analysis, yijt is defined as gambling expenditures for household i in state j in the twoweek time period t. In subsequent analyses, yijt is defined as total non-gambling consumption and
then as spending on particular categories of goods, for household i in state j in reference period t.
The regressor of interest is the LOTSTATE indictor. It is equal to one if there is a state lottery in
the household’s state of residency j during the reference period t, and zero otherwise. (For
quarterly observations, it is based on the presence of a lottery in the first month of the quarter.)
The coefficient on LOTSTATE is interpreted as the causal effect of the presence of a state lottery
on the dependent variable.
The vector Xijt consists of household level controls for family size, household income,
urban status, number of persons less than 18 and over 64, and the sex, race, marital status, and
education of the household head. The vector Zjy consists of controls for the state level of
cigarette, beer, and gasoline taxes, which vary by year. This controls for differences in the prices
of these goods that are not captured in either year or state effects. The vector Mijt consists of a
series of dummy variables indicating the months of the year during which the household is
observed; it is included in the estimation equation to control for seasonal spending effects.
Finally, γjt is the monthly state unemployment rate in reference period t (for quarterly
observations, it is averaged over the quarter); ωy is a binary indictor for the year, which controls
for any nationwide shocks to spending; and υj is a dummy that captures fixed effects associated
with state j.
The identifying assumption of equation (1) is that the implementation of the 21 state
lotteries during this time period does not coincide with other state-level changes that are not
controlled for in the regression but that might affect household expenditure behavior. An obvious
candidate is changes in the legalization of other forms of gambling. Fortunately, changes in the

16

The set of switching states consists of CO, CA, IO, OR, MO, WV, MT, KS, SD, VA, FL, WI, ID, IN, KY, MN,
LA, TX, NE, GA, NM; the always-lottery states are NH, NY, NJ, CT, MA, MI, PA, MD, IL, ME, OH, RI, DE, VT,
AZ; and the never-lottery states are AL, AK, AR, HI, ID, MS, NC, NV, OK, SC, TN, UT, WY.
14

availability of other forms of gambling does not coincide with the timing of state lottery
introduction.17
Table 2 displays the results from estimating equation (1) for gambling behavior using
CEX Diary data.18 Mean gambling expenditures and participation among households in states
that do not have a lottery in place at the time are listed in columns 1 and 3, respectively. Column
2 reports coefficients from an OLS regression of equation (1) with expenditure level as the
dependent variable. As expenditures constitute a limited dependent variable, interpreting the
regression coefficient is not entirely straightforward. When Ordinary Least Squares (OLS)
regression is used to estimate the equation for expenditure levels, observations with zero
spending are included in the analysis and the estimated impacts combine the extensive and
intensive margins. These effects are reported separately in columns 4, 5, and 6. Column 4 lists
the coefficients from OLS estimation of equation (1) with the dependent variable defined to be
“any gambling expenditures”; column 5 lists marginal effects from a Probit specification. The
final column reports the coefficient on LOTSTATE when the dependent variable is the natural
logarithm of expenditures. The coefficient necessarily captures changes on the intensive margin
as the sample is conditioned on positive spending. To the extent that the introduction of a state
lottery affects the extensive margin of gambling, the set of households with positive gambling
expenditures is changed and the estimated effect on intensity is contaminated.19
The results in Table 2 confirm that the introduction of a state lottery leads households to
increase total gambling expenditures and participation. For the overall sample, the estimated
coefficient on LOTSTATE in the OLS levels specification reveals that two-week gambling
expenditures increase by a reported $1.43, off a mean of $0.71. The results of OLS and Probit
17

The legalization of casino gambling substantially lags the spread of state lotteries. Before the early 1990s, legal
casinos only operated in Nevada and Atlantic City, New Jersey. Now they are legal in 28 states. Similarly, riverboat
casinos did not begin operating legally until the first one opened in Iowa in 1991. Most Native American tribal
gambling started after 1987, when the United States Supreme Court issued a decision confirming the inability of
states to regulate commercial gambling on Indian reservations.
18
With the exception that state unemployment rate is not controlled for in the analyses. State unemployment data
were not available when the confidential BLS CEX Diary were accessed at BLS.
18
Tobit and sample-selection models provide alternatives but have serious drawbacks. Perhaps the most pertinent in
this context is conceptual: these models interpret the dependent variable as the censored observation of an
underlying continuously distributed latent variable. The latent index coefficients have no predictive value for
observed spending amounts. The two-part model (2PM) introduced by Cragg (1971) explicitly combines the
participation and intensity effects. As discussed in Angrist (2001), researchers using this model simply pick a
functional form for each part, e.g. linear probability or probit for the first part and a linear or log-linear model for the
second part. This has the advantage over the Tobit and other sample-selection models is that it does not impose

15

estimation of equation (1) for participation in any gambling suggest that the introduction of a
state lottery leads to an increase in the two-week gambling participation rate. Finally, column 6
reports the estimated effect of the introduction of a state lottery on the intensity of spending. The
negative coefficient on the lottery state indicator suggests that new, less-committed gamblers are
being brought into the gambling sample. Estimation of a Tobit specification, which includes nongamblers in the estimation sample, corroborates the finding that gambling expenditures increase
significantly in response to the presence of a state lottery.
Table 2 also displays results separately by income group, where households are divided
into three strata (thirds of the income distribution) in the CEX survey data. Households in all
income groups respond to a state lottery with increased gambling participation and expenditures.
(Due to sample size limitations, estimating the equation separately by race is uninformative.)
4.2 How do state lotteries affect participation in various forms of gambling?
Evidence from national gambling surveys
The finding that household gambling expenditures rise when a state lottery is introduced
suggests that lottery spending is not totally financed by a reduction in expenditures on previously
existing gambling alternatives. But are they partly financed by substitution away from other
gambling? To answer this question, I analyze the NORC (1998) and Kallick et. al (1975) data.
Relative to the CEX Diary data, these data sources offer the advantage of recording participation
by type of gambling, but they have the disadvantage of not containing expenditure amounts. The
analysis of this data is thus limited to observing effects on the extensive margin of various types
of gambling.
I conduct a regression-adjusted difference-in-difference (DD) analysis on the combined
data to determine how the introduction of a state lottery impacts participation in various forms of
gambling. The DD analysis compares the mean change in gambling participation between 1974
and 1997 among states that implement a lottery in the intervening years to the mean change in
gambling participation among states that did not. The comparison group consists of the set of
states that either never have a lottery or have a lottery as early as 1974. The effect of interest is

restrictions on the latent index structure. Functional forms can also be chosen that impose nonnegativity. However,
the 2PM does not attempt to solve the sample selection problem and the second part can not be interpreted as causal.
16

captured in the coefficient on LOTST7597*year1997 — the interaction between an indicator
variable for the year 1997 and an indicator variable for residing in a state that adopted a lottery
between 1975 and 1997.20 All regressions control for the following individual demographics:
sex, race, marital status, education, and regular attendance at religious services. They also control
for main year effects and a full set of state effects.
Results from the DD analysis of the effect of introducing a lottery on gambling
participation are displayed in Table 3. The introduction of a state lottery leads to a statistically
significant 50.4 percentage point increase in the probability that an adult participates in gambling
of any kind during the year. Not surprisingly, the introduction of a state lottery leads to an
increased probability of lottery gambling. More interestingly, the introduction of a state lottery
does not have a negative effect on participation in track, bingo, private, or unlicensed gambling.
The estimated coefficients on the independent variable of interest – LOTST7597*year1997 – are
remarkably close to zero in each of the four regressions. Again, the data reveal that adults in all
income groups respond to the introduction of a state lottery with increased gambling
participation. For no income group do we see a substitution away from other types of gambling.
4.3 How do state lotteries affect household consumption?
Evidence from consumer interviews
The analyses discussed above find no evidence that household lottery spending is financed by
substitution away from previously existing forms of gambling. State lottery expenditures must
therefore displace non-gambling expenditures. In this section, I analyze BLS Consumer
Expenditure Survey (CEX) - Interview Survey data from 1982 to 1998 to determine to what
extent household non-gambling consumption is decreased when a state lottery is introduced. The
CEX Interview Survey collects information on major items of expense and household

20

While a DD strategy "differences out" ex ante differences, it is still interesting to know whether such differences
exist. Are there differences ex ante in gambling participation rates, conditional on individual demographics, between
states in 1974 that eventually adopt a lottery and those that do not? Regression results suggest there are not.
Lotst7597 is a binary indicator for whether the state implements a lottery between the two survey years. The
coefficients on lotst7597 (standard errors in parenthesis) in regressions with binary dependent variables indicating
participation in the various forms of gambling are as follows: lottery .055 (.028), track .044 (.039), bingo .045
(.035), private .105 (.081), and unlicensed .073 (.071). These results suggest that there is no ex ante statistically
significant difference in gambling participation between residents of never-lottery states and residents of states that
eventually adopt lotteries.
17

characteristics.21 Households are asked about expenditures for up to three consecutive quarters.
The BLS estimates that 90 to 95 percent of expenditures are covered by the Interview survey, but
gambling expenditures are excluded. The analysis therefore asks a reduced-form question: does
the introduction of a state lottery lead to declines in non-gambling consumption.22
I estimate equation (1) for non-gambling consumption. Table 4 lists the results. Column 1
lists mean spending among households in states that do not have a lottery in place at the time.
Column 2 reports coefficients from an OLS regression of equation (1) with spending level as the
dependent variable. (All households have positive spending so composition-bias is not an issue.)
Column 3 lists the implied percentage change from the non-lottery mean. The final column
reports the coefficient on LOTSTATE when the dependent variable of equation (1) is the natural
logarithm of expenditures. Specifying the function as log-linear has two relevant properties: one,
the effect of outliers on the estimated coefficient is mitigated, and two, the coefficients are
interpreted as percentage changes. This allows us to observe the proportional decline in different
categories of spending.
For the overall sample, total quarterly spending falls by $115, implying an average
decrease of $38 in monthly household consumption expenditures. The average number of adults
in a CEX household is 1.57; from this we calculate an average monthly consumption reduction
of $23 per-adult. Based on the LeFleurs sales data, monthly sales per-adult average $18 across
the 38 state lotteries. We thus conclude that household lottery gambling is completely financed
by a reduction in non-gambling consumption.
The decrease of $115 in consumption expenditures represents a decline of 1.6 percent
relative to mean total spending in the absence of a state lottery. The log-linear specification finds
a decline of 1.9 percent (with an associated standard error of 0.7). This latter estimate might be
preferred since the effect of outliers is mitigated. The implication is that on average, households
displace two percent of their quarterly consumption expenditures with state lottery ticket
purchases.
21

The public use CEX Interview files do not include records from Rhode Island and Montana. Furthermore, the
BLS public files suppress the state of residence for some records in order to meet the Census Disclosure Review
Board’s criterion that the smallest geographically identifiable area have a population of at least 100,000. The
consequence is that approximately 17 percent of records do not have state identified: state is left blank for all records
from Mississippi, New Mexico, Maine, and South Dakota, and for some records from other states. The consumption
analysis sample therefore includes observations from 42 states and the District of Columbia.
22
The unreliability of gambling magnitudes found in the analysis of CEX Diary data preclude the construction of a
two-sample IV estimate of the effect of increased gambling on non-gambling consumption.
18

The bottom panel of Table 4 presents the results from two specification checks on the
model. Recall from the discussion in Section 2.3 that the introduction of a state lottery has a nonpositive effect on the price of gambling. The magnitude of the price decrease varies by
household, depending on the availability of alternative gambling forms and the associated
transportation or stigma costs. The theoretical implication is that if a neighboring state already
offers a state lottery, the introduction of one will have less of an effect on the price. The further
implication is that the household response in terms of gambling and non-gambling consumption
expenditures will be smaller.
The bottom of Table 4 reports the regression-adjusted effect of the introduction of a state
lottery when a bordering state already operates one. The coefficient on the LOTSTATE indicator
captures the “pure” effect of introducing a state lottery on total non-gambling consumption. The
coefficient on LOTSTATE*BORDER captures the additional effect of introducing a lottery when
a neighboring state already operates one. (This interaction term equals zero if the state lottery is
introduced before any neighboring states introduce one; it does not switch to one if and when a
neighboring state finally does introduce a state lottery.) For the overall sample, the analysis finds
that households reduce quarterly consumption by $290 when a state lottery is introduced, as
shown in column 1. If the lottery is introduced when a neighboring state already operates a
lottery, the effect is mitigated by $209, as shown in column 2, though the point estimate is not
statistically significant. Columns 3 and 4 report the coefficients from a log-linear specification.
These estimates suggest that the “pure” effect of introducing a state lottery is a decline in
quarterly household spending of 3.6 percent; if a border state previously operated a lottery, the
decline is 1.6 percent.
An additional question is whether the shift in expenditures is temporary. The bottom
panel of Table 4 confirms that the reduction in consumption is sustained in the long run. In the
first two years after a state lottery is introduced, households respond with an average decline in
quarterly non-gambling consumption of 1.7 percent (standard error of 0.8). This response is
sustained: the average decline in consumption among households in states with lotteries that
have been operating for at least two years, relative to households residing in states without
lotteries, is 1.4 percent (standard error of 0.7).
4.4 How do state lotteries effect the consumption of low-income households?

19

Evidence from consumer interviews
Among households in the lowest income third, total quarterly spending is reduced by $139 (see
Table 4), implying a decrease of $46 in monthly household consumption expenditures.
(Households are divided into three strata based on the income distribution in the CEX Interview
Survey sample.) Based on the average number of adults in a CEX household, we calculate a
monthly consumption reduction of $29 per-adult. How does this reduction compare to lottery
ticket purchases? Sales data are not available by income group, but we can compare this decline
in consumption to reported lottery gambling in the NORC (1998) survey data. Lottery-state
adults in the lowest income third report an average of $139.5 in lottery spending; adjusting this
figure for known underreporting (see Section 4 above) yields average yearly spending of $162.2,
or $14 per month. These numbers suggest that low-income households are financing their lottery
gambling completely by a decline in consumption. The data suggest that lottery gambling might
crowd in other gambling expenses, perhaps by reducing the “stigma” associated with gambling.
Households in the lowest income third experience the most pronounced percentage
decline in consumption spending: 2.7 percent (standard error of 1.2). As reported in Table 4,
OLS estimation of the log-linear specification suggests that the average response among
households in the middle income group is a decline of 0.5 percent (standard error of 0.8); 1.4
percent (standard error of 0.8) among those in the highest income group. The data reject the
hypothesis that the proportional decline for the middle income group is the same as for the
lowest income group, but can not reject the hypothesis for the highest income group.
Table 5 offers a more detailed picture of how low-income households change their
consumption in the presence of a state lottery.23 Equation (1) is estimated separately for 11
categories of goods: food at home; medical drugs and personal care; home - rent, mortgage,
other bills; alcohol; smoking products; food out of the home; entertainment; education;
household repairs, services, and furnishings; clothes (children and adult); and transportation
and cars. The table reports estimates for the levels, participation, and log-linear specifications. It
is difficult to obtain precise estimates in this exercise, but the analysis does offer a few
interesting insights. First, the decline in consumption appears to be spread across expenditure
categories. Point estimates yielded by the logarithm specification are negative for 8 of the 11
23

Detailed results for the middle and highest income thirds are available from author.
20

categories. Statistically significant reductions are observed in spending categories that might be
classified as “necessities:” food at home and home expenditures including rent, mortgage, and
other bills. In terms of within-household externalities, it is interesting to note that lottery
spending appears to be a substitute for the “adult good” alcohol; on the other hand, there is no
evidence that spending is reduced on children’s clothing, but statistical power is potentially a
problem.
5 Consumer demand for lottery products
The above section provides unambiguous evidence that households respond to the introduction
of a state lottery by increasing their gambling expenditures at the expense of a reduction in other
forms of consumption. If consumers are fully-rational and fully-informed, and externalities are
not relevant, then these behavioral responses are consumer-welfare enhancing. However, if the
oft-raised concern that consumers are making misinformed choices is true, then the effect on
consumer welfare is not clear. This section provides an initial exploration of consumer choices
over lottery products and investigates whether consumers of lottery products appear to make
informed choices.
As outlined in the introduction, the hypothesis that lottery consumers are being deceived
implies that consumer demand for lottery tickets does not respond to the expected value of a
gamble, conditional on other features of the game. If consumers are misinformed, their demand
for lottery gambles might respond to the top prize, but would not systematically respond to the
expected value of the bet. The analysis of this section directly tests this proposition. In addition,
if consumers are risk-averse, then participation in gambles with an average return of 52 cents on
the dollar reflects a fully-rational, fully-informed decision only if the participation provides some
consumption, or entertainment, value. This suggests that an additional test of consumer
rationality and information is whether consumers derive entertainment value from lottery
gambling. To test this I investigate whether consumer demand responds to variation in nonwealth creating characteristics of lottery games, such as the number of drawings per week or the
number of digits chosen. I perform these two tests simultaneously.
5.1 Data and empirical strategy

21

To investigate the nature of consumer demand, I combine game level sales data with detailed
information about the corresponding lottery game. The analysis is conducted at the level of state,
game, and week. To the best of my knowledge, I am the first to compile a comprehensive data
set of lottery game characteristics, and this is therefore the first analysis of its kind. I limit the
empirical analysis to lotto games, to the exclusion of other types of lottery products including
numbers games, instant scratch-off, keno, bingo, and VLT products.24 Relative to other products,
lotto games vary substantially in prize amounts and structure. There is both variation across
games and over time within a game as jackpot amounts frequently “rollover” and accumulate.
Additionally, to draw conclusions about individual behavior from aggregate sales data I must
rely on a representative agent assumption; limiting the analysis to a single type of lottery product
makes this assumption substantially less stringent.
The structure of a lotto game is defined by the number of digits the bettor chooses and the
size of the field. For example, in a lotto game with a 6/44 game matrix, a bettor chooses 6
numbers without replacement from a field of 44; the odds of picking the winning numbers are 1
in 7,059,052. Some lotto games have fixed jackpot amounts; others have “rolling” jackpots such
that if the jackpot is not won on a given draw, the jackpot (minus the prize payments for partially
correct bets) is rolled over into the jackpot for the next drawing. Some lotto games pay the
jackpot as a cash prize, others as a long-term annuity, and others offer a choice. Lotto games also
differ in the number of draws per week. 25

24

I include multi-state lotto games in the sample because the two types of products have the same essential
structures; they differ only in scale. Multi-state lotto games pool sales across states to engender larger jackpots.
There are six unique multi-state lotto products: Wildcard, Powerball, Cash 4 Life, and Daily Millions, which are run
by the Multi-State Lottery Association; and The Big Game and Megabucks, which are not. I consider the state
version of a multi-state product a unique game; for example, Powerball in Minnesota is considered a different game
than Powerball in Montana. This seems appropriate as states run individual advertising campaigns.
25
I offer two examples. First, a resident of Maryland playing the "Cash in Hand" game can purchase a ticket from
any Maryland State Lottery location any day of the week. There are three drawings per week. He pays the retail
agent $1 and picks 7 out of 31 numbers, or marks "quick pick" and lets the machine pick the numbers for him. If the
7 numbers on his gameboard match the 7 winning numbers (with odds of 1:2,629,575), and he claims his prize
within 182 days from the date of drawing, he is paid $500,000 cash. The state of Maryland will pay each game
board with the winning numbers $500,000. (In the unlikely event that more than 5 game boards win, all winning
boards will receive an equal share of a $2,500,000 pool.) Second, a resident of Florida playing Florida Lotto pays $1
and picks 6 numbers out of 53, or marks "quick pick". She can place bets on up to 26 consecutive drawings in
advance. If the 6 numbers on her ticket match the 6 winning numbers (with odds of 1:22,957,480), and she claims
her prize within 180 days, she wins the jackpot amount. The actual prize depends on sales and the number of
winners for the draw. If there is no ticket with the winning number, the jackpot rolls over and the cash available for
that jackpot is added to the next jackpot prize pool.
22

I obtained weekly sales data from 1992 to 1999 from Lefleurs Inc., a group that collects
weekly sales data from state lottery agencies. (Appendix Table 2 describes the sales data.) I
obtained information about game characteristics from state lottery websites and from lottery
game brochures provided by state lottery agencies. For games with rolling jackpots, I obtained
times series data on the advertised jackpot amounts from various state lottery agencies. The
sample excludes games for which only realized jackpot data is available; in games in which the
jackpot rolls over, the actual jackpot amount is a function of both the rollover amount and the
induced additional sales. Using the advertised amount avoids incorporating this latter portion
into the independent variable. For state-game-week cells that have more than one advertised
jackpot (because there are multiple drawings per week and the jackpot is not a fixed amount), I
take the maximum advertised jackpot during the week. The final sample used in the empirical
analysis consists of nearly 15,000 observations at the game-week level. These observations are
from a sample of 91 lotto products from 33 states.
The empirical analysis estimates how weekly sales of lotto tickets respond to changes in
the statistical moments of the gamble as well as to differences in game characteristics. The
estimating equation takes the following form:
ysgw = α + λ1(expected value)sgw + λ2(variance)sgw + λ3(skewness)sgw +
+ λ5(nominal top prize)sgw + Xsgwβ1 + Zsyβ2 + ζs + ωw + υg + εijt.
where ysgw is the natural logarithm of per adult sales from game g, in state s, in week w. (A loglinear specification is used in order to generate estimates of percentage changes in sales, rather
than changes in levels. In addition, the logarithmic transformation removes the heteroskedasticity
in the residuals of sales.) The vector Xsgw includes non-wealth creating characteristics of the
game. The vector Zsy includes controls for the proportion of the state population in seven age-sex
demographic groups, observed at the year level. All regressions control for state and week
effects, ζs + ωw. In some specifications, the equation is estimated with a game dummy υg to
control for unobserved product fixed effects. The equation is estimated using OLS, weighted by
state population. Standard errors are robust standard errors, adjusted for clustering at the stateyear level to flexibly control for correlation of the error terms.
The moments of a one dollar gamble depend on several factors: the structure of the game,
the value of previous rolled-over jackpots, and the number of tickets bought in the current
drawing. The moments are calculated using the “real top prize,” which is the present discounted

23

value of the advertised jackpot (assuming a six percent interest rate), and all lower prize tiers
offered by a game. All prize amounts are adjusted to year 2000 dollars. I make the simplifying
assumption that the probability of multiple winners, which depends on the number of tickets
bought and the numbers chosen by bettors, is negligible. Hence, the expected value is not
adjusted for the probability of having to share the jackpot. The mean expected value of a $1 bet
among the sample of all lotto games is 0.53.
The “nominal top prize” of a game is the advertised dollar amount. This is the
undiscounted sum of the game-specific number of annual payments. In the analysis, the
“nominal top prize” is adjusted to year 2000 dollars using the Consumer Price Index, but it is not
discounted to present terms. In most instances, it is nearly twice as large as the “real top prize.”
The highest single-state lotto prize in the sample is associated with the Texas Lotto in January,
1994: a nominal top prize of $18 million, with a present discounted value of $10 million. The
largest prize among multi-state games is associated with the Powerball game in July 1998; the
nominal prize amount is $266 million, with a present discounted value of $147 million. (The
actual jackpot won on this game was $295.7 million, in year 2000 dollars.) The vector Xsgw
includes the following non-wealth creating game characteristics: number of draws per week, age
of game, age of game squared, how many numbers the bettor picks, and the jackpot type (cash,
annuity, or a choice).
5.2 Results
Table 6 displays the estimation results. All regressions control for state unemployment rate, state
fixed effects, week fixed effects, and state demographic composition. Column 1 displays the
results of estimating demand as a function of only the statistical moments of the gamble. The
results provide preliminary evidence that consumers respond positively to the expected value of
a gamble, but the point estimate is not statistically significant. This specification suggests that
consumers like variance, but dislike skewness. Note that this finding contradicts the finding of
Garrett and Sobel (1999) that consumers respond negatively to variance and positively to
skewness.26 Column 2 adds entertainment characteristics as independent variables. The positive

26

A rigorous analysis of consumer preferences for risk requires more structure than the analysis presented here; such
an analysis using this data is provided in Kearney 2002.
24

coefficient on expected value increases in absolute value to 0.683 and is statistically significant
(standard error of 0.113). This finding rejects the hypothesis that lottery players are misinformed
evaluators of gambles.
Column 2 shows that consumer purchases are also driven by non-wealth creating
characteristics of lottery products. This implies that consumers are deriving entertainment value
from playing the lottery. For example, consumers appear to prefer picking more numbers to
fewer and demand more of a game as it ages. The specification reported in column 3 adds the
nominal top prize as an independent variable. Not surprisingly, it enters positively and is
statistically significant. The interesting result in this column is that the estimated positive effect
of expected value is maintained and even strengthened. The point estimate is 0.757, with a
standard error of 0.108. Replacing “expected value” with the natural logarithm of one minus the
expected value in this specification, yields an estimated price elasticity of -0.39.
The specifications reported in columns 4 and 5 incorporate product fixed effects into the
model. The estimation now controls for differences in sales across games that are driven by fixed
game characteristics not explicitly captured by the regressors in the model. Again, the data
demonstrate that sales are positively driven by the expected value of a gamble and that demand
responds to the non-wealth creating characteristics of lotto games. The specification in column 5
yields an estimated price elasticity of -0.17.
It is consistent with these findings to claim that consumers are fully rational: they derive
an entertainment value from participating in the lotto gamble that equals the price of the gamble
(one minus expected value), and then, insofar as they are making investments, they recognize
which gambles are better investments. On the other hand, it is also consistent to argue that
consumers are at least partially irrational, believing that the non-wealth characteristics bear on
the likelihood of winning positive returns. Though the analysis does not allow us to discriminate
between the two scenarios, it does imply that consumers are at least partly – and potentially fully
– informed in recognizing the wealth value of a bet.
6 Conclusion
This paper has offered two main contributions to the public debate regarding the consumer
consequences of state lotteries. The first contribution is an empirical investigation of how

25

households shift their spending in response to the introduction of a state lottery. I have used the
variation across states in the timing of state lottery introduction to compare the change in
expenditures among households in states that implement lotteries to the change in expenditures
among households in states that do not. The analyses are based on consumer expenditure data
from 1982 to 1998, during which time 21 states implemented lotteries.
The evidence on household gambling expenditures demonstrates that households increase
their gambling expenditures in the presence of a state lottery. Total gambling after a lottery is
introduced exceeds previous gambling expenditures, which implies that households are not
financing lottery gambling completely by substituting away from other forms of gambling. A
complementary analysis of participation in various forms of gambling finds that there is no
substitution away from participation in other forms of gambling when a lottery is introduced. In
fact, my analysis of household non-gambling consumption suggests that household spending on
lottery tickets is financed completely by a reduction in other forms of household consumption.
The introduction of a state lottery is associated with a decline in household non-gambling
consumption of $115 per quarter. This figure implies a monthly reduction of $23 in per-adult
consumption, which compares to average monthly sales of $18 per lottery-state adult. The
response is most pronounced for low-income households, which on average reduce nongambling expenditures by approximately three percent. The impact of a state lottery is found to
be more pronounced if no bordering state previously implemented a lottery. In addition, the
decline in non-gambling consumption is sustained in the long run.
The second major contribution of the paper is an evaluation of whether lottery consumers
appear to be making informed choices. To evaluate this question I analyze lottery sales data from
91 lotto games from 1992 to 1998 as a function of lottery product attributes, including the
statistical moments of the gamble, the advertised undiscounted top prize, and the non-wealth
creating characteristics of the game. The analysis suggests that sales are positively driven by the
expected value of a gamble, controlling for other characteristics. This finding is robust to
alternative specifications, including controlling for unobserved product fixed effects. The NORC
(1998) survey offers supporting evidence that agents understand that state lotteries do not offer
fair bets. The survey asks respondents how much of the ticket price of their favorite game do
they think is returned as prize money. Only 7.5 percent of the respondents thought the pay-out

26

was above the actual average pay-out rate. This finding suggests that consumers are at least
partly – and potentially fully – informed in recognizing the wealth value of a bet.
Two things should be kept in mind when interpreting the results of this paper. First, the
analysis has identified average effects, but due to data limitations, can not sufficiently examine
the heterogeneity of household response. While the average household reduces consumption by
$38 a month in response to the introduction of a state lottery, there are likely to be some
households in the tail of the distribution who forego much greater amounts of consumption.
Second, intra-household externalities are a potential issue that can not be sufficiently addressed
with available data. For example, there is some anecdotal evidence to suggest that some
members of lottery-gambling households would rather not spend household money on lottery
tickets. Future work examining these issues would lead to a more thorough understanding of the
welfare implications of state lotteries.

27

References
Ali, M.M. 1977. “Probability and utility estimates for racetrack bettors.” Journal of Political
Economy 85, 803-815.
Angrist, J. 2001. “Estimation of Limited Dependent Variable Models With Dummy Endogenous
Regressors: Simple Strategies for Empirical Practice.” Journal of Business and Economic
Statistics, 19, No. 1.
Becker, G. and K. Murphy. 1988. “A Theory of Rational Addiction,” Journal of Political
Economy.
Berry, F.S. and W.D. Berry. 1990. “State Lottery Adoptions as Policy Innovations: An Event
History Analysis,” American Political Science Review, 84(2).
Browning, M. and P. Chiappori. 1998. “Efficient Intra-Household Allocations: A General
Characterization.” Econometrica, 66(6), 1241-1278.
Cragg, J.G. 1971. "Some Statistical Models for Limited Dependent Variables With Application
to the Demand for Durable Goods," Econometrica, 39, 829-844.
Clotfelter, C.T., P.J. Cook, J.A. Edell, and M. Moore. 1999. State Lotteries at the Turn of the
Century: Report to the National Gambling Impact Study Commission. Duke University.
Clotfelter, C.T. and P.J. Cook. 1990a. “On the Economics of State Lotteries,” The Journal of
Economic Perspectives, 4(4), 105-119.
———. 1990b. “Redefining Success in the State Lottery Business,” Journal of Policy Analysis
and Management 9.
———. 1989. Selling Hope: State Lotteries in America. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University
Press.
Duflo, E. 2000. “Grandmothers and Granddaughters: The Effects of Old Age Pension on Child
Health in South Africa.” MIT Department of Economics working paper.
Forrest, D.O., D. Gulley, and R. Simmons. 2000. “Elasticity of Demand for UK National Lottery
Tickets,” National Tax Journal 53(4), 853-863.
Friedman, M., and L.J. Savage. 1948. “The Utility Analysis of Choices Involving Risk.” Journal
of Political Economy 56, 279-304.
Garrett, T.A. and R.S. Sobel. 1999. “Gamblers favor skewness, not risk: Further evidence from
United States’ lottery games.” Economic Letters 63, 85-90.

28

Geary, R. 1997. “The Numbers Game: State lotteries – A Ticket to Poverty,” in The New
Republic, May 19.
Gerstein, D. and M. Toce. 1999. Fast Track Codebook for the Gambling Impact and Behavior
Study –Adult Surveys. National Opinion Research Council.
Golec, J., and M. Tamarkin. 1998. Bettors love skewness, not risk, at the horse track. Journal of
Political Economy 56, 279-304.
Gruber, J. and B. Koszegi. 2000. “Is Addiction ‘Rational’? Theory and Evidence.” NBER
Working Paper No. W7507.
Gtech Corporation. 2000. The Vital Signs of Legalized Gaming in America: Gtech's 8th Annual
National Gaming Survey. West Greenwich, RI.
Gulley, O. D., and F. A. Scott. 1993. "The Demand for Wagering on State-Operated Lotto
Games," National Tax Journal, 45(1): 13-22.
Imbens, G.W., D.B. Rubin, and B. Sacerdote. 1999. "Estimating the Effects of Unearned Income
on Labor Supply, Earnings, Savings, and Consumption: Evidence from a Survey of
Lottery Players." NBER Working Paper No. W7001.
International Gaming & Wagering Business, April 1998, 44;
International Gaming & Wagering Business, June 1998, 48-49.
Kahneman, D., and A. Tversky. 1979. Prospect theory: An analysis of decision under risk.
Econometrica 47, 263-291.
Kallick, M., D. Suits, T. Dielman, and J. Hybels. 1976. Gambling in The United States (ICPSR
7495) University of Michigan Institute for Social Research.
Kearney, M.S. 2001. “State Lotteries and Consumer Behavior." MIT Department of Economics,
unpublished mimeo, November.
Kearney, M.S. 2002. “Preferences under Risk: The Case of State Lottery Bettors.” In
unpublished MIT Ph.D. dissertation.
Spindler, C.J. 1995. "The Lottery and Education: Robbing Peter to Pay Paul?" Public Budgeting
and Finance, 15, 54-62.
LaFleur's World Lottery Almanac. 2001. LaFleur's Inc. www.lafleurs.com.

29

Mullahy, J. 1997. “Instrumental-Variable Estimation of Count Data Models: Applications to
Models of Cigarette Smoking Behaviour,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 11, 586593.
National Gambling Impact Study Commission. 1999. Final Report.
National Public Radio, All Things Considered, April 14, 1999.
National Public Radio, All Things Considered, June 22, 1999.
Pulley, B. 1999. "Waiting for riches: a special report - living off the daily dream of winning a
lottery prize," The New York Times, May 22, A1.
Thaler, R.H. and W.T. Ziemba. 1988. “Anomalies. Parimutuel betting markets: Racetracks and
lotteries. Journal of Economic Perspectives 2(2), 161-174.
Udry, C. 1996. “Gender, Agricultural Production, and the Theory of the Household,” Journal of
Political Economy, 101 (5), 1010-1045.
United States Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor Statistics. 2001. "Consumer Expenditures
in 1999." Report 949.
Worthington, A. 2001. "Implicit Finance in Gambling Expenditures: Australian Evidence on
Socioeconomic and Demographic Tax Incidence," Public Finance Review, 29 (4), 326342.

30

Table 1
Lottery Participation Rates and Expenditures
1998 NORC Survey Data

n

Overall
% who
Mean
played annual
last year spending,
all adults

overall

2,417

51.3

male

1,152

55.8

female

1,265

47.2

white

1,769

52.4

black

291

42.3

hispanic

170

58.8

other

180

47.2

Household income
< 27,000

353

45.0

27,000 to 54,000

445

56.2

>54,000

635

59.5

hs drop out

326

46.3

hs graduate

613

52.4

some college

736

55.6

college grad

742

48.4

n

Lottery States
% who
Mean
played
annual
last year spending,
all adults

Non-lottery states
% who Mean
played annual
last spending,
n
year all adults

107.3
(470.7)
143.2
(525.7)
91.8
(494.6)

2,047

55.7

128.4

357

25.2

981

51.8

153.4

163

30.1

1,066

59.9

105.3

194

21.1

107.9
(510.0)
200.1
(711.9)
108.4
(214.9)
74.9
(257.3)

1,059

57.0

251

24.3

237

46.0

53

24.5

154

61.0

14

28.6

141

51.8

119.3
(544.3)
230.0
(770.5)
107.5
(208.0)
81.8
(263.1)

38

28.9

125.4
(560.5)
113.4
(455.0)
145.8
(554.3)

287

50.5

63

17.5

368

63.0

76

22.4

550

62.9

139.5
(610.0)
127.1
(485.2)
158.9
(584.1)

83

36.1

257

54.0

65

13.8

527

57.3

82

19.5

624

58.8

110

36.4

639

52.0

100

.25

170.2
(716.4)
137.5
(573.8)
109.1
(504.0)
82.2
(310.6)

197.2
(794.0)
155.1
(613.2)
120.0
(538.2)
86.7
(315.3)

47.3
(240.9)
82.5
(331.1)
17.8
(114.7)
41.4
(215.8)
67.0
(333.8)
86.7
(288.0)
45.5
(238.1)
53.0
(245.5)
48.0
(261.0)
59.9
(286.8)
63.9
(261.4)
28.8
(175.2)
47.3
(231.3)
51.8
(283.0)

notes:
1. Data is from the 1998 National Survey on Gambling conducted by the National Opinion Research Council (NORC)
under contract with the National Gambling Impact Study Commission. These estimates of annual lottery expenditures
incorporate a set of assumptions used by Clotfelter and Cook (1999), as described in the text. The data is not adjusted
for the underreporting of lottery sales documented by Clotfelter and Cook (1999).
2. All expenditure amounts are adjusted to year 2000 dollars using the Consumer Price Index.
3. Standard errors in parenthesis.

31

Table 2
Effects of a State Lottery on Two-week Gambling Participation Rate and Expenditures:
Coefficient on LOTSTATE
CEX Diary Data
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

Mean
expenses
(no
lottery)

OLS
Level

Mean
participation
(no lottery)

OLS
Any

Probit
Any

OLS
Ln

Overall
(n=79,064)

.714
(10.3)

1.43
(.353)

.019
(.136)

.069
(.006)

***

.061
(.004)

***

-.282
(.089)

***

Lowest income
(n=25,538)

.487
(8.67)

.438
(.242)

.011
(.106)

.032
(.005)

***

.035
(.003)

***

-.395
(.186)

**

Middle income
(n=27,394)

.561
(6.94)

1.32
(.309)

***

.019
(.136)

.069
(.007)

***

.070
(.003)

***

-.207
(.156)

Highest income
(n=26,132)

1.12
(14.3)

2.45
(.863)

***

.027
(.161)

.102
(.009)

***

.109
(.004)

***

-.308
(.131)

***

**

notes:
1. Data are from confidential Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) - Diary Survey
data files from 1984 to 1999. Data are not adjusted for the underreporting of lottery expenditures described in the text.
All dollar values are adjusted to year 2000 dollars using the BLS Consumer Price Index.
2. The LOTSTATE indicator is equal to one if there is a state lottery in the household’s state of residency during the
two-week reference period.
3. Standard errors are White’s robust standard errors adjusted for clustering within a state-year cell.
4. *** indicates significance at 99 percentile ** at 95 percentile
5. A Tobit specification for levels suggests the same patterns. The coefficients are as follows: overall 58.2; lowest
income 31.7; middle income 46.0; highest income 72.9.
6. All regressions include controls for the following household demographics: family size, before-tax income, urban
status, number of persons less than 18 and over 64, the sex and educational attainment of the household head, the race
of the household head (when it is not the conditioning variable). All regressions also include controls for state, year,
month of year, and state cigarette, beer, and gasoline tax levels.

32

Table 3
Effects of a State Lottery on Gambling Participation:
Difference-in-Difference Estimates
Dep Variable

any

lottery

track

bingo

private

unlicensed

Overall
(n=2,572)

.504
(.117)

***

.429
(.036)

***

.011
(.027)

-.002
(.027)

.009
(.034)

-.023
(.033)

Lowest income
(n=629)

.526
(.217)

**

.448
(.072)

***

-.008
(.045)

-.003
(.053)

.057
(.071)

-.031
(.056)

Middle income
(n=991)

.836
(.203)

***

.469
(.063)

***

.053
(.043)

.064
(.045)

.065
(.054)

.002
(.055)

Highest income
(n=952)

.413
(.230)

*

.392
(.066)

***

-.001
(.059)

-.091
(.052)

-.056
(.060)

-.049
(.066)

notes:
1. Data on participation in the five types of gambling are from the 1975 National Survey of Adult Gambling conducted
by Kallick et al. at the University of Michigan and the 1998 National Survey on Gambling conducted by the National
Opinion Research Council (NORC) under contract with the National Gambling Impact Study Commission. The Kallick
et. al. (1975) data consist of 1,749 completed interviews covering participants’ lifetime and past-year gambling behavior.
The NORC (1998) data contain information about the gambling behavior of 2,417 adults from a random-digit dial
sample.
2. The reported difference-in-difference estimate is the coefficient on LOTST7597*year1997 — the interaction between
an indicator variable for the year 1997 and an indicator variable for residing in a state that adopted a lottery between
1975 and 1997.
3. All regressions control for sex, race, marital status, education, and regular attendance at religious services. They also
control for main year and state effects.
4. Standard errors are White’s robust standard errors adjusted for clustering within a state-year cell.
5. *** indicates significance at 99 percentile ** at 95 percentile
6. “Any” gambling is not equal to the sum of the five types of gambling displayed because the 1998 file separately
categorizes participation in casino, charitable, card, bar/restaurant, internet, and indian reservation gambling.

33

Table 4
Effects of a State Lottery on Quarterly Consumption:
Coefficient on LOTSTATE
CEX Interview Data

overall
(n=251,214)
income 1
(n=81,751)
income 2
(n=86,313)
income3
(n=83,150)

(1)
Mean
spending
(no lottery)
7362.5

(2)
OLS
Level
-115.0
(58.4)

4,650.6

**

-126.0
(81.2)
-14.6
(64.2)
-138.5
(109.9)

6,135.2
11,104.8

-290.0
(114.1)

**

-144.2
(70.1)

**

-0.016

-.019
(.007)

***

-0.027

-.027
(.012)
-.005
(.008)
-.014
(.008)

**

-0.012

208.8
(119.8)

*

Are there short-term and long-term effects?
OLS Level
Years 1
Year 3 &
or 2
beyond
overall
(n=251,239)

(4)
OLS
Ln

-0.002

Does bordering a lottery state matter?
OLS Level
Lotstate
Lotstate*border
overall
(n=251,214)

(3)
change/
mean

Lotstate
-.036
(.014)

Years 1
or 2

-27.3
(61.7)

-.017
(.008)

OLS Ln
Lotstate*border
**

.020
(.015)

OLS Ln
Year 3 &
beyond
**

-.014
(.007)

**

notes:
1. Data are from BLS Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) - Interview Survey data files from 1982 to 1998.
2. The LOTSTATE indicator is equal to one if there is a state lottery in the household’s state of residence at the beginning
of the reference period quarter.
3. Quarterly consumption is defined as household expenditures on the following 41 categories of goods: Food at home,
food away from home, alcoholic beverages, housing mortgage and tax payments, housing maintenance, rented dwellings,
other lodging, utilities/fuels/public services, child care, adult care, other household operations, household textiles,
furniture, floor coverings, major appliances, small appliances and misc. housewares, misc. household equipment, men’s
clothing, boys’ clothing, women’s clothing, girls’ clothing, baby clothing, footwear, other apparel, new cars and trucks,
used cars and trucks, other vehicles, vehicle financing, gasoline and motor oil, vehicle repair, vehicle insurance, public
transportation, vehicle rental, prescription drugs, entertainment fees, television expenses, other entertainment, personal
care, reading material, educational expenses, tobacco and smoking supplies.
4. Standard errors are White’s robust standard errors adjusted for clustering within a state-year cell.
5. *** indicates significance at 99 percentile ** at 95 percentile
6. The lowest income third in the sample has annual household income <=$9337.4; the highest has income >=$26,151.
7. All regressions include controls for the following household demographics: family size, before-tax income, urban
status, number of persons less than 18 and over 64, the sex, race, and educational attainment of the household head. All
regressions also include controls for state, year, month of year, and state cigarette, beer, and gasoline tax levels and
monthly state unemployment rate.

34

Table 5
Effects of a State Lottery on Quarterly Consumption:
Coefficient on LOTSTATE, by Expenditure Category
CEX Interview Data – Households in the Lowest Income Third

total spending

Mean
spending
(no lottery)
4,650.6

1. food at home

750.9

2. medical drugs and
personal care
3. home – mortgage, rent,
other bills
4. alcohol

119.5
1,427.7
64.9

5. smoking

64.6

6. food out

248.3

7. entertainment

249.4

8. education

119.1

9. house - repairs,
services, furnishings
10. clothes

373.9
264.2

10a. kids

39.9

10b. adult

224.2

11. transportation/cars
sample size

968.1

OLS
Level

OLS
Any

-126.0
(81.2)

-

-12.9
(10.3)
1.16
(3.74)
-84.5
(30.8)
-6.33
(2.66)
-2.94
(2.21)
-9.96
(9.07)
3.98
(16.3)
3.01
(11.3)
-8.94
(19.3)
-10.8
(9.02)
-.664
(2.00)
-10.1
(7.93)
2.29
(39.8)

-.004
(.002)
.0005
(.009)
-.002
(.002)
-.022
(.009)
-.014
(.008)
-.002
(.008)
.008
(.009)
.007
(.008)
.001
(.009)
-.010
(.008)
-.0004
(.006)
-.009
(.008)
-.009
(.007)

***
**

OLS
Ln
(c.o.p.)
-.027
(.012)

**

-.031
(.016)
.006
(.019)
-.069
(.021)
-.048
(.028)
-.009
(.022)
-.034
(.024)
-.025
(.026)
.037
(.067)
-.052
(.033)
-.020
(.026)
-.006
(.034)
-.024
(.026)
.030
(.025)

**
**

***

81,751

notes:
1. Data are from BLS Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) - Interview Survey data files from 1982 to 1998.
2. The LOTSTATE indicator is equal to one if there is a state lottery in the household’s state of residence at the beginning of the
reference period quarter.
3. Category 3 includes expenditures on mortgage and tax payments, rented dwellings, other lodging, and utilities/fuels/public services.
Category 7 includes expenditures on entertainment fees, television expenses, other entertainment, and reading. Category 9 includes
expenditures on housing maintenance, child care, adult care, other household operations, household textiles, furniture, floor coverings,
major appliances, small appliances and misc. housewares, and misc. household equipment. Category 11 includes expenditures on new
cars and trucks, used cars and trucks, other vehicles, vehicle financing, gasoline and motor oil, vehicle repair, vehicle insurance, public
transportation, and vehicle rentals.
4. Standard errors are White’s robust standard errors adjusted for clustering within a state-year cell.
5. *** indicates significance at 99 percentile ** at 95 percentile
6. The lowest income third in the sample distribution is characterized by annual household income <=$9337.4.
7. All regressions include controls for the following household demographics: family size, before-tax income, urban status, number of
persons less than 18 and over 64, the sex, race, and educational attainment of the household head. All regressions also include controls
for state, year, month of year, and state cigarette, beer, and gasoline tax levels and monthly state unemployment rate.

35

Table 6
Weekly Ln Lotto Sales per Adult as a Function of Game Attributes
dep var:
ln(pasales)
Expected value
Variance/1M.
skewness /1T

(1)

.377
(.406)
.040
(.010)
-.0002
(.00005)

(2)

***
***

(3)

***
.683
(.136)
.003
(.006)
.000008
(.00004)

.757
(.126)
-.006
(.004)
.00003
(.00003)
.007
(.002)
-.052
(.024)
-.126
(.041)
.020
(.004)
.785
(.155)
.401
(.149)
.823
(.177)
-1.11
(.143)
.214
(.157)
-.030
(.019)

(4)

***

.299
(.060)
.010
(.001)
-.00004
(.00001)

(5)

***
***
***

***
.346
(.060)
**
.004
(.002)
*
-.00001
(.000007)
***
.004
(.0008)

nominal top
prize/1M.
no. draws per week

-

-

-

age of game

-

(age of game)2

-

pick 5

-

pick 6

-

pick 7

-

cash jackpot

-

choice (cash/ann)

-

state
unemployment rate
product fixed
effects
state fixed effects
week fixed effects
demog. controls*
constant

-.030
(.025)

-.059
(.024)
-.133
(.041)
.020
(.004)
.828
(.154)
.398
(.151)
.857
(.182)
-1.13
(.149)
.290
(.156)
-.029
(.019)

no

no

no

yes

yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

yes
yes
yes

25.1
(75.2)

11.7
(72.9)

-129.1
(66.7)

-127.7
(66.8)

13,930

13,930

13,930

14,669

.89

.89

.92

.91

sample size
R2

-380.8
(142.9)
14,669
.61

***

**
***
***
***
***
***
***
*

***

-

**

-

***

-.201
(.076)
.022
(.003)

***

***
***

-.206
(.076)
.023
(.003)

***

-

-

***

-

-

***

-

-

***

-

-

-

-

-.029
(.015)

*

-.029
(.015)

***
***

*

*

notes:
1. Unit of observation is state-week-game.
2. The sample includes 91 lotto products from 33 states.
3. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering at the state-year level, to flexibly account for correlations among errors.
4. Lottery sales data are from Lefleurs inc.
5. Data on game characteristics is compiled by author using information provided by state lottery associations.
6. Monthly state unemployment data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
7. All regressions are population weighted. All regressions control for the proportion of the state population in the
following categories: females age 18-24, 25-44, 45-64, 64+, males age 18-24, 25-44, 65+. Yearly state population
figures are from the U.S. Census Bureau.

36

Appendix Table 1
State Lottery Implementation, by Year
1964
1967

New Hampshire
New York

1970
1972
1973
1974
1975
1978

New Jersey
Connecticut, Massachusetts, Michigan, Pennsylvania
Maryland
Illinois, Maine, Ohio, Rhode Island
Delaware
Vermont

1981
1982
1983
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989

Arizona
District of Columbia, Washington
Colorado
California, Iowa, Oregon
Missouri, West Virginia
Montana, Kansas, South Dakota
Virginia, Florida, Wisconsin
Idaho, Indiana, Kentucky

1990
1991
1992
1993
1996

Minnesota
Louisiana
Texas
Nebraska, Georgia
New Mexico

37

Appendix Table 2
Lottery Sales (in Year 2000 Dollars)
Mean state sales
Monthly total
Monthly per
(in millions)
adult sales
Overall
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998

78.8
67.8
80.8
86.3
78.1
81.0
78.7
77.1

18.3
16.0
17.5
18.9
18.9
18.5
18.3
18.9

Yearly total
(in millions)
33,409
24,207
31,574
34,158
34,671
34,981
34,951
34,287

All states
No. of states
(inc. DC) with
lotteries
35
37
37
37
38
38
38

No. of states
reporting
sales
32
34
33
37
36
37
38

notes:
1. Lottery sales data is from Lefleurs inc., who collects information from state lottery agencies.
2. Population figures used for per adult calculations are BLS census population numbers.
3. These figures reflect sales on all lottery games, including lotto, multi-state lotto, numbers, instant, keno, sports,
bingo, and VLT products.

38

