NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BORROWING COSTS AND THE DEMAND FOR
EQUITY OVER THE LIFE CYCLE
Steven J. Davis
Felix Kubler
Paul Willen
Working Paper 9331
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9331
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2002

We thank seminar participants at the 2002 Minnesota Macroeconomics Summer Institute, the 2002 NBER
Summer Institute, the 2002 NBER Economic Fluctuations Program Meeting in Chicago, Notre Dame
University and the University of Chicago for many helpful comments, Amir Yaron and Muhammet Guvenen
for thoughtful remarks, Jonathan Parker for providing parameters of the income processes in Gourinchas and
Parker (2002), Nick Souleles for directing us to data on charge-off rates for consumer loans and David
Arnold, Jeremy Nalewaik and Stephanie Curcuru for able research assistance. Davis and Willen gratefully
acknowledge research support from the Graduate School of Business at the University of Chicago. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Steven J. Davis, Felix Kubler, and Paul Willen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Borrowing Costs and the Demand for Equity Over the Life Cycle
Steven J. Davis, Felix Kubler, and Paul Willen

NBER Working Paper No. 9331
November 2002
JEL No. D91, G11, G12
ABSTRACT
We analyze consumption and portfolio behavior in a life-cycle model with realistic
borrowing costs and income processes. We show that even a small wedge between borrowing costs and
the risk-free return dramatically shrinks the demand for equity. When the cost of borrowing equals or
exceeds the expected return on equity – the relevant case according to the data – households hold little
or no equity during much of the life cycle. The model also implies that the correlation between
consumption growth and equity returns is low at all ages, and that risk aversion estimates based on the
standard excess return formulation of the consumption Euler Equation are greatly upward biased. The
demand for equity in the model is non-monotonic in borrowing costs and risk aversion, and the standard
deviation of marginal utility growth is an order of magnitude smaller than the Sharpe ratio.

Steven J. Davis
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
steve.davis@gsb.uchicago.edu

Felix Kubler
Department of Economics
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-6010
fkubler@stanford.edu

Paul Willen
Graduate School of Business
University of Chicago
1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
paul.willen@gsb.uchicago.edu

1

Introduction

This paper analyzes consumption and portfolio behavior in a life-cycle model with
borrowing costs that exceed the risk-free investment return. The agents have standard time-separable preferences with modest risk aversion and mild impatience, face
realistic income processes, and can invest in risky and risk-free assets.
We show that a wedge between borrowing costs and the risk-free return has several
important eﬀects on consumption and portfolio behavior. First, even a modest wedge
dramatically shrinks the demand for equity throughout the life cycle. Second, when
the borrowing rate equals or exceeds the expected return on equity – the relevant
case according to the data – households hold little or no equity until middle age.
Third, the correlation between consumption growth and equity returns rises with
age, but it is low at all ages for reasonable parameter choices. Fourth, risk aversion
estimates based on the standard excess return formulation of the consumption Euler
Equation are greatly upward biased. The bias diminishes, but remains large, for
“samples” of households with positive equity holdings. Fifth, households borrow to
ﬁnance consumption but not to ﬁnance large equity positions. In each respect, the
introduction of a realistic wedge between borrowing costs and the risk-free return
greatly improves the ﬁt between theory and empirical evidence.
Table 1 reports data on the size of the wedge. The bottom two rows show that
household borrowing costs on unsecured loans exceed the risk-free return by about six
to nine percentage points on an annual basis, after adjusting for tax considerations
and charge-oﬀs for uncollected loan obligations. Since 1987, roughly two percentage
points arise from the asymmetric income tax treatment of household interest receipts
and payments. However, the bulk of the wedge arises from transactions costs in the
loan market. Despite the evident size of these transaction costs, they have been largely
ignored in theoretical analyses of life-cycle consumption and portfolio behavior. They
have also been ignored in most empirical studies of asset-pricing behavior.
1

Aside from the wedge between borrowing costs and the risk-free return, our lifecycle model is entirely standard. None of our results rely on strong risk aversion, a
high degree of impatience, habit formation, other types of nonseparability, self-control
problems or myopia. Nor do they rely on equity market participation costs, informational barriers, time-varying asset returns, enforcement problems in loan markets, or
hard borrowing limits (other than the lifetime budget constraint).
According to our analysis, the cost of borrowing and the shape of the expected
life-cycle income proﬁle are key determinants of equity accumulation. The variance of
undiversiﬁable labor income shocks also has important eﬀects on equity holdings, and
the risky nature of labor income is an important source of cross-sectional heterogeneity
in consumption and asset holdings conditional on age.
Our analysis also highlights several other results. First, equity holdings and market participation rates are non-monotonic in the cost of borrowing, both reaching a
minimum where the borrowing cost equals the expected return on equity. As this
result suggests, the properties of our model are not “in between” those of the canonical model with equal borrowing and lending rates and alternative models with hard
borrowing limits. Second, relative to a model with a no-borrowing constraint, households defer equity market participation when faced with realistic borrowing costs.
As a consequence, households accumulate less equity over the life cycle when faced
with realistic borrowing costs as compared to a no-borrowing constraint. Third, equity holdings and participation rates are non-monotonic in the degree of risk aversion
when borrowing costs exceed the risk-free return. Fourth, once we consider realistic
borrowing costs, neither sizable deviations from optimal portfolio shares nor delayed
participation in equity markets until, say, age 50 involves large welfare costs.
On the asset-pricing front, our analysis helps resolve two closely related aspects
of the equity premium puzzle: Why do people hold so little equity when faced with
a substantial equity premium? And, why is the covariance between consumption

2

growth and asset returns so low? Answers to both question follow from the high
borrowing costs reported in Table 1. These data imply a small or negative “leverage”
premium on borrowed funds that are invested in the stock market. This fact, when
combined with upward sloping income proﬁles or mildly impatient consumers, means
that households accumulate little or no equity until middle age, and they can have
modest equity holdings even on the verge of retirement.
The paper proceeds as follows. The balance of the introduction discusses related
research and reviews some well-established facts about life-cycle consumption and
portfolio behavior. Sections 2 and 3 describe the model and the choice of parameters.
Section 4 discusses life-cycle portfolio choice and consumption in our model, and
section 5 compares model implications with empirical evidence. Section 6 oﬀers some
concluding remarks, and an appendix describes our numerical solution method.

1.1

Relationship to the Literature

Our model departs modestly from the seminal work on life-cycle portfolio behavior by
Merton (1969) and Samuelson (1969). Indeed, our model is identical to Samuelson’s
discrete-time setup except for three elements: the wedge between borrowing costs and
risk-free returns, the presence of undiversiﬁable income shocks, and the use of realistic
income proﬁles. The wedge and the undiversiﬁable labor income shocks necessitate
a computational approach to the analysis, which we pursue using the same methods
as in Judd, Kubler and Schmedders (2002).
We also build on other research in ﬁnance and macroeconomics. Brennan (1971)
shows that a wedge between borrowing costs and risk-free returns is easily handled in
the standard one-period model of mean-variance portfolio choice. The wedge implies
that households cannot attain points above and to the right of the tangency portfolio
along the standard capital market line. Higher borrowing costs reduce the demand for
equity in the one-period setting, given standard mean-variance preferences. Heaton
3

and Lucas (1997) show that a borrowing rate that exceeds the risk-free return reduces
equity holdings for an inﬁnitely lived agent.
We incorporate key life-cycle elements into a many-period setting with realistic
borrowing costs and endogenous wealth accumulation. In our model, unlike Brennan
or Heaton-Lucas, higher borrowing costs raise the demand for equity in reasonable
circumstances. The causal mechanism behind this result involves the impact of borrowing costs on precautionary savings and life-cycle asset accumulation. More generally, life-cycle factors play a central role in both equity market participation and
equity accumulation behavior in our model.
Many researchers have explored the eﬀects of hard borrowing limits on portfolio
choice in life-cycle models. For example, Constantinides, Donaldson and Mehra (2002)
consider a three-period model with no borrowing, and Gomes and Michaelides (2002)
consider a calibrated many-period life-cycle model. We show that allowing households
to borrow at a rate above the risk-free return yields more realistic behavior with
respect to asset accumulation, equity market participation and borrowing itself than
a blanket prohibition on borrowing.
Section 5 shows that our model generates a standard deviation of marginal utility
growth that is an order of magnitude smaller than the Sharpe ratio. This result
appears inconsistent with Hansen and Jagannathan (1991), who argue that the Sharpe
ratio represents a lower bound on the standard deviation of marginal utility growth.
Our result should not come as a complete surprise, however. Other researchers (He
and Modest, 1995, and Luttmer, 1996) show that the existence of trading frictions
can potentially reduce the implied lower bound on the volatility of marginal utility
growth. We show that one particular, and easily quantiﬁed, friction does indeed
reconcile a high Sharpe ratio with low volatility of marginal utility growth.

4

1.2

Some facts of life-cycle consumption and portfolio choice

Three well-established sets of empirical results are relevant to an assessment of our
model. First, a large percentage of households hold no equity – a phenomenon sometimes referred to as the “participation puzzle.” According to Vissing-Jorgenson (2002),
only 44 percent of households held stock in 1994, a big increase over the 28 percent
ﬁgure for 1984. Participation rates rise with age (Poterba and Samwick, 2001), education and income (Mankiw and Zeldes, 1991, Brav and Geczy, 1995), and self-employed
workers are more likely to hold stock (Heaton and Lucas, 2000). To a large degree,
low equity market participation can be traced to the fact the many households have
little or no ﬁnancial wealth (Lusardi et al., 2001).
Second, most households that do hold equity hold very little. Vissing-Jorgensen
(2002) reports that the median level of equity holdings for stockholding households is
about 21 thousand dollars, and the mean is 95 thousand dollars. Ameriks and Zeldes
(2001) ﬁnd that the level of stockholding rises with education, income and age.
Third, at least as far back as Grossman and Shiller (1982), many researchers
have observed that the covariance of consumption growth and equity returns is very
low, even for most households that hold equity. That is, given standard preferences
and a plausible degree of risk aversion, the estimated covariance violates standard
consumption-based asset pricing relations. Several researchers have also shown, however, that the covariance is higher for households that hold equity. See, for example,
Mankiw and Zeldes (1991), Brav and Geczy (1995), Brav, Constantinides and Geczy
(2002) and Attanasio, Banks and Tanner (2002).

2

A Life-Cycle Model

We consider a partial equilibrium model of household consumption and portfolio
choice. The household life cycle consists of two phases, work and retirement, which
5

diﬀer with respect to the character of labor income. During the working years, log
labor income (ỹt ) evolves as the sum of a deterministic component (dt ), a random
walk component (η̃t ), and an uncorrelated transitory shock (ε̃t ):
ỹt = dt + η̃t + ε̃t .
This type of income process is widely used in life-cycle studies of consumption and
asset accumulation.
During the retirement years, a household receives a fraction of its income in the last
year of work. Ideally, we would specify retirement income as some fraction of, say, the
highest n years of work income – consistent with most deﬁned beneﬁt pension plans
and with social security. However, such a structure is computationally burdensome,
because it increases the dimensionality of the state space. As a computationally
easier alternative, we ﬁrst calculate the ratio of the average value of dt in the highest
n working years to the value of d in the last year of work. We then multiply this ratio
by realized income in the last year of work to get the retirement basis. Finally, to get
retirement income, we multiply the retirement basis by a number between zero and
one called the replacement rate.
To see why this procedure is useful, look at Figure 1, which shows expected
labor income proﬁles for various education groups. Note, for example, that expected
labor income in the ﬁnal year of work is lower relative to lifetime expected income
for college-educated households than for households with post-graduate education.
Hence, setting retirement income to the same fraction of income in the last working
year for all households would eﬀectively assign a relatively low replacement rate to
college-educated households. The retirement basis serves to adjust for diﬀerences
among education groups in the shape of the lifetime expected income proﬁle.
Households can trade three ﬁnancial assets. They can buy equity with stochastic
net return r̃E , save at a net risk-free rate rL , and borrow at the rate rB ≥ rL . Households cannot take short positions in equity, nor can they borrow negative amounts.
6

Net indebtedness cannot exceed the present value of the household’s lowest possible
future income stream, discounted at the borrowing rate of interest.
A household chooses a contingency plan for consumption, borrowings and asset
holdings at date t to maximize
U (ct ) + Et

T


β a−t U (c̃a )

a=t+1

subject to a sequence of budget constraints, where ca is consumption at age a, Et
is the expectations operator conditional on time-t information, β is a time discount
factor, and U (·) is an isoelastic utility function. We solve numerically for the optimal
solution using a backward induction algorithm, as described in the appendix.

3

Parameter Settings and Discretization

Tables 2 and 3 summarize our parameter settings. We set the coeﬃcient of relative
risk aversion to 2 in our baseline speciﬁcation, but we also report results for other
values ranging from 0.5 to 8. We set the annual time discount factor to .95.1
Following Campbell (1999), we set the annual risk-free investment return to 2%,
the expected return on equity to 8% and the standard deviation of equity returns to
15%. We set the correlation of equity returns and labor income shocks to zero.2 In
line with Table 1, we set the baseline borrowing rate to 8%.
1

Compelling evidence on the value of the subjective discount factor is scarce. See the discussion

in Engen et al. (1999). Much, perhaps most, previous research on consumption and portfolio choice
over the life cycle adopts values near .95 or .96. Our model generates realistic asset accumulation
behavior for values in this neighborhood. Substantially lower values (e.g., .90) lead to very little
wealth accumulation over the life cycle, and substantially higher values (e.g., 1.0) imply much greater
wealth accumulation than seen in the data.
2
Davis and Willen (2000) present evidence of non-zero correlations between labor income shocks
and equity returns. They also consider the implications of a non-zero correlation for life-cycle
portfolio choice in a model with the borrowing rate equal to the risk-free investment return.

7

For the life-cycle income processes, we adopt parameter values estimated by Gourinchas and Parker (2002) from the Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX) and the
Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID). The GP income measure is “after-tax family income less social security tax payments, pension contributions, after-tax asset
and interest income” in 1987 dollars. GP also subtract “education, medical care and
mortgage interest payments” from their measure of income, because “these categories
of expenditure do not provide current utility but rather are either illiquid investments
or negative income shocks.”3 They restrict their sample to male-headed households
and attribute the head’s age and education to the entire household.
To estimate the deterministic component of income for each education group, GP
ﬁt a ﬁfth-order polynomial in the head’s age to CEX data on log family income.
They also ﬁt a ﬁfth-order polynomial to their entire sample, pooled over the ﬁve
education groups. To estimate the standard deviation of transitory and permanent
income shocks, GP use the longitudinal aspect of the PSID. Since the income measures
reported in household surveys contain much measurement error, the raw variance estimates substantially overstate income uncertainty. To adjust for this overstatement,
we adopt GP’s suggestion to reduce the estimated variance of the transitory shock
by one half and the variance of the permanent shock by one third. Table 3 reports
the standard deviation of the income shocks after adjusting for measurement error.
The expected income proﬁles displayed in Figure 1 reﬂect three elements of the
GP income processes: (i) the proﬁle of the deterministic component; (ii) the variance
of the transitory shock to log income, which aﬀects the level of expected income; and
(iii) the variance of the permanent shock, which aﬀects the level and slope of expected
income. The proﬁle for the middle education group, not displayed in Figure 1, is very
similar to the proﬁle for the pooled sample.
We discretize the state-space using the Tauchen and Hussey (1991) method. Our
3

Without these deductions, household income would be about 27% higher.

8

model has three sources of randomness: a permanent labor income shock, a transitory
income shock and an asset return shock. We specify two discrete points for the
permanent shock, two points for the transitory shock and three points for the asset
return shock, so that the random shocks obey a twelve-state Markov chain.
Our discretization procedure does not generate zero income in any state of nature. In this respect, our speciﬁcation diﬀers from that of GP. The diﬀerence is not
innocuous: by assuming that agents have non-zero probability of zero income, GP
preclude borrowing.4 In our setup, households can and do borrow.
In our numerical analysis below, we often turn oﬀ one or both labor income shocks.
We do this for two reasons: ﬁrst, to help understand the impact of income uncertainty
on equity demand and, second, to show that many of our results do not rest on income
uncertainty. Whenever we shut oﬀ one or both income shocks, we also readjust the
deterministic income component to preserve the same expected income proﬁle.

4

The demand for equity over the life cycle

Before analyzing portfolio choice, we ﬁrst introduce some terminology and provide
intuition. We then explore how four parameters of the household decision problem
aﬀect the demand for equity over the life cycle: (1) the borrowing rate, (2) risk
aversion, (3) undiversiﬁable labor income shocks, and (4) the shape of the income
proﬁle. Lastly, we turn to the issue of non-participation in equity markets.
Borrowing capacity is the present value of future labor income (including retirement income), when discounted at the borrowing rate, along the lowest possible future
4

If zero income is possible in the last period of life, households that borrow in the penultimate

period run the risk of negative consumption in the ﬁnal period. With isoelastic utility and relative
risk aversion of at least 1, the possibility of negative consumption, no matter how remote, leads
to inﬁnitely negative utility. Thus no households borrow in the penultimate period. The same
argument extends to earlier periods of life by induction.

9

income path. The equity premium is the diﬀerence between the expected return on
equity and the risk-free investment return. The leverage premium is the diﬀerence
between the expected equity return and the borrowing rate. When the cost of borrowing exceeds the risk-free investment return, the equity premium exceeds the leverage
premium. Hence, the net return on equity depends on the source of funds invested,
as depicted in the following table.
Source of funds

Opportunity cost Net equity return

Liquid wealth

Risk-free return

Equity premium

Borrowing capacity

Borrowing rate

Leverage premium

Given a realistic equity premium (say 6%), a household invests all or much of its
liquid wealth in equity. When the leverage premium is positive, a household may also
borrow to ﬁnance equity holdings, but it holds less equity than an otherwise similar
household with greater ﬁnancial wealth. When the leverage premium is negative,
households do not draw on borrowing capacity to invest in equity. That is, with
a zero or negative leverage premium, equity demand varies closely (often one-forone) with liquid wealth. In turn, liquid wealth depends principally on the shape of
the lifetime income proﬁle and the strength of consumption-smoothing motives. For
example, a household with a sharply upward-sloping income proﬁle saves little, and
thus acquires little equity, early in life. The upshot is that the evolution of liquid
wealth over the life cycle is a key determinant of equity demand.

4.1

Eﬀect of the borrowing rate

How does the borrowing rate aﬀect the demand for equity over the life cycle? First, a
higher borrowing cost lowers borrowing capacity by reducing the present value of labor
income. Second, a higher borrowing rate lowers the leverage premium. And third, the
borrowing rate aﬀects the evolution of wealth over the life cycle. A low borrowing rate
depresses liquid wealth by encouraging greater borrowing for consumption smoothing
10

purposes and by substituting for precautionary wealth holdings that households would
otherwise accumulate to smooth transitory income shocks. But a low borrowing rate
can also increase liquid wealth: if the leverage premium is positive, borrowing to
invest in equity enables the household to increase wealth over time.
As these remarks suggest, there is a non-monotonic relationship between the cost
of borrowing and the demand for equity. For example, consider our baseline speciﬁcation with no labor income risk for a household from the pooled sample. Figure 2
shows its life-cycle equity holdings (averaged over many draws) for alternative borrowing rates. When the borrowing rate equals the risk-free return of 2%, households
invest large amounts in equity throughout the life cycle, a result that is not sensitive
to the shape of the income proﬁle. Thus, the standard model with rB = rL implies
equity holdings that greatly exceed what we see in the data.
A borrowing rate of 5% yields much lower equity holdings throughout the life cycle.
Why? An increase in the borrowing rate from 2% to 5% implies a reduction in the
leverage premium from 6% to 3% and a decline in borrowing capacity. The eﬀect on
a very young household is easily understood: since it has no liquid wealth, a smaller
leverage premium and lower borrowing capacity mean lower equity demand. Less
obviously, the disparity in equity holdings persists into retirement. Two forces are at
work. First, households with a non-zero replacement rate still have borrowing capacity
in retirement. As shown in Figure 3, households with a positive leverage premium
continue to borrow until the year before death. So even in retirement, the size of the
leverage premium aﬀects equity demand. Second, a higher leverage premium earlier in
life leads, in expectation, to higher wealth accumulation by retirement, as illustrated
in Figure 4. A household with a 2% borrowing rate has much greater liquid wealth
at retirement than a household with a 5% borrowing rate.
Equity demand behaves diﬀerently when the leverage premium is zero or negative.
With a borrowing rate equal to 8%, the household from the pooled sample does not

11

invest in equity until age 54 (Figure 2). That is, it never pays to invest borrowing
capacity in equity when the leverage premium is zero or negative. However, the
household still borrows when young for consumption-smoothing purposes (Figure 3),
provided that the cost of borrowing is not too high, so that liquid wealth is negative
during much of the life cycle. Although the household from the pooled sample with
a zero leverage premium stops borrowing after age 53, asset accumulation and equity
demand are smaller than cases with a positive leverage premium.
At borrowing rates above 8%, households hold more equity than at a borrowing
rate equal to 8% (Figure 2). In this region, higher borrowing rates lead to less
borrowing early in life (Figure 3), earlier participation in equity markets (Figure 2)
and greater liquid wealth at retirement (Figure 4).
Figure 5 shows average demand for equity as a function of the borrowing rate,
computed using the age and education weights in the Gourinchas-Parker CEX sample.
As seen in Figure 5, average equity demand is smallest when the borrowing rate
equals the expected return on equity. At this trough, equity demand in the model
with risky labor income is less than 10% of its value in an otherwise identical model
with borrowing rate equal to the risk-free return. For the model with no labor income
risk, average equity demand at rB = E(r̃E ) is less than 1% of its value at rB = rL .
Further increases in the cost of borrowing above E(r̃E ) raise average equity demand.

In particular, higher borrowing costs discourage consumption smoothing

through the loan market, so that households begin accumulating wealth earlier in
the life cycle. Note, however, that the equity demand function is rather ﬂat to the
right of rB = E(r̃E ). Hence, when borrowing rates equal or exceed the return on
equity, the demand for equity is an order of magnitude smaller than in a standard
model with equal borrowing and lending rates.
To sum up, we emphasize three points. First, even a modest wedge between borrowing and lending rates sharply reduces the demand for equity. Second, a borrowing

12

rate equal to the return on equity minimizes the demand for equity. This result is
particularly notable since the borrowing rates reported in Table 1 lie near estimates
of the expected return on equity. Third, introducing a realistic borrowing rate into
an otherwise standard life-cycle model dramatically shrinks the demand for equity.

4.2

Eﬀect of undiversiﬁable labor income risk

How does undiversiﬁable labor income risk aﬀect the demand for equity over the life
cycle? First, greater income risk makes households with proper preferences eﬀectively
more risk averse, which reduces equity demand at given levels of liquid wealth and
borrowing capacity. Second, greater income risk intensiﬁes the precautionary saving
motive, which encourages wealth accumulation for consumption-smoothing purposes.
These two eﬀects work in opposite directions.
Figure 6 shows that the ﬁrst eﬀect dominates when rB = rL , so that labor income
uncertainty lowers equity holdings. In contrast, the second eﬀect dominates when
rB = E(r̃E ). This case diﬀers from the case with rB = rL for two reasons. First, when
rB = E(r̃E ), younger households hold no equity in the absence of income uncertainty.
Hence, they cannot oﬄoad risk by reducing their equity holdings, and the ﬁrst eﬀect
is shut oﬀ. Second, it is more costly to rely on borrowing as a consumption-smoothing
device at a high interest rate, so that the precautionary motive for asset accumulation
becomes stronger. As a result, income uncertainty increases equity demand when
rB = E(r̃E ).5

4.3

Eﬀect of relative risk aversion

How does an increase in the relative risk aversion parameter aﬀect the demand for
equity over the life cycle? Greater risk aversion lowers a household’s appetite for risk,
5

We discuss the distinct eﬀects of permanent and transitory income shocks on the demand for

equity in Sections 5.1 and 5.2 below.

13

and its demand for equity, at a given level of liquid wealth. But risk aversion also has a
powerful eﬀect on the evolution of liquid wealth over the life cycle. Higher risk aversion
means higher precautionary savings, which raises wealth. Higher risk aversion also
means a lower elasticity of substitution under our preference speciﬁcation, which leads
to more borrowing and less wealth accumulation with a rising income proﬁle.
As these remarks suggest, stronger risk aversion can mean higher or lower equity
demand, and the eﬀects can vary signiﬁcantly with age. When the borrowing rate
equals the risk-free return, higher risk aversion leads to lower equity holdings throughout the life cycle. When the borrowing rate equals the return on equity, the story
is more complicated, as shown in Figure 7. Observe that a household with RRA=1
holds less equity throughout life than a household with RRA=.5 or one with RRA=4.
A household with RRA=8 holds more equity early in life than any other case shown,
but it holds less equity at the end of life.
What drives these results? Since the leverage premium is zero, the main issue is
how liquid assets evolve over the life cycle. A household with RRA=0.5 has a high
elasticity of substitution, which makes it willing to reduce consumption early in life.
As a result, it borrows less early in life than a household with RRA=1. In turn,
lower borrowing and more investment lead to higher wealth accumulation throughout
the life cycle. A household with RRA=4 accumulates assets early in life because of
a strong precautionary motive. The additional savings early in life lead to greater
wealth throughout life than the household with RRA=1. Finally, what about the
household with RRA=8? Early in life, it invests more than the other cases shown,
reﬂecting its strong precautionary saving motive. But all along, unlike the other
households, it ﬁnds the risk-free asset highly attractive. As it ages, it continues to
direct a large fraction of its portfolio to the risk-free asset, so that it experiences a
substantially lower return on its asset portfolio.
Figure 8 shows that the average demand for equity is a non-monotonic function

14

of the risk aversion parameter when borrowing costs exceed the risk-free return. For
relative risk aversion below 2 or above 7, equity demand rises with risk aversion, as
predicted by a simpler model with rB = rL . For relative risk aversion between 2
and 7, equity demand is a declining function of the risk aversion parameter. Equity
demand is near its minimum for relative risk aversion values near 2 or 3.

4.4

Eﬀect of the expected labor income proﬁle

How does the shape of the expected income proﬁle aﬀect the demand for equity? The
answer hinges on the cost of borrowing. When rB = rL and labor income is risky
(certain), the shape of the income proﬁle has little (zero) eﬀect on equity demand.
In contrast, when rB ≥ E(r̃E ), the demand for equity is highly sensitive to the
shape of the income proﬁle.6 The explanation for this sensitivity is straightforward:
households borrow only for consumption-smoothing purposes when rB ≥ E(r̃E ), so
they hold no equity until they attain positive ﬁnancial wealth. The age at which this
occurs depends on the shape of the income proﬁle.
Consider the case with rB = E(r̃E ). Figure 9 compares life-cycle equity demand
for a household from the pooled sample and no labor income risk to an otherwise
identical household with a ﬂat income proﬁle. We set income in the ﬂat proﬁle to
the simple mean of baseline labor earnings during the working years. The household
with a ﬂat proﬁle invests in equity throughout life, whereas the household with the
upward-sloping baseline proﬁle waits until age 54. Early investment, compounded by
the high return on equity, means that the household with a ﬂat proﬁle accumulates
large wealth and equity positions before the baseline household even begins to invest.
Figure 10 shows the eﬀect of the income replacement rate during retirement on
equity holdings. In this ﬁgure, we vary the replacement rate while holding ﬁxed
6

The shape of the income proﬁle also aﬀects equity demand in the intermediate case with rB ∈

(rL , E(r̃E )), but the eﬀect is stronger when rB ≥ E(r̃E ).

15

the other income parameters. The more income a household expects to receive in
retirement, the less it saves and the less it invests in equity. The nature of retirement
income also aﬀect the optimal portfolio mix. When replacement rates are low, or
when pensions take the form of deﬁned contribution plans invested heavily in equities,
households are more likely to invest in the risk-free asset in addition to equity.

4.5

Non-participation in equity markets

When the leverage premium is zero or negative, a household invests in equity if and
only if its net liquid wealth position is positive. Since households can borrow in our
model, net liquid wealth is often negative or zero, and the household holds no equity.
This pattern of borrowing and non-participation in equity markets is fully consistent
with rational, time-consistent behavior by patient, mildly risk averse households.
Table 4 shows participation rates for diﬀerent age groups using the pooled-sample
income process and baseline parameter settings. The table highlights several points.
First, a borrowing rate above the return on equity raises participation rates conditional on age. This eﬀect on participation arises for the same reason that additional
increases in the cost of borrowing above E(r̃E ) lead to greater asset holdings.
Second, when permanent income shocks are not too important, a speciﬁcation
with rB = 8% implies equity market participation rates that are very low for younger
households and that then rise gradually after age 40, as seen in the table. In contrast,
participation rates are very high throughout life when rB = 99%. Since households do
not borrow at a 99% rate under our parameter settings, this speciﬁcation is equivalent
to a model with a no-borrowing constraint. Thus, a model with realistic borrowing
costs delivers much more realistic participation behavior than a model with a noborrowing constraint.7
7

A model that allows for limited borrowing at the risk-free rate also implies very high equity

market participation. In addition, it has the unpalatable implication that old households borrow to

16

Third, temporary and permanent income shocks have quite diﬀerent eﬀects on
equity market participation. In other words, the impact of income uncertainty on
participation behavior depends on the persistence of the income shocks. We take up
this issue in Section 5 below.
Not shown in the table is the ambiguous eﬀect of risk aversion on equity market
participation. Participation rates are high for very low levels of risk aversion (RRA <
1) and for high levels (RRA > 4), but they are considerably lower for intermediate
levels (1 ≤ RRA ≤ 4). The explanation for the non-monotonic relationship between
participation and risk aversion parallels the explanation given above for the nonmonotonicity in the level of equity holdings.

5

Does our model ﬁt the facts?

Section 1 reviewed several facts about life-cycle consumption and portfolio behavior.
We now assess the ﬁt between those facts and predictions of the model. Where the
model fails to ﬁt the facts, we assess whether the failure is large or small in a welfare
sense.

5.1

Fact 1: Non-participation in equity markets

To get a better sense of what drives participation behavior in the model, Table 5
shows how average participation rates vary with several aspects of the speciﬁcation.
Two points are immediately clear from Tables 4 and 5. First, the model can generate
low participation rates when borrowing rates exceed the risk-free return. Second,
when ﬁt to the GP data on income shock variances, the predicted participation levels
exceed those observed in the data.
In evaluating this failure of the model, it is worth emphasizing that we have not
ﬁnance equity holdings.

17

modelled any liquidity advantage for the risk-free asset. Given the modest liquid
wealth positions of many households in our simulations, equity market participation
would be much lower if we incorporated some reason to hold small liquid wealth
positions in the risk-free asset. We make a related point below when we quantify the
welfare costs of non-participation from the vantage point of the model.
Tables 4 and 5 also show that permanent and transitory income shocks aﬀect
participation quite diﬀerently. The introduction of permanent income shocks raises
participation in all scenarios shown, and speciﬁcations with only permanent shocks
exhibit full participation at all ages. In contrast, transitory income shocks push
outcomes away from zero and 100% participation. Hence, relative to a speciﬁcation
with no income risk, transitory income shocks tend to raise participation at younger
ages. But relative to a speciﬁcation with permanent income shocks, the introduction
of transitory income shocks lowers participation at younger ages.
The explanation for these results involves the consumption-smoothing role of borrowing. Borrowing is not helpful in smoothing permanent income shocks, but it
is useful for smoothing transitory shocks. In particular, a suﬃciently bad transitory
shock (or shock sequence) causes the household to draw down liquid wealth and resort
to borrowing, at which point it ceases to hold equity. The consumption smoothing
role of borrowing is highly sensitive to the borrowing rate – the higher the borrowing
rate, the more households act to reduce the likelihood of borrowing. This behavioral
response can be seen in Table 4 as a positive relationship between rB and participation, conditional on age, when only transitory income shocks are present. In short,
transitory shocks create a motive to hold equity when the household would otherwise
hold none, but they also give rise to circumstances in which some households exhaust
their asset holdings and turn to borrowing.
Turning to cross-sectional evidence, empirical studies consistently ﬁnd that equity

18

market participation rates rise with age.8 As seen in Table 4, this empirical regularity
is well matched by the predicted life-cycle pattern of participation in the model with
transitory income shocks. In this respect, our analysis provides a simple explanation
for a widely observed empirical regularity.
Empirical studies also ﬁnd that participation rates rise with education. In contrast, our speciﬁcations predict lower participation rates for the top two education
groups, because they face steeper expected income proﬁles. It is unclear whether this
mismatch reﬂects a failure of the model or an inadequate calibration. For reasons of
data availability, our simulations confront all households with the same environment
except for the diﬀerences among education groups in the income processes. However,
small diﬀerences among education groups in borrowing costs, risk aversion and time
discounting, or small changes in the baseline values for the income shock variances,
can alter the predicted relationships between participation rates and education.

5.2

Fact 2: Average and life-cycle demand for equity

For realistic borrowing rates, our model predicts small equity holdings, roughly in
line with the data. The impact of borrowing costs on average equity demand can be
seen in Table 5. The column headed “DKW” shows predicted average equity holdings
when rB = E(r̃E ), while the column headed “Std” shows average equity holdings in
an otherwise identical model with rB = rL . Comparing these two columns shows that
the borrowing cost wedge dramatically reduces equity demand in every speciﬁcation.
Focusing now on cases with rB = E(r̃E ), some speciﬁcations imply tiny values for
average equity demand, as illustrated by the row with RRA=4 and no labor income
risk. Speciﬁcations with risky labor income imply substantially larger equity holdings,
8

Isolating age eﬀects from time and cohort eﬀects requires an identifying assumption. However,

to the best of our knowledge, every study that considers the issue concludes that age has a positive
eﬀect on participation in equity markets.

19

in line with the discussion in Section 4.2. Table 6 shows that a realistic borrowing
rate leads to much lower equity holdings at all ages. Table 6 and Figures 6 and 7 show
that equity holdings rise sharply with age until late in the life cycle when rB = E(r̃E ).
Some commentators have suggested that our results on equity demand, equity
market participation and the covariance between consumption and asset returns
would not survive the introduction of margin loans. However, a few observations
make clear why the introduction of margin loans would not greatly aﬀect our results.
First, initial margin requirements on equity are 50% or higher. Thus, for a household
with one thousand dollars in liquid wealth, a margin loan enables the household to
adopt an equity position of no more than two thousand dollars. Second, the data
show a large wedge between margin loan rates and risk-free returns. Kubler and
Willen (2002) report that as of July 8, 2002, the rates on margin loans of less than
$50,000 at ﬁve major brokerage houses (The Vanguard Group, Fidelity Investments,
Charles Schwab, Salomon Smith Barney and UBS Paine Webber) exceed the rate on
90-day U.S. Treasury Bills by 357 to 570 basis points, depending on brokerage house
and loan size. Even at these rates, brokerage houses require credit checks and reserve
the right to deny margin credit or impose higher margin rates. Finally, the combination of unsecured borrowing and margin loans does not oﬀer an attractive leverage
premium. For example, at an 8% expected return on equity, a risk-free rate of 1.68%
and a 4.63% margin loan premium, the expected return on a margin-levered equity
portfolio is (1/.5)8 − (1.68 + 4.63) = 9.69%. Combined with a wedge of 7.5 percentage
points on unsecured borrowing, roughly the midpoint of the Table 1 values, the fully
levered portfolio oﬀers a leverage premium of 9.69 − (1.68 + 7.5) = .51%. That is,
the fully levered portfolio oﬀers an expected return premium of 51 basis points with
a standard deviation of 2 × 15= 30%.

20

5.3

Fact 3: Covariance of consumption and equity returns

How does our model ﬁt the facts about the covariance of consumption growth and
equity returns? Much better, in three respects, than models with equal borrowing
and lending rates. First, our model’s implied covariance between minus marginal
utility growth and equity returns lies well below the excess return on equity. Second,
if one applies standard formulas to calculate risk aversion using data generated by
our model, one overestimates risk aversion, often by a factor of ten or more. This implication rationalizes the implausibly large estimates of risk aversion in consumptionbased asset-pricing studies. Third, our model rationalizes the rejection of standard
consumption-based asset-pricing relationships in samples that are restricted to households with positive equity holdings. We now develop these three points in turn.
First, consider the covariance between minus marginal utility growth and equity
returns. According to standard models with equal borrowing and lending rates,



∆M
U
E (r̃E ) − rL = cov r̃E , −
≡ covM U
(1)

E(∆M
U)
That is, the excess return on equity equals minus the covariance between equity
returns and the growth rate of marginal utility. Equation (1) is central to most
consumption-based asset pricing studies. It fares poorly in confrontations with the
data for standard preference speciﬁcations.
As shown in Tables 5 and 6, equation (1) fails to hold in versions of our model
with realistic borrowing costs. Table 6 shows that covM U is (near) zero for young
households and reaches a maximum of 2.3 prior to retirement in the version of the
model with risky labor income. In contrast, the standard model implies that covM U
equals 6.0 at all ages.
We can interpret covM U as the equity premium implied by consumption behavior. In particular, suppose we observe a consumption process and know the utility
function. In addition, suppose we assume that households face equal borrowing and
21

lending rates. Then from equation (1), we would infer an equity premium of 0.2% in
our baseline speciﬁcation with no labor income risk and 1.1% with risky labor income
(ﬁrst and third rows of Table 5). In other words, we would mistakenly attribute the
low covariance of consumption growth and asset returns to a low equity premium,
not diﬀerential borrowing and lending rates.
We can also follow Hansen and Jagannathan (1991) and interpret the same information in another way. Equation (1) implies that the standard deviation of marginal
utility growth is bounded below by the Sharpe ratio. We can use our model to calculate the actual standard deviation of marginal utility growth, reported in Table 5 in
the “HJ” column. Note that only when the borrowing cost wedge is zero or very small
does the HJ statistic equal or exceed the Sharpe ratio (38%). For realistic borrowing
costs, the model implies that the standard deviation of marginal utility growth is
much smaller than the Sharpe ratio.
Second, consider the estimation of risk aversion from consumption-based assetpricing relationships. Recall from Hansen and Singleton (1983) that, if asset returns
and consumption are jointly log-normal and individual utility is of the time-separable
isoelastic form, then equation (1) implies
γ=

E(r˜E ) − rL + .5 var(r̃E )
cov(r̃E , ∆ log c̃)

(2)

where γ is the coeﬃcient of relative risk aversion. The columns headed “Implied
RRA” in Tables 5 and 6 calculate risk aversion using equation (2).
Inspecting these tables reveals that equation (2) greatly overestimates risk aversion when borrowing rates exceed lending rates. In the baseline speciﬁcation with
permanent and transitory income shocks (Row 3), the Implied RRA is 13.0, more
than six times the true value. In the baseline speciﬁcation with certain labor income
(Row 1), the Implied RRAA is 60.9, more than thirty times its true value.
Third, consider the consequences of restricting samples to households with positive
equity holdings. Starting with Mankiw and Zeldes (1991), researchers have argued
22

that equations (1) and (2) are unreasonable descriptions of reality for households that
do not participate in equity markets. But, as the argument goes, perhaps equations
(1) and (2) approximate reality for households that invest non-zero amounts in equity.
This type of argument leads to equity ownership as a sample selection criterion in
studies of consumption-based asset pricing relationships.
To evaluate this approach in terms of our model, the bottom row of Table 6
reports statistics for “samples” restricted to equity market participants. This selection
criterion leads to a better ﬁt between theory and data, but the theory continues to
perform poorly if we maintain that the data are generated by a world with rB =
rL . For example, restricting the sample to equity market participants lowers the
Implied RRA from 55.8 to 15.7 in the speciﬁcation with no income risk, as compared
to a true RRA value of 2.0. If one instead recognizes that the borrowing rate is
several percentage points above the risk-free return, then the theory explains why
consumers appear so risk averse in consumption-based asset pricing studies, why the
implicit equity premium appears so small, and why the Hansen-Jagannathan bound
is violated.

5.4

Facts we don’t match

Our model fails to match the facts on at least two dimensions. First, as we discussed
above, versions of the model with large permanent income shocks predict higher
equity market participation rates than seen in the data. Second, the model predicts
that many households hold equity but not the risk-free asset. Moreover, unless risk
aversion is high, the model predicts small portfolio shares in the risk-free asset for
households that invest in both assets.
We now investigate the welfare signiﬁcance of these model failures. Our main
message is simple: When borrowing rates are in the neighborhood of the return on
equity, the welfare costs of delayed participation in equity markets or the wrong
23

bond-equity mix are small. Even the right to hold equity can have modest welfare
consequences in a life-cycle model with a zero or negative leverage premium. The
situation is very diﬀerent in the standard model. When the borrowing rate equals
the risk-free investment return, delayed equity market participation and the wrong
bond-equity mix imply large welfare costs. These observations are not intended to
downplay the shortcomings of our model. Rather, they suggest that there is ample
scope for other factors – participation and transaction costs, alternative preferences, a
desire for liquidity, information costs and so on – to strongly inﬂuence equity holdings,
once we recognize that borrowing costs exceed the risk-free return.
To carry out the welfare comparisons, it is useful to focus on certainty-equivalent
consumption levels, which we report in Table 7. To obtain certainty-equivalent consumption, we ﬁrst calculate lifetime expected utility, U , for a given consumption
proﬁle. We then ﬁnd the constant level of consumption, c, that yields the same level
of lifetime expected utility. That is, we solve
T

t=0

βt

c1−γ
=U
1−γ

 1 − γ γ−1
U
,
for c = T
t
β
t=0

where β is the time discount factor, and γ is relative risk aversion.
For example, consider a household with less than high school education, no income
risk and an 8% borrowing rate. According to Table 7, that household is indiﬀerent
between the optimal lifetime consumption plan and a ﬂat proﬁle with consumption
of $17,850 per year. If the same household is not allowed to trade equity, certaintyequivalent consumption falls to $17,800. In other words, the right to trade equity is
worth about $50 per year, or less than .3 percent of annual consumption. Table 7
considers three departures from optimal behavior: non-participation in equity markets
throughout life, non-participation until age 50 with optimal behavior thereafter, and
optimal participation subject to a 50-50 bond-equity portfolio mix.
Perhaps the most notable feature of Table 7 is the small cost of delayed equity
market participation, given realistic borrowing costs. In the speciﬁcation with no
24

income risk and an 8% borrowing rate, the cost of waiting until age 50 to invest in
equity is essentially zero. The costs of delayed participation are larger for speciﬁcations with risky income, but less than $400 per year for every group. Costs on this
order are not trivial, but they seem well within range of reasonable values for the
costs of participating and transacting in equity markets.
The standard life-cycle model with rB = rL tells a starkly diﬀerent story. For
example, the costs of delayed participation until age 50 when rB = rL range from 14
to 23 thousand dollars per year, which amounts to more than ﬁfty percent of annual
consumption. In other words, the standard model implies enormous welfare costs for
widely observed departures from theoretically predicted behavior. These costs are
far too large to be rationalized by plausible costs of participating and transacting in
equity markets.

6

Concluding Remarks

Realistic borrowing costs dramatically shrink the demand for equity in the canonical
life-cycle model of consumption and portfolio choice. The model’s theoretical implications about the average level and life-cycle pattern of equity holdings are roughly in
line with the data, given realistic borrowing costs. In addition, a realistic borrowing
rate greatly improves the performance of the theory along several dimensions that
feature prominently in consumption-based asset pricing studies.
The implications of our model diﬀer in noteworthy respects from those of models
that abstract from life-cycle considerations and from models with hard borrowing
limits. For example, equity demand and equity market participation rates are nonmonotonic in borrowing costs and risk aversion in our model. The opportunity to
borrow at realistic rates in a life-cycle setting also has important consequences for
life-cycle wealth accumulation, which in turn drives the demand for equity. Because

25

households face an upward sloping income proﬁle, they borrow in the early part of
the life cycle, which causes a substantial delay in the age at which they ﬁrst invest in
equity or ﬁrst accumulate substantial equity holdings.
Our analysis points to several directions for future research. We mention three
here. First, our model implies that households accumulate little or no liquid wealth
until middle age, which is consistent with much empirical evidence (e.g., Lusardi,
Cossa and Krupka, 2001). Given its simplicity and its assumption of patient, timeconsistent, rational consumers, our model and analysis challenge claims that households save too little. A natural next step, which we are currently pursuing, is to
enrich the model to account for housing consumption and wealth and for the liquidity beneﬁts of safe assets. We plan to evaluate this richer version of the model
against a number of facts about consumption, home ownership, wealth accumulation
and portfolio choice over the life cycle.
Second, our analysis puts the spotlight on the role of borrowing costs and leverage
as key factors in the demand for risky assets. This paper does not consider other
ways to leverage equity investments such as margin loans or investments in levered
mutual funds. Margin loans provide limited scope for levered equity holdings, but
corporate bonds, government securities, real estate and small business wealth are
often subject to less stringent restrictions on leverage. Kubler and Willen (2002)
consider an extended version of our model to address portfolio choice in a broader
setting that encompasses a fuller menu of risky assets and leveraging methods.
Third, our model has strong testable implications for the life-cycle behavior of equity holdings and for the covariance between consumption growth and equity returns.
In particular, as a household ages, the model predicts rising equity holdings and an
increasing covariance between consumption growth and equity returns. These implications can be tested using now-standard econometric methods applied to (synthetic)
panel data on consumption and portfolio holdings.

26

References
[1] Altig, David and Steven J. Davis, 1992, The timing of intergenerational transfers,
tax policy and aggregate saving, American Economic Review, 82(5), 1199-1220.
[2] Ameriks, John and Stephen P. Zeldes, 2001, How do household portfolio shares
vary with age? working paper, Columbia University.
[3] Attanasio, Orazio P., James Banks and Sarah Tanner, 2002, Asset holding and
consumption volatility, Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 771-792.
[4] Brav, Alon, George M. Constantinides and Christopher C. Geczy, 2002, Asset
pricing with heterogeneous consumers and limited participation: Empirical evidence, Journal of Political Economy, 110(4), 793-824.
[5] Brav, Alon and Christopher C. Geczy, 1995, “An empirical resurrection of the
simple consumption CAPM with power utility,” working paper, University of
Chicago.
[6] Brennan, Michael J, 1971, Capital market equilibrium with divergent borrowing
and lending rates, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis, 6, 1197-1205.
[7] Campbell, John Y, 1999, Asset prices, consumption and the business cycle, in
John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford, editors, Handbook of Macroeconomics,
Volume 1C. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
[8] Constantinides, George M., John B. Donaldson and Rajnish Mehra, 2002, Junior
can’t borrow: A new perspective on the equity premium puzzle, Quarerly Journal
of Economics, 117(1), 269-296.
[9] Davis Steven J. and Paul S. Willen, 2000, Using ﬁnancial assets to hedge labor
income risks, working paper, University of Chicago.
[10] Deaton, Angus, 1991, Saving and liquidity constraints, Econometrica, 59, 12211248.
[11] Engen, Eric M., William G. Gale, and Cori R. Uccello, 1999, The adequacy of
retirement saving, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, 65-187.
[12] Garcia, C.B. and W.I. Zangwill, 1981, Pathways to Solutions, Fixed Points, and
Equilibria. Englewood Cliﬀs, NJ.: Prentice-Hall.

27

[13] Gomes, Francisco and Alex Michaelides, 2002, Life cycle asset allocation: A
model with borrowing constraints, uninsurable labor income risk and stockmarket participation costs, working paper, London Business School.
[14] Gourinchas Pierre-Olivier and Jonathan A. Parker, 2002, Consumption over the
life cycle, Econometrica, 70(1), 47-89.
[15] Grossman Sanford and Robert Shiller, 1982, Consumption correlatedness and
risk measurement in economies with non-traded assets and heterogeneous information, Journal of Financial Economics, 10(2), 195-210.
[16] Hansen, Lars Peter and Ravi Jagannathan, 1991, Implications of security market
data for models of dynamic economies, Journal of Political Economy, 99(2), 22562.
[17] Hansen, Lars Peter and Kenneth Singleton, 1983, Stochastic consumption, risk
aversion, and the temporal behavior of asset returns, Journal of Political Economy, 91, 249-265.
[18] He, Hua and David M. Modest, 1995, Market frictions and consumption-based
asset pricing, Journal of Political Economy, 103(1), 94-117.
[19] Heaton, John and Deborah Lucas, 1997, Market frictions, savings behavior, and
portfolio choice, Macroeconomic Dynamics 1, 76-101.
[20] Heaton, John and Deborah Lucas, 2000, Portfolio Choice and asset prices: The
importance of entrepreneurial risk, Journal of Finance, 55(3), 1163-98.
[21] Judd, Kenneth, Felix Kubler and Karl Schmedders, 2002, Computational methods for dynamic equilibria with heterogeneous agents. Forthcoming in M. Dewatripont, L. P. Hansen and S. J. Turnovsky, editors, Advances in Economics
and Econometrics: Theory and Applications, Eighth World Congress. Cambridge
University Press.
[22] Kubler, Felix and Paul Willen, 2002, Margin borrowing and life-cycle portfolio
choice. Work-in-progress.
[23] Lusardi, Annamaria, Ricardo Cossa and Erin L. Krupka, 2001, Savings of young
parents, Journal of Human Resources, 36(4), 762-794.
[24] Luttmer, Erzo G. J., 1996, Asset pricing in economies with frictions, Econometrica, 64(6), 1439-67.
28

[25] Mankiw, N. Gregory and Stephen P. Zeldes, 1991, The consumption of stockholders and nonstockholders, Journal of Financial Economics, 29, 97-112.
[26] Merton, Robert C, 1969, Lifetime portfolio selection under uncertainty: The
continuous time case, Review of Economics and Statistics, 51, 245-257.
[27] Poterba, James M. and Andrew A. Samwick, 2001, Portfolio allocations over the
life cycle, in Seiritsu Ogura, Toshiaki Tachibanaki, and A. David Wise, editors,
Aging Issues in the United States and Japan. Chicago: University of Chicago
Press.
[28] Samuelson, Paul A, 1969, Lifetime portfolio selection by dynamic stochastic programming, Review of Economics and Statistics, 51, 239-243.
[29] Tauchen, George and Robert Hussey, 1991, Quadrature-based methods for obtaining approximate solutions to nonlinear asset pricing models, Econometrica,
59(2), 371-96.
[30] Vissing-Jorgensen, Annette, 2002, Towards an explanation of household portfolio choice heterogeneity: Nonﬁnancial income and participation cost structures.
working paper, University of Chicago.
[31] Watson, L.T., S.C. Billups and A.P. Morgan, 1987, HOMPACK: A suite of codes
for a globally convergent homotopy algorithm. ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software, 13, 281-310.

29

Appendix: Computational details
We solve the model by backward induction. At age 80, the solution is trivial: consume
everything. We then solve for optimal consumption and portfolio choice at age 79
conditional on liquid wealth, income, the state of the world and the (degenerate)
policy rule at age 80. Next, we solve for consumption and portfolio choice at age 78 –
again conditional on liquid wealth, income, the state of the world and the calculated
optimal policy rule at age 79. And so on.
The problem therefore reduces to solving simple two-period optimization problems
and to approximating policy rules as functions of some minimal set of state variables
(including current age). This appendix focuses on two aspects of the solution procedure: how to reduce the endogenous state space to one variable, and how to solve
the two-period problem eﬀectively. First, we use preference homotheticity to simplify
the problem and reduce the number of continuous state variables to one. Second, we
discuss how we solve the two-period optimization problem.
A little notation will help. Let zt be a Markov chain with ﬁnite support z ∈
{1, ..., S} and transition π. Gross equity returns are R̃E (zt ), and the gross borrowing
and lending rates are RB and RL , respectively. A date-event z t is a history of shocks
(z1 , ..., zt ). Let y(z t ) denote income at time t.
Preference homotheticity allows us to simplify the problem by combining wealth
and income into one variable (Deaton, 1991). Suppose we have solved for optimal
policy rules from time t + 1 on. Suppose at date t, we are in state z with income
yt and wealth Ξt . The optimal policy rule for next period speciﬁes investment of
i
Ft+1
(Ξt+1 (z  ), yt+1 (z  ); z  ) in asset i = B, L, E at time t+1. Bellman’s principle implies
that the solution to the two-period problem below constitutes optimal portfolio choice
at t in state z with income y and liquid wealth Ξ.
max

F L ,F B ,F E

 c1−γ
c1−γ
t
+ β Et t+1
1−γ
1−γ

(3)

s.t. ct = y + Ξ − F L + F B − F E ;
ct+1 (z  ) = y(z  ) + Ξ(z  ) − F L (Ξ(z  ), y(z  ); z  )+
F B (Ξ(z  ), y(z  ); z  ) − F E (Ξ(z  ), y(z  ); z  ),
Ξ(z  ) = F L RL − F B RB + F E RE (z  ),

∀z  ∈ {1, ..., S};

∀z  ∈ {1, ..., S};

F L ≥ 0, F B ≥ 0, F E ≥ 0;
where we suppress time subscripts on variables other than consumption to reduce
notational clutter.
Now divide through by yt , deﬁne xi = ct /yt , and consider the two-period opti30

mization problem:
x
x1−γ
t
+ β Et t+1
1−γ
1−γ
1−γ

max

f L ,f B ,f E

(4)

s.t. xt = ξ − f L + f B − f E ;

yt+1 (z  )  
ξ(z ) − f L (ξ(z  ); z  ) + f B (ξ(z  ); z  ) − f E (ξ(z  ); z  ) ;
xt+1 =
yt
yt+1 (z  ) + f L RL − f B RB + f E RE (z  )
ξ(z  ) =
;
yt+1 (z  )
f L ≥ 0, f B ≥ 0, f E ≥ 0.
Observe that the policy rules are now functions of a single endogenous state variable,
ξ, the ratio of liquid wealth plus current income to current income. This reduction
in the dimensionality of the state space greatly simpliﬁes computation.
We can recover the solution to the original problem (3) by multiplying the solution
to the transformed problem (4) by current income:
c t = yt xt
F L = yt f L , F B = yt f B , F E = yt f E
To solve the transformed two-period problem, we solve the associated KuhnTucker conditions – a nonlinear system of equations and inequalities that is necessary
and suﬃcient for optimality. Following Garcia and Zangwill (1981, pages 65-68),
we use a change of variables to eliminate inequalities in the Kuhn-Tucker conditions
and state the optimality conditions as a system consisting solely of equations. The
resulting system has 3 unknowns corresponding to the three asset holdings.
In particular, let ηj ∈  for j = 1, 2, 3, and deﬁne the Kuhn-Tucker multiplier for
asset j, µj = (max{0, −ηj })3 . The consumer’s holding of asset j is θj = (max{0, ηj })3 .
Note that θ and µ are twice continuously diﬀerentiable, and that the complementary
slackness conditions hold:
(max{0, ηj })3 ≥ 0,

(max{0, −ηj })3 ≥ 0,

and (max{0, ηj })3 · (max{0, ηj })3 = 0.

We implement our solution algorithm using Fortran 90. A simple Newton method
usually works well as a nonlinear equation solver when a good starting point is known.
In some cases we need to use homotopy methods (as implemented in HOMPACK, see
Watson et al (1987)) to solve the system.
Lastly, we draw attention to two practical aspects of our computational solution.
First, the range of ftj (ξ; z) will generally depend on t and z. In practice, we set
arbitrary bounds on the range that vary only with t. We then verify that these
31

bounds never bind in the simulations. Second, in generating ftj (ξ; z), we don’t solve
(4) for every possible value of ξ. Instead, we solve (4) for a ﬁnite number of values of ξ
and use cubic spline interpolation to ﬁll in the rest. See Judd et al. (2002) for details
on spline interpolation. Since the true policy functions have non-diﬀerentiabilities,
we use 50 knots for each spline interpolation to obtain suﬃcient accuracy.
Maximal relative errors in Euler equations lie below 10−6 . Running times on a
Pentium III computer with a 1.2 Ghz processor and 1 GB of RAM clustered around
four or ﬁve minutes but range from 2 minutes for models with no labor income risk
and borrowing rates above the expected return on equity to about 15 minutes for
models with labor income risk and borrowing rates below the return on equity.

32

33

6.3

5.1

4.4
0.8
7.9
9.0

8.7

1.0
8.2
8.5

9.3

0.7
8.8
7.9

9.5

1.3
9.1
6.5

10.3

and Risk-Free Returns, Selected Years [tabx6]
1972 1980 1984 1987 1990 1995 2001
12.5 15.5 16.5 14.2 15.5 13.9 13.2
.181 .247 .249
0
0
0
0
10.2 11.6 12.4 14.2 15.5 13.9 13.2
5.7 11.5 11.9 7.7
8.3
6.3
4.1
.313 .428 .330 .279 .250 .282 .297
3.9
6.6
8.0
5.5
6.2
4.5
2.9
6.7
4.0
4.6
6.5
7.2
7.7
9.1

interest rate and charge-oﬀ data for credit cards instead of two-year personal loans.

on risk-free investments after adjusting for tax considerations and the charge-oﬀ rate. Row (11) is calculated in the same manner as row (10), except that it makes use of

loan loss reserves net of recoveries as a percentage of loans outstanding. Rows (10) and (11) show the diﬀerence between the household cost of borrowing and the rate of return

Notes: Borrowing costs, returns and charge-oﬀs are expressed as annual percentage rates. Row (9) reports the value of loans removed from the books and discharged against

2001 entry in row (5). Row (9) is from www.federalreserve.gov/releases/chargeoﬀ/chg all sa.txt (visited 3 April 2002). Other rows are calculated by the authors as indicated.

interest payments on non-mortgage loans. Row (5) is from Table 1 in Poterba (2001), which is calculated from the NBER TAXSIM model. Poterba’s 1999 value is used for the

of the Federal Reserve Bulletin and the Federal Reserve’s Annual Statistical Digest. Row (2) reﬂects the Tax Reform Act of 1986, which eliminated the tax deductibility of

Sources: Rows (1) through (8) for 1972 to 1987 are reproduced from Table 1 in Altig and Davis (1992). Data for later years as follows: Rows (1) and (4) are from various issues

Table 1: Household Borrowing Costs
Year
(1) Average rate on two-year personal loans
(2) Average marginal tax subsidy on borrowing
(3) After-tax borrowing cost (1 - row 2)*(row 1)
(4) Rate on three-year U.S. Treasury Securities
(5) Average marginal tax rate on interest income
(6) After-tax risk-free return (1 - row 5)*(row 4)
(7) Pre-tax wedge between borrowing cost
and risk-free return (row 1 - row 4)
(8) After-tax wedge between borrowing cost
and risk-free return (row 3 - row 6)
(9) Charge-oﬀ rate on loans, net of recoveries
(10) After-tax wedge net of charge oﬀs (row 8 - row 9)
(11) After-tax wedge net of charge oﬀs, credit cards

Table 2: Parameter Settings
Parameter
Baseline
Relative Risk Aversion
2
Annual Discount factor
0.95
Age of labor force entry
21
Age of retirement
65
Age of death
80
var (∆η̃)
see Table 3
cov (∆η̃, r̃E )
0
var (ε̃)
see Table 3
cov (ε̃, r̃E )
0
Replacement rate
80%
rL
2%
rB
8%
E(r̃E )
8%
std (r̃E )
15%

Alternative values
0.5, 1, 4, 8

20%, 40%, 60%, 100%
2%, 5%, 8%, 20%, 99%

Table 3: Income Shock Standard Deviations, percent per year
σ(ε̃)
σ(∆η̃)
(transitory shock) (permanent shock)
Some high school
23
12
High school diploma
15
14
Some college
13
12
College degree
14
10
Graduate school
16
9
Pooled Sample
15
12
Education group

Note: These values are from Gourinchas and Parker (2002), adjusted for measurement error as described in the text.

34

Table 4: Equity Market Participation Rates [tabx1]

Age
Group
22 - 24
25 - 29
30 - 34
35 - 39
40 - 44
45 - 49
50 - 54
55 - 59
60 - 79
All ages

No income
Transitory
shocks
shocks only
rB =
rB =
8
20 99
8
20 99
0
0
0
0
49 65
0
0
0
1
57 80
0
0
0
0
68 85
0
57
0
1
78 88
0 100 100 5
88 93
0 100 100 20 95 97
20 100 100 54 99 99
100 100 100 87 100 100
100 100 100 100 100 100
27 64 57 32 82 90

Permanent and
transitory shocks
rB =
8
20
99
65 69
69
84 93
94
96 99
99
100 100 100
100 100 100
100 100 100
100 100 100
100 100 100
100 100 100
94 96
96

Notes:
1. Table entries are for the pooled sample and, unless otherwise noted, the baseline
parameter settings reported in Tables 2 and 3.
2. The participation rate is 100% at all ages for rB ∈ {8, 20, 99} in the speciﬁcation
with permanent income shocks only.

35

Table 5: Average Equity Demand and other Statistics, Alternative Speciﬁcations
[tabx3]

rB
2
2
2
99
99
99
-

Labor
RRA RR income
shocks?
No
T
P+T
No
T
P+T
No
T
P+T
4
No
4
P+T
8
No
8
P+T
No
0.2
No
1
No

Income
Proﬁle

covM U

HJ

covC

Flat
-

0.2
0.3
1.1
6.0
6.1
6.1
0.4
0.6
1.2
0.1
2.8
0.0
5.0
0.9
0.7
0.1

1.5
1.9
7.1
38.2
38.8
38.7
2.3
3.8
7.5
0.9
18.1
0.2
31.8
5.8
4.6
0.7

0.1
0.1
0.5
2.8
2.7
2.7
0.2
0.3
0.6
0.0
0.6
0.0
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.1

Equity Demand
DKW
Std
15
1871
21
737
80
831
1871
1871
737
737
831
831
27
1871
40
737
84
831
3
589
99
336
0
248
104
157
77
1920
49
1644
7
1937

Implied
%
RRA
Ptcp
60.9
32
47.0
39
13.0
90
2.5
100
2.6
100
2.6
100
39.3
64
23.6
91
12.3
97
206.9
17
11.1
94
1424.1
10
11.4
98
15.3
100
19.5
45
123.6
26

Notes:
1. Table entries are for the pooled sample and, unless otherwise noted, the baseline
parameter settings reported in Tables 2 and 3. RR denotes the income replacement
rate during retirement.


2. covM U = cov(r̃E , −∆M
U /E(∆M
U )). See Section 5.3 for details.


3. HJ = std(∆M U /E(∆M U ). See Section 5.3 for details.
4. covC = cov(∆ log c̃, r̃E ).
5. DKW denotes our model with indicated value of rB . Std denotes the standard
model with rB = rL = 2%. The equity demand values are in 1987 dollars.
6. The Implied RRA is calculated using equation (2). See Section 5.3.

36

Table 6: Equity Demand and other Statistics over the Life Cycle [tabx7]
Age
Group
23 - 29
30 - 39
40 - 49
50 - 59
60 - 69
70 - 79
All ages
Participants
Only

No labor income shocks
Permanent and transitory
covM U Equity Demand Implied covM U Equity Demand
DKW Standard
RRA
DKW Standard
0.0
0
1263
Inf
0.1
8
240
0.0
0
1619
Inf
0.6
32
495
0.0
0
2117
Inf
1.2
81
884
0.1
9
2475
116.4
1.9
154
1320
0.8
60
2500
12.5
2.3
215
1633
1.1
47
1668
8.7
2.2
138
1138
0.2
11
1891
55.8
1.1
84
828
0.7

41

1891

15.7

Note: See notes to Table 5.

37

1.2

88

828

shocks
Implied
RRA
147.6
16.1
8.7
5.6
4.5
4.5
9.1
9.1

Table 7: The Welfare Costs of Sub-Optimal Equity Holdings. [tabx11]

rB

8

2

8

Certainty-equivalent consumption levels, thousands of 1987 dollars.
Income Equity
Less than
High School Some College Graduate
Shocks Holdings High School
Degree
College Degree
School
No
17.80
23.43
25.30
28.06
26.91
50/50
17.81
23.44
25.31
28.08
26.93
No
Age 50
17.85
23.49
25.37
28.17
26.97
Optimal
17.85
23.49
25.37
28.17
26.97
21.17
28.34
30.55
33.27
33.59
No
Age 50
No
23.22
31.09
33.52
36.50
36.84
37.70
50.48
54.42
59.28
59.84
Optimal
No
13.32
16.04
18.20
22.83
22.46
Yes,
50/50
13.65
16.63
18.68
23.11
22.64
both
Age 50
13.58
16.43
18.59
23.17
22.73
Optimal
14.14
17.35
19.38
23.63
22.93

Notes:
1. Unless otherwise noted, the table entries are for the baseline parameter settings
reported in Tables 2 and 3.
2. “50/50” indicates a portfolio mix that is constrained to have 50% of its value in
equity and 50% in bonds. “Age 50” means that the household is constrained from
participating in the equity market until age 50. See Section 5.4 for details.

38

Figure 1: Expected labor income proﬁles. figa7
45

Income (thousands of 1987 $)

40

Grad
↓
school

35
30

Pooled ↓

College ↓

← High School

25
20

← Less than HS

15
10

20

30

40

50
Age

60

70

80

Holdings (thousands of 1987 $)

Figure 2: Life-cycle equity holdings at various borrowing rates. Baseline parameter
settings for a household from the pooled sample and no labor income risk. [figa1]

2500
rB = 2 →

2000
1500
1000
350
300
250
200
150
100
50
0
20

rB = 5 ↓

rB = 99 ↓
30

40

50
Age

↑ rB = 8
60
70

39

80

Holdings (thousands of 1987 $)

Figure 3: Life-cycle borrowing at various borrowing rates. Baseline parameter settings for a household from the pooled sample and no labor income risk. [figa2]
1400
1200

rB = 2 →

1000
800
600
400
300
250
200
150
100
50
0

↓ rB = 5

↓ rB = 8
20

30

40

50
Age

↓ rB =99
60
70

80

Holdings (thousands of 1987 $)

Figure 4: Life-cycle liquid wealth at various borrowing rates. Baseline parameter
settings for a household from the pooled sample and no labor income risk. [figa3]
2000
rB = 2
1800
→
(right axis)
1600
1400
1200
1000
800
↓ rB = 5
600
400
100
200
50
rB = 99 ↓
rB = 8 ↑
0
0
-200
-50
-100
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
Age

40

Demand for equity (thousands of 1987 $)

Figure 5: Average equity demand as a function of borrowing rate. Baseline parameter settings for a household from the pooled sample. [figb1]
120
100
↓ Transitory and permanent shocks

80
60
40

Transitory shocks only ↓

20

↑ No labor income shocks

0

6

8

10
12
14
Borrowing rate

16

18

20

Holdings (thousands of 1987 $)

Figure 6: Life-cycle equity holdings with and without labor income risks using pooled
sample and baseline parameter settings.[figa6]

2500
2000
← rB = 2, no risk

1500

← rB = 2, risk

1000
500
200
150
100
50
0
20

rB = 8, risk →
rB = 8, no risk→
30

40

50
Age

60

41

70

80

Holdings (thousands of 1987 $)

Figure 7: Life-cycle equity holdings at alternative RRA values for pooled sample
with risky labor income and baseline parameter settings. [figa4]
400

RRA = 0.5 −→

300

200

RRA = 4 −→
RRA = 8 −→

100
← RRA= 1
0

20

30

40

50
Age

60

70

80

Demand for equity (thousands of 1987 $)

Figure 8: Demand for equity as a function of relative risk aversion. Pooled sample
with risky labor income and baseline parameter settings. [figb2]
180
170
160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90
80

0

1

2

3
4
5
Relative risk aversion

42

6

7

8

Holdings (thousands of 1987 $)

Figure 9: Life-cycle equity holdings for pooled sample and ﬂat income proﬁles.[figa9]
160
140
← Flat

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

20

30

40

50
Age

← Baseline
60
70

80

Holdings (thousands of 1987 $)

Figure 10: Life-cycle equity holdings for alternative income replacement rates during
retirement. [figa8]
300
250
200
150

← RR=0.4

100

← RR=0.6
← RR=0.8

50
0

RR = 0.2 →
40

45

50

← RR= 1
55

60
Age

65

43

70

75

80

