                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   WHY EUROPE SHOULD LOVE TAX COMPETITION -
                            AND THE U.S. EVEN MORE SO

                                          Eckhard Janeba
                                        Guttorm Schjelderup

                                        Working Paper 9334
                                http://www.nber.org/papers/w9334


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                    November 2002




We are grateful for helpful comments by Andreas Hauffler, Anne Live Scrase, and the participants in
seminars at University of Michigan and Notre Dame. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Eckhard Janeba and Guttorm Schjelderup. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Why Europe Should Love Tax Competition - and the U.S. Even More So
Eckhard Janeba and Guttorm Schjelderup
NBER Working Paper No. 9334
November 2002
JEL No. D72, F02, H11

                                               ABSTRACT


        Is global competition for mobile capital harmful (less public goods) or beneficial (less
government waste)? This paper combines both aspects within a generalized version of the comparative
public finance model (Persson, Roland and Tabellini, 2000) by introducing multiple countries and

endogenous tax bases. We consider the role of political institutions and compare parliamentary
democracies (Europe) and presidential-congressional systems (USA) to show that increasing tax

competition is likely to improve voter welfare, even if public good supply decreases because rents to
politicians also fall. The conditions for voter welfare to improve are less stringent under the presidential-
congressional system than under parliamentary democracies. Increasing tax competition lowers voter
welfare if the only benefit to politicians is to divert resources from the government budget and the future

is valued highly.



Eckhard Janeba                                              Guttorm Schjelderup
Department of Economics                                     Department of Economics
University of Colorado                                      Norwegian School of Economics
Boulder, CO 80303-0256                                      and Business Administration
and NBER                                                    5045 Bergen
janeba@colorado.edu                                         Norway
                                                            guttorm.schjelderup@nhh.no
1         Introduction

Increasing mobility of capital both among regions and countries has been an important
phenomenon around the world over the last two decades. For some academics and policy-
makers this has been reason for concern since governments often compete for investment
through tax incentives that ignore the detrimental e¤ect on other regions. In the now
vast literature on tax competition, as originated by Zodrow and Mieszkowski (1986) and
Wilson (1986), and surveyed by Wilson (1999), this so-called …scal externality gives rise
to too low tax rates and underprovision of public goods in equilibrium. In more popular
terms it is also considered a threat to the modern welfare state, a position that is shared
by many people and governments in Europe as well as by the political left in the United
States.
        This view is in sharp contrast to the thinking of conservative policymakers and the
Public Choice literature (e.g., Brennan and Buchanan 1980, or McLure 1986) who argue
that competition in general, and competition among governments in particular, is bene-
…cial because it reduces government waste and disciplines politicians. Policymakers tend
to overspend and absorb government resources for their own objectives and with little or
no bene…t to citizens. While this view is more popular in the U.S. than in Europe, it is
shared to some extent by those Europeans who are concerned about too much spending
and waste of resources at the European Union level.
        It is perhaps surprising that the tax competition literature and the Public Choice
approach by and large have failed to examine both arguments within a single framework.1
The traditional tax competition literature assumes benevolent governments and therefore
the only distortion is the …scal externality. The closed economy, or complete centralization
of all government activity, thus leads to a …rst-best optimum, while openness due to the
…scal externality adversly a¤ects welfare. By contrast, the Leviathan view of government
assumes in the extreme that no tax revenue bene…ts voters. Hence, a reduction in tax
revenue due to government competition must be good.
        Both approaches are obviously caricatures. The …rst objective of our research is to
provide a framework that gives each side a legitimate chance of winning the intellectual
debate over the net bene…ts of increasing international capital mobility. In other words,
    1
        The few exceptions that exist, and which di¤er from our approach, are discussed further below.



                                                      2
we examine the e¤ect of increasing capital mobility (or globalization) on the relative
strength of the economic distortion as a result of …scal externalities and the political
distortions arising from sel…sh policymakers. As our title suggests, we show that increasing
competition is likely to improve voter utility, although it is not guaranteed.
   The political response to increasing tax competition has di¤ered greatly between Eu-
rope and the U.S.. In the European Union there is a long-standing debate about coordi-
nation or even harmonization of tax policies. While policies are not fully harmonized at
the European level, there exist commonly agreed accounting rules for corporate pro…ts,
minimum tax rates for value added taxes, some agreements to coordinate the taxation
of interest income, and continuing debates and proposals over harmonization of capital
tax rates. The response is quite di¤erent from the debate in the U.S., where competition
among states is usually considered a key element of the federal system (for a critical view
on certain forms of tax competition in the U.S., see Holmes 1995 and Burstein and Rol-
nick 1995). This positive view is perhaps a re‡ection of the in‡uential article by Tiebout
(1956), who argued that independent decision making by states leads to an e¢cient out-
come. Also, at the international level the U.S. has been much more skeptical with regard
to the coordination of international tax policies, which, for example, became quite clear
during the recent OECD initiative to ban harmful tax practices (OECD 1998, 2000).
   Our second objective is to provide an explanation for these two di¤erent political re-
sponses across the Atlantic. We argue that the key to understanding the di¤erence in
responses lies in the political and budgetary institutions in the U.S. and Europe. The role
of political institutions has been emphasized in the work of Persson, Roland and Tabellini
(2000) and Persson and Tabellini (2000). In this literature - sometimes called comparative
public …nance - it is shown both theoretically and empirically that parliamentary democra-
cies di¤er from presidential-congressional democracies in terms of tax levels, public goods
provision, government waste and transfer payments. In particular, parliamentary democ-
racies have higher taxes, higher public goods provision, and higher government waste than
presidential-congressional democracies. The reason for these di¤erences lies in the sepa-
ration of powers in the budget making process. In a U.S. style presidential-congressional
system, …scal decisions are made at committee levels led by powerful, but di¤erent chair-
men. By contrast, parliamentary democracies - the most common form of democracy in
Europe - typically provide a more cohesive government by forming a coalition that jointly
passes the entire government budget.

                                             3
   We use a modi…ed version of the comparative public …nance approach and generalize it
by introducing multiple countries whose governments compete for mobile capital. In con-
trast to Persson, Roland and Tabellini (2000) taxation is distortionary, as in the traditional
tax competition literature. Tax rates, public good supply as well as rents to politicians are
shaped by the extent of international competition, reelection concerns of policymakers,
and the budgetary decison making rules (i.e., parliamentary vs. presidential-congressional
regime). We consider two versions of the model. In the base model politicians seek reelec-
tion because it gives them an exogenous bene…t from holding o¢ce in the future. This
one-shot game has a dynamic interpretation if politicians place relatively little emphasis
on diverting government resources for their own purposes and are mostly motivated by
the exogenous bene…ts from holding o¢ce (e.g., the joy of being in power). In the second
version of the model politicians are only motivated by the power to extract government
resources for themselves. The outcomes under the two versions are similar but not iden-
tical. In particular, the second version makes increasing tax competition harmful under
both regimes if politicians value the future su¢ciently.
   Using the comparative public …nance approach to study tax competition for mobile
capital o¤ers a number of novel and perhaps surprising insights. First, in a closed economy
voters must allow politicians some diversion of tax revenue for their own bene…t for them
to seek reelection. The alternative to reelection is worse for voters because politicians
implement high taxes that are used solely for their own bene…t (even if this implies no
reelection). In a parliamentary democracy, public goods provision is at its …rst-best level.
Although the legislators who form the political majority consider only the bene…t of
public goods provision for their own electoral districts, the voters in these districts pay
only proportionally to the …nancing. Common for both regimes is that the equilibrium is
not e¢cient due to positive rents to legislators. In this sense our approach does not stack
the deck against the view that increasing tax competition is bene…cial.
   Second, we undertake two types of comparisons under each political regime. We ini-
tially compare the equilibrium in an open economy with the one in a closed. The open
economy consists of an arbitrary number of identical countries that have the same po-
litical system (re‡ecting the dominance of parliamentary democracies in Europe, or the
dominance of the presidential-congressional system among U.S. states). The purpose is to
see if tax competition is harmful and how the two regimes might di¤er. In addition, we
undertake comparative statics with respect to the number of countries under each political

                                              4
system once there are at least two countries. Increasing the number of countries allows us
to capture the notion of increasing tax competition or globalization, as the elasticity of
capital supply increases from each country’s perspective. In both cases of comparison, our
focal point is on the qualitative e¤ects of opening up the economy. Of particular interest
is how voter utility is a¤ected under the two regimes.
   In the base version of the model we show that under a mild condition opening up the
economy reduces tax rates on mobile capital under both political regimes. In contrast to
the traditional view on tax competition, however, this does not necessarily imply a loss
in voter utility because the rents to politicians that are diverted from the government
budget fall as well. We identify two channels for why rents fall. In equilibrium rents equal
the maximum tax revenue politicians can obtain for themselves when forgoing reelection
(minus the exogenous bene…ts of holding o¢ce in the future). Increasing tax competition
lowers the maximum tax revenue because tax rates in the rest of the world decline, making
it harder to raise revenues. The second channel is the result of adding countries while
holding tax rates constant everywhere. When more countries compete to attract capital,
the capital stock falls in a country where politicians do not seek reelection.
   It is worth pointing out that it is the fall in rents to politicians that may have been
overlooked in Europe, where the fear of falling tax rates on capital income (see Sorensen
2000) may have been taken to imply less government services by the same amount. If
the loss in rents is large enough, an increase in private consumption can outweigh the
potential loss in public good provision. Yet, the fact that the fall in rents to politicians
does not guarantee an increase in voter utility is in contrast to the Leviathan view of
government. In a world of parliamentary democracies, the public good level falls when
opening up the economy. Without further assumptions we cannot sign the e¤ect on voter
utility. An example shows, however, that utility in an open economy can be lower than
in a closed economy. By contrast, in a world of presidential-congressional democracies
the public good supply is una¤ected by the separation of budgetary powers. Voter util-
ity is higher in the open economy. At the expenditure setting stage, taxes have already
been determined. Thus, public good supply equals the exogenous bene…ts from holding
o¢ce when policymakers are reelected. In this sense, the presidential-congressional system
appears to have an advantage.
   Once there are more than two countries, increasing the number of countries has similar


                                             5
qualitative e¤ects, that is, tax rates and rents to politicians fall. Somewhat di¤erent to
the previous point is the fact that in a world of parliamentary democracies voter utility
increases under some condition, which is satis…ed, for example, if the marginal product
of capital (in terms of a second factor) is a positive constant. By contrast, we do not
need to impose a similar condition to guarantee an increase in voter utility in a world
of presidential-congressional democracies. Public good supply is constant and tax rates
fall. Again, this appears to make the presidential-congressional system better suited for
increasing competition.
   We then reconsider these results in a model where all bene…ts of holding o¢ce are
endogenous and result from diverting government revenues. Many of our earlier results
continue to hold. Di¤erent is that under a presidential-congressional system the public
good supply is no longer constant, but tends to fall when competition intensi…es. More
generally, an increase in the number of countries has a more ambiguous e¤ect on voter
utility under both regimes. When politicians greatly discount the bene…ts of holding future
o¢ce, and thus current-period rents must be high for them to seek reelection, increasing
tax competition is good. The opposite holds when the future is highly valued, because tax
competition then mostly aggravates the underprovision problem without much a¤ecting
the rents to politicians.
   Our paper relates to a small literature that studies tax competition in models where
Benevolence and Leviathan coexist. Edwards and Keen (1996) assume rent-seeking politi-
cians who also care about the supply of public goods. In their model reelection concerns
are not modeled and, as a consequence, the outcome of tax competition depends on an as-
sessment of the relative strength of Leviathan versus Benevolence (where the weights are
exogenous). Rauscher (1998) points out the possibility that tax competition may tame a
Leviathan if the government employs user charges to …nance government provided goods.
This result does not hold, however, if lump sum taxes are available. Gordon and Wil-
son (2001) use a model where residents initially set taxes, while rent-seeking government
o¢cials thereafter decide on the distribution of expenditures. Residents set salaries to
government o¢cials in order to curb rent-seeking activities. O¢cials can be ousted from
o¢ce only if they spend more of their budget on perks than do o¢cials in other regions
(yardstick competition a la Besley and Case, 1995). In this model competition to attract
mobile households reduces wasteful behavior by government o¢cials, and increases public
expenditure and resident utility.

                                            6
   Voting is introduced explicitly in Persson and Tabellini (1992) who study a two-country
model where each government levies a source tax on mobile capital to …nance government
transfers. A fall in the cost of investing abroad (i.e., increasing competition) puts down-
ward pressure on tax rates. At the same time, however, there is a second, political e¤ect
in place since policy is chosen by a policymaker who represents the preferences of the
median voter. Tax competition is shown to make the median voter select a more leftist
government, whose distributional preferences call for higher taxes on capital, and this
partly mitigates the tendency of tax competition to lower taxes on capital. In Besley and
Smart (2001), politicians fall into two categories: benevolent or rent-seeking. Imperfect
information prevents voters from identifying the latter type. They show that yardstick
competition is most likely to be welfare improving for voters when it is more likely that
politicians are benevolent, and detrimental to welfare if it is more likely that politicians
are rent-seeking.
   Finally, Wildasin and Wilson (2001) construct a model where the ”political market
structure” is endogenous and dependent on economic integration. Politics are introduced
by allowing di¤erent groups to form lobbies (like in Grossman and Helpman, 1994) and
these groups compete for political favors by relating contributions to the government’s
subsequent choice of tax rates. The government maximizes a weighted average of con-
tributions and welfare (each region’s income). In this setting the equilibrium in a single
region is e¢cient, whereas this is not the case in the many-region tax equilibrium. In
the latter case there are ’wasteful’ contributions to politicians, and social welfare may
increase or decrease depending on how income is distributed (between capitalists and
workers) and thus on the construction of welfare. A related point is made by Lorz (1998)
who shows that wasteful lobbying is reduced with increasing tax competition, and thus
leads to higher welfare. We emphasize that none of the papers reviewed above focuses on
the di¤erent political and budgetary institutions and how these may a¤ect the outcome
of tax competition.
   The rest of the paper is structured as follows. In section 2 we set up the general tax
competition model and solve for the …rst-best optimum under a social planner. We consider
a world with parliamentary democracies in section 3, while the presidential-congressional
system is analyzed in section 4. In the following section we turn to a dynamic version of
the model in which all rents from holding o¢ce are endogenous. Section 6 concludes.



                                             7
2     The Model

We employ a standard tax competition model with N symmetric countries who compete
for mobile capital by setting a tax on capital. Di¤erent from the standard model is that
we pay close attention to the micro-political foundations of government decision making.
Similar to Persson, Roland and Tabellini (2000), but in an open economy with endogenous
tax setting, we consider two legislative forms of government, a parliamentary regime and
a presidential-congressional system, in which elected policymakers decide on tax rates and
government expenditures. Politicians are sel…sh and therefore want to divert government
resources away from proving public goods, but policymakers are partially kept in check
because of reelection concerns. We characterize the outcome of tax competition in each
of the two political regimes as a function of the number of countries involved. The latter
allows us to capture the notion of globalization.
    Our model considers a setting with N identical countries. We assume that each country
has three identical electoral districts (d = 1; 2; 3); and that each district has its own group
of voters of size unity. The political process within a district is such that it appoints
through voting a legislator (l = 1; 2; 3) as the representative to the country’s legislature.
In our simpli…ed setting we assume that the incumbent legislators are already appointed
and the agenda setting powers are assigned by nature. Yet, all legislators are seeking
reelection. The two political systems considered di¤er in terms of how agenda setting
powers are distributed and how the three legislators decide on public policy, an aspect we
study in more detail below.
    Production in country i is described by a production function f (ki ) ; with ki being
the amount of capital per unit of a second factor used in country i: The second factor
is inelastically supplied and internationally immobile. In slight abuse of terminology we
refer to ki as capital. The production function has the properties f 0 > 0; f 00 < 0: Output
can be used for private consumption or transformed into a public good at a marginal rate
of transformation of one. The total world stock of capital (in terms of the second factor)
is k¹ and, due to symmetry, k ´ k¹ is the amount of capital owned by the three groups
of voters in each country. Capital is assumed perfectly mobile, and in the competitive
equilibrium, capital ‡ows between the countries until the marginal returns net of tax are




                                              8
equalized across countries, that is,

                                f 0 (ki ) ¡ ti = ½;         8 i 2 f1; :::N g ;                      (1)

where ½ is the equilibrium return on capital and ti is the tax per unit of capital in country
i. The amount of capital used in country i; ki ; depends on all tax rates. We use notation
ki (ti ; t¡i ); where the …rst entry refers to the tax rate in country i, and the second entry is
the vector of tax rates in all other countries. When all countries have the same tax rate, ki
is equal to k: For the most part of our analysis we consider only a capital tax rate. In the
concluding section, however, we brie‡y discuss the inclusion of a second tax instrument.
       Voting group d in country i derives utility from private consumption cdi and public
goods provision gi ; where gi is the level of public goods provision that bene…ts all voting
groups in country i. We assume that preferences are quasi-linear in private consumption.
Since in each district there is one representative voter, the utility of a voter located in
district d in country i is given by

                                                f (ki ) ¡ f 0 (ki ) ki + ½k
                        udi = cdi + H (gi ) =                               + H (gi ) ;             (2)
                                                             3

where [f (ki ) ¡ f 0 (ki ) ki ] =3 is the income from the …xed factor to each of the three groups
of voters when ki is employed, and (½k) =3 is capital income to each group net of taxes.
The function H(gi ) sati…es the usual properties H 0 > 0 and H 00 < 0; as well as the Inada
condition H 0 (0) ! 1:2 For future refernce it is useful to notice that for a common tax
rate ti = t for all i; the international capital market equilibrium is symmetric, ki = k; and
(2) reduces to

                                                f(k) ¡ tk
                                        udi =             + H(gi ):                                 (3)
                                                    3

       The government in each country makes a decision on its tax rate on capital, the level
of public good, and the rents accruing to politicians. The public budget constraint in
country i is
                                                      3
                                                      X
                                      ti ki = gi +          ril ´ gi + ri ;                         (4)
                                                      l=1

   2
       For most of our results we could allow H 00 = 0; but this would complicate the exposition without
adding much. In an example in section 3, however, we will use a linear utility function.

                                                       9
where ril captures the possible diversion of resources by legislator l; and ri is the vector
containing the rent of each legislature in country i: Rents are a pure waste from the
voter’s perspective and bene…t only politicians. The amount of rents that can be diverted
in equilibrium will be shaped by reelection concerns, the political system, and the number
of countries competing for capital.
    Before we undertake the detailed analysis of the decision making under di¤erent po-
litical institutions it is useful to examine how a social planner would allocate resources.
If a social planner was to maximize global welfare subject to national budget constraints,
she would solve the problem
                                       Ã 3                          3
                                                                                     !
                                        X                           X
                          max                 uJi (qi ) + :: + ::         uJN (qN )
                       fqi ;::::qN g
                                        J=1                         J=1

                                                  PN             ¹ where qi = fti ; gi ; ri g is a policy
subject to the restrictions (1),(4) and             i=1   ki = N k;
vector. The solution is
                                                                                ¡1¢
                                              0   1                  H 0¡1
                          ri = 0;        H (gi ) = ;            ti =             3
                                                                                      ;              (5)
                                                  3                      k
for all i 2 f1; ::::Ng. Since rents to politicians are of no bene…t to voters, diversion of
public funds is zero under a social planner. The provision of public goods follows the
Samuelson condition. The marginal utility from the public good equals one third because
the marginal rate of transformation is one and there are three districts in each country
so the sum of marginal utilities is given by 3H 0 (gi ) : Finally, equation (5) also describes
how taxes should be set in order to raise the necessary revenue to comply with an optimal
provision of the public good.
    The benchmark case of a social planner serves to illustrate how tax policy is con-
ducted under a traditional utilitarian approach. In the next sections we investigate the
policy outcome under the two most common democratic political systems: a parliamentary
democracy and a presidential-congressional regime.



3     The Parliamentary Regime

The political process in a parliamentary regime (indexed by P ) is characterized by a co-
hesive majority in parliament on which the government can count to pass its legislative

                                                       10
proposals. Since there are three districts each represented by a single legislator, the con-
struction of a government implies teaming up two legislators. The government’s budget
proposal may either be done by one single minister who will seek support for the bud-
get from the second minister, or by delegating budgetary tasks to each minister (say by
allowing one minister to set the tax rate and the other to control the expenditure side).
The exact making of the budget is not crucial to our results since the two alternative set
ups have in common that each minister has veto power against the other minister.3 This
is the key di¤erence to the presidential-congressional system where tax and expenditure
decisions are separated and di¤erent coalitions can be formed for each decision.
       The sequencing of events has an impact on the bargaining power of each minister and
thus who derives most rents from being in o¢ce, but this is of immaterial interest as will
be clear later. The main point we make here is that the joint responsibility of budget
making means that the two ministers have a joint incentive to collude against voters. Yet
legislators have an interest to act partially in the interest of voters because they value
reelection. If they fail to meet the minimum utility that voters demand, voters punish the
incumbent by electing an otherwise identical challenger. To model the political process we
assume that in each country the incumbent legislators’ decide on policies in a bargaining
game with the following sequence:

   1. Nature randomly selects two legislators fai ; mi g as coalition partners. Legislator ai
         is responsible for the whole budget and legislator mi is the junior coalition partner.

   2. Voters in each district of country i decide their reelection strategy by setting reser-
                      ©           ª
      vation utilities u¹di (t¡i ) for every possible tax vector t¡i .
                                                                           £               © l ª¤
   3. Minister ai proposes the following budget qPi                   =        ti ; gi ;    ri , such that
         ti ki (ti ; t¡i ) ¸ gi + ri ; where all elements are constrained to be nonnegative.

   4. The junior coalition partner mi decides on whether she should support the budget.
         If she approves the budget, the proposal is implemented and the game goes to stage
         6: If mi vetoes the budget, the government is toppled and the game continues at
         stage 5:
   3
       The former approach is undertaken in Persson, Roland and Tabellini (2000), while the latter is used
in Persson and Tabellini (2000; ch. 10, p. 263). The results that emerge under both approaches are
qualitatively similar.

                                                     11
  5. A default policy is implemented such that
                               £                                                 ¤
                          ¹Pi = t¹i ki (t¹i ; t¡i ) =3 = ril = r¹i =3 > 0; gi = 0 ;
                          q

      where t¹i is the default tax rate.

  6. Election. A legislator is reelected if the policy enacted meets or exceeds the voters’
      reservation utility in that district, as determined in stage 2. Otherwise an identical
      challenger is elected.

   The default policy in stage 5 is a shortcut for a more elaborated game that would ensue
if the government coalition breaks down. Stage 5 captures the idea that in a government
crisis situation legislators can ensure some rents for themselves. Note, however, that these
rents are endogenous because they are dependent on other countries’ tax rates. To simplify
the analysis, we assume that in the crisis situation voters don’t receive any public goods.
   In order to determine the policy outcome we must formulate the behavior of the
legislators. We assume that each legislator maximizes the rents derived from holding
o¢ce as given by the utility function,

                                         vil = °ril + pli R;                               (6)

where R is the exogenous bene…t from being reelected - assumed to be identical for all
candidates - and pli is the probability that legislator l is reappointed. As before, ril is the
rent extracted from tax revenue collected after providing public good gi . The inclusion of
° < 1 re‡ects the presence of transaction costs associated with rent-seeking.
   The exogenous rent R can be given two di¤erent interpretations. First, R could be
interpreted as non-budget related bene…ts of holding o¢ce (such as the joy of being
in control, invitations to privately sponsored parties, enhanced job opportunities after
quitting politics, etc.). A second interpretation is that the only bene…t from holding o¢ce
is the power to extract resources from the government budget. In that case R is simply the
expected discounted value of future endogenous rents. For the remainder of this and the
following section we stick to the …rst interpretation. The second interpretation is pursued
in section 5, showing qualitatively similar but not identical results.
   As for voter behavior, we assume that within each voting district voters coordinate
their actions, but each district acts independently. A legislator’s reappointment is then

                                                 12
based on the simple retrospective voting rule,
                          (
                            1 i¤ udi (qi ; t¡i ) ¸ u¹di (t¡i ) ;                d=l
                    pli =                                                                    (7)
                            0 otherwise

The voting rule assumes that voters in all districts set their reservation utilities at the
same time. Given the sequencing of the game politicians know the vector of reservation
utilities when the budget proposal is made. Hence, they will not be reelected if they act
against the interests of their constituencies. Furthermore, reservation utilities are time
consistent since voters know that the incumbents (ministers) and the opponent (third
legislator) are identical.4
       We now want to derive the subgame perfect equilibrium of this game in which politi-
cians are reelected. This typically requires voters to allow policymakers to divert some
money from the government budget for themeselves. A key aspect of the analysis is to
derive the incentive constraints for rent diversion consistent with reelection. A precise
equilibrium de…nition is given in the Appendix. Loosely speaking, each agent in each
country must maximize utility at each point in the sequence given the decisions of all
other agents and consistent with international capital market equilibrium and domestic
budget balance (private and government). It is crucial to note that under a parliamentary
regime the two ministers have bargaining power against each other. There is no real sep-
aration of powers and the budget is e¤ectively a simultaneous vote over the tax rate and
the expenditure side. Because of the veto power of each minister, the two ministers are
also the residual claimants on rents. To ensure that the government has an incentive to
remain in power, voters must at least leave the two legislators with as much rent as both
can obtain if they choose not to run for reelection and extract the maximum tax income.
The latter amounts to setting gi = 0 and a tax rate equal to

                                     t~i (t¡i ) = arg max ti ki (ti ; t¡i ) :
                                                        ti


In order to avoid cluttering notation, we often use only t~i : The continuation value of
holding o¢ce for ai and mi are (°ria + R) and (°rim + R). The incentive constraint that
de…nes equilibrium rents is therefore given by
                                                          ¡         ¢ 2R
                                  rPi ´ ria + rim ¸ t~i ki t~i ; t¡i ¡   :                   (8)
                                                                       °
   4
       For further discussion of this sequencing see Persson, Roland and Tabellini (2000).

                                                       13
The right hand side gives the maximum payo¤ in terms of tax revenue to be shared
among the two ’ministers’ when no money is devoted to public goods provision, minus the
exogenous bene…t from being reelected. The left hand side denotes the combined rents
that must be given to the two ’ministers’: If (8) is satis…ed, legislator ai and mi will
seek reelection (if they can meet reservation utilities). How the rents are divided between
minister ai and mi depends on the bargaining power of each minister, an aspect that
we don’t pursue further. Each minister must get at least one third of the default policy
however.
   We next turn to determining reservation utilities. Note that in equilibrium voters in all
districts enjoy the same utility level because all consume the same amount of the public
good and pay identical taxes. Symmetric reservation utilities in all districts are therefore
consistent with equilibrium strategies leading to reelection of all legislators. To …nd the
the equilibrium reservation utilities we consider the voter optimization problem in those
districts whose legislators are part of the government, i.e., maximize (2) subject to the
government budget constraint (4), the incentive constraint (8), the arbitrage condition in
the capital market (1), capital market equilibrium and ½ ¸ 0. The optimal policy resulting
from this maximization problem gives the reservation utility that leads legislators to seek
reelection by implementing exactly this policy.
   The full derivation of the equilibrium policy is relegated to the appendix. Here we
report the outcome and provide an intuitive interpretation. The condition characterizing
the public good supply in equilibrium is given by
                                   ¡ ¢          1      1
                                H 0 gP =              > ;                               (9)
                                            3 (1 ¡ ²)  3

where ² ´ ¡ tki @ki
                    j > 0 is the elasticity of capital used in country i with respect to tax
                @ti ti =t
rate ti evaluated at the symmetric tax vector ti = tj = t for all i; j. We use superscript
P to denote equilibrium values under the parliamentary regime. Equation (9) re‡ects
the trade o¤ between increasing the supply of the public good through a higher tax on
capital that drives capital out of the country, taking into account that rents are diverted
and private income reduced. To further interpret our result notice from equation (8) that
from a single country’s perspective rents to politicians do not change as the country
varies its tax rate. As a consequence, the equilibrium values of the other variables follow
immediately from the government budget constraint and the utility function. Note that all

                                            14
variables in the open economy are only implicitly de…ned, as the revenue maximizing tax
rate e
     ti > tP is itself a function of tP . Hence, if all countries are parliamentary democracies,
the equilibrium leading to reelection of all politicians is characterized by
                                             µ           ¶
                                P        0¡1       1
                              g = H                        ;
                                               3 (1 ¡ ²)

                                              ¡        ¢ 2R
                                   rP = t~i ki t~i ; tP ¡   ;                                    (10)
                                                          °

                                             rP + g P
                                   tP =               ;
                                                k

and where uP = u¹ for all districts in all countries follows immediately by use of (10) in
(3).
      To gain some insight it is useful to consider …rst the special case of the closed economy
(N = 1). In a closed economy capital supply is …xed (ki = k = k) and the elasticity in
(9) becomes zero, implying that the tax on capital is lump sum. Because capital is …xed,
all formulas simplify. In addition, the revenue maximizing tax rate in a closed economy t~
is simply equal to the marginal product of capital, f 0 (k), leaving a zero return for capital
owners.
      Comparing the results for the closed economy to those under a benevolent social
planner (cf. (5)), it is seen that the provision of the public good is at its …rst-best level.
Although the two ministers conduct policy on behalf of voters in 2 out of 3 districts, the
bene…ts from public goods provision are fully internalized. Each district bene…ts in full
from the public good, but only pays one-third of the cost. Hence, no political externality
arises and the provision is jointly optimal for all voters. The …rst best provision of the
public good is in line with the closed economy results in the traditional tax competition
literature (Zodrow and Mieszkowski, 1986). Di¤erent from this literature, however, is the
result that the autarky solution is not …rst-best overall. Politicians derive positive rents in
equilibrium. The tax rate is set above the requirement for e¢cient provision of the public
good, resulting in too little private consumption. The open economy may be better for
voters than the closed economy since it entails the potential of curbing rent-seeking.5
  5
      Our results seem to contradict …ndings by Persson, Roland and Tabellini (2000, p. 1148) who in a
closed economy show underprovision of the public good in the parliamentary regime. The di¤erence is



                                                  15
       We can now compare the closed economy case to the open economy. In the following we
use subscripts 1 and N to distinguish between the closed economy and the open economy
with at least two countries. We obtain
Proposition 1 If a parliamentary system is adopted worldwide, opening up the economy
leads to:
                                                     ¡         ¢
       (a) A fall in the provision of the public good g1P > gN
                                                             P
                                                                 :
                                         ¡         ¢                   ¡         ¢
       (b) A fall in rents to politicians rP1 > rPN and lower tax rates tP1 > tPN if

                                           f 0 (ki ) + f 00 (ki ) ki > 0:

Proof:
    (a) Follows immediately from (9) and strict concavity of H(g), as ²jN=1 = 0 < ²jN>1 :
                                                                                                ¡         ¢
    (b) Comparing the rents in both situations we get rP1 > rPN , f 0 (k) k > e            ti ki t~i ; tPN .
Since t~i (tPN ) > tPN by de…nition, we have that k > ki (t~i ; tPN ): The politicians’ rents are lower
                                          ¡ ¡      ¢¢      ¡          ¢             ¡ ¡        ¢¢
in the open economy if f 0 (k) k ¸ f 0 ki t~i ; tPN ¢ ki t~i ; tPN because f 0 ki t~i ; tPN ¡ t~i =
½ ¸ 0. This condition is satis…ed if f (ki ) ki is non-decreasing in ki : From our previous
result plus the budget constraint it now follows that tP1 > tPN :¥
       Consistent with the conventional wisdom in standard tax competition models is our
…nding that increasing tax competition leads to lower public good provision and tax rates
on the mobile factor (Mieszkowski and Zodrow, 1986; Bucovetsky and Wilson, 1991). Dif-
ferent from the literature, however, is that this does not necessarily imply lower voter
utility, as we discuss in more detail below. Consistent with the Leviathan and conserva-
tive view of government is that global competition is likely to reduce rents to politicians.
Proposition 1 shows that the rents derived by politicans are lower in an open economy
under fairly weak conditions.6 The public choice literature (e.g. Brennan and Buchanan,
1980) argues that the size of government would be excessive and voter interest hampered

explained by the set of government instruments. In their model the government can a¤ect voter utility by
public goods provision and by direct transfers. The latter can be used more e¤ectively to buy o¤ voters
thus leaving more rents on the table for politicians. Hence, the inclusion of transfers into the model
crowds out the provision of the public good. In the concluding section we discuss the role of transfers in
our model.
   6
       The condition for rents to fall is not strong. It is satis…ed, for example, for all functions of the form
f (ki ) = ki® ; with 0 < ® < 1:


                                                        16
in the absence of competition. In many Leviathan type models, however, reelection is not
explicitly modeled and hence voter utility will always rise when taxes fall. Our approach
appears richer because it encompasses the interaction of reelection concerns and the com-
petition e¤ect for mobile capital that endogenously determines the rent to politicians in
equilibrium.
   Finally, it is of great interest whether voter utility is larger in the open economy or
not. In the standard tax competition model the fall in tax rate and public good supply
would unambiguously show a utility loss. Not so here because rents to politicians fall as
well. This opens the possibility that the tax rates fall so much that the increase in private
consumption outweighs the loss in public good consumption. Without further assumptions
the comparison appears ambiguous. This can be seen by writing the di¤erence in utility
                ¡         ¢      ¡ ¢     ¡ P¢
as uP1 ¡ uPN = k tPN ¡ tP1 =3 + H g1P ¡ H gN  ; which by use of the government budget
constraint can be restated as
                       1 £¡ P      ¢ ¡ P        ¢¤ £ ¡ ¢       ¡ P ¢¤
               uP1 ¡ uPN = rN ¡ r1P + gN   ¡ g1P + H g1P ¡ H gN       :
                       3
                                  ¡ P      ¢ ¡ P       ¢           ¡ ¢    ¡ P¢
   By Proposition 1 we know that rN   ¡ r1P + gN  ¡ g1P < 0; and H g1P > H gN  ;
so the …rst square bracket is negative while the last squared bracket is positive. The sign
then depends on the relative magnitudes of the two e¤ects. To sum up, utility increases
only if the fall in taxes and rents that allow for higher private consumption exceeds the
loss to the consumer in terms of lower public goods provision. While a general statement is
not possible, we can identify an example in which utility falls when comparing the closed
economy with a two-country world.
   Example 1: To simplify the example we use a linear utility function ui = ci + agi ;
where a > 1=3 is a constant. We use a quadratic production function, f (ki ) = ki (1 ¡ bki )
for b < 1=ki and f (ki ) = 0 otherwise. These functional forms allow us to compute the tax
rate in the open economy directly. Note that the closed economy is not …rst-best because of
the positive rents to politicians. For parameter values: a = 1:1; b = 0:2; k = 1; R=° = 0:1;
utility in the closed economy is 0:287, whereas it is only 0:281 for N = 2: Utility is quickly
rising, however, when increasing the number of countries. In fact, for N = 3 utility in the
open economy is 0:332; which is higher than utility in the closed economy.
   It is perhaps not surprising that the comparison between the closed economy and open
economy with an arbitrary number of countries is ambiguous in terms of voter utility. A

                                             17
di¤erent but related question is how increased openness (=larger N ) a¤ects the outcome
of tax competition when the country is open already, i.e. N ¸ 2: An increase in the
number of countries means distributing the …xed world stock of both factors among more
countries. The endowment ratio of capital over the …xed factor thus is unchanged in
the process. In carrying out this comparative static analysis we treat N as a continuous
variable, whereas in reality it is not. This is unproblematic for results concerning N ¸ 2;
as all variables are continuous. However, the approach implies that we cannot be sure
that monotone comparative static results for N ¸ 2 extend all the way to N = 1. For
example, the tax rate elasticity for capital employed is strictly positive for N = 2; but
equals zero for N = 1:
   Before we state our next result we introduce a weak su¢cient condition that enables
us to sign the e¤ect of increasing tax competition on the tax rate.
Assumption 1. The second-order derivatives @ 2 ki =@t2i and @ 2 ki =@ti @N are nonpositive
when evaluated at a symmetric tax vector.
Assumption 1 imposes structure on the third derivative of the production function, whose
sign is a priori unclear. Note however that Assumption 1 is ful…lled for quadratic produc-
tion functions. We may now state
Proposition 2. Assume N ¸ 2 and Assumption 1 holds: In a world where all countries
have a parliamentary regime an increase in N

 (a) lowers the tax rate on capital,

 (b) decreases the rents to politicians,

 (c) reduces public good supply when N ! 1; and

 (d) increases voter utility if ²k ¡ ki (tei ; tP ) < 0: This condition holds when f 00 (ki ) is a
     positive constant.

   Proof. See the Appendix.
   Increased openness unambiguously reduces the tax rate and the rents derived by politi-
cians. The intuition follows the same logic as in our previous result. Moreover, as tax rates
fall, public good supply tends to decrease as well. However, since rents to politicians fall,
an increase in public good supply cannot be ruled out, unless we impose an additional

                                               18
assumption on the number of countries. The most important result of Proposition 2, how-
ever, is that it provides a condition for voter utility to rise. To understand part (d) better,
consider the following decomposition of the utility change

                        duP          k dtP              dg P
                               = ¡         + H 0 (g P )
                        dN           3 dN               dN
                                     µ                ¶
                                         0  1             dtP              drP
                               = k H (g ) ¡  P
                                                              ¡ H 0 (g P )
                                            3             dN               dN
                                             ·                  ¸
                                     0   P           dtP e @ki
                               = H (g ) ¢ (²k ¡ ki )    ¡ ti      :                          (11)
                                                     dN      @N

   The …rst line of the decomposition describes the change in utility as a result of a fall in
the tax rate - which increases private consumption - and the change in public good provi-
sion. The second line decomposes the latter e¤ect into a tax revenue e¤ect and a rent e¤ect,
where the former can be combined with the private consumption e¤ect. Consequently, the
…rst term in the second line is the traditional e¤ect of increased underprovision of public
goods due to H 0 (g P ) > 1=3: Note that utility is not necessarily decreasing, because rents
to politicians fall as well. Rents are reduced for two reasons. First, the maximized tax
revenue etki (e
              t; tP ) falls when more countries compete to attract capital thus lowering the
tax rate that the rest of the world levies, that is (@ki (e
                                                          t; tP )=@t¡i ) ¢ (dtP =dN ) < 0: Second,
holding tax rates in all countries …xed, an increase in N lowers the capital stock in country
i when the country chooses a tax rate ti > t¡i ; that is @ki (e
                                                              t; t¡i )=@N < 0 (see Appendix
7.1): The last line of (11) then incorporates the rent e¤ect and collects all terms that
involve a tax rate change. Given these two e¤ects, it is then easy to see then why Prop.
2d holds.
   From our previous results we know that k > ki (tei ; tP ); so that utility is increasing in
N if the elasticity of capital demand with respect to the capital tax rate is small enough.
One would think that this is more likely the lower is N: In fact, at N = 1, the elasticity is
zero and utility is unambiguously rising. Example 1 shows, however, that the discreteness
of the number of countries does matter. At N = 2 the elasticity is much higher and may
lead to lower utility than the closed economy. Signing the utility change is di¢cult for
another reason. The capital stock ki (e
                                      ti ; t¡i ) is a function of the number of countries as
well, and therefore we cannot relate the inquality monotonically to N: The inequaliy is
not empty however. When the production function is quadratic voter utility does increase.

                                                 19
In that case the higher discipline forced upon policymakers outweighs the loss in public
good consumption due to …scal externalities. In fact, it has proven impossible so far to
…nd a condition under which utility falls. It is this aspect that may make the outcome of
increasing tax competition more attractive than perhaps previously thought, in particular
in Europe where the parliamentary regime dominates.
        We now turn to investigate how increasing economic integration a¤ects outcomes under
a presidential-congressional system.



4         The Presidential-Congressional Regime

A presidential-congressional regime (indexed by C) di¤ers from a parliamentary regime in
that there is separation of powers. Typically, tax and expenditure decisions are made by
di¤erent agenda setters (i.e., committees). Jointly these decisions must satisfy government
budget balance however. We ensure this by assuming that decisions are taken sequentially,
…rst the tax rate and then the decision how to split revenues between rents to politicians
and public goods. To make things simple, we will abstract from the president and his
potential veto powers.7 In each country the sequencing of events is as follows:


    1. Nature randomly selects two agenda setters among the incumbent legislators. Leg-
          islator ati is responsible for tax setting, while legislator agi allocates tax revenue.
                                                       ©           ª
    2. Voters in each country set reservation utilities u¹di (t¡i ) for their voting rule.

    3. Congressional legislator ati proposes ti :

    4. Congress votes over ti : If two legislators support the proposal the tax rate is imple-
       mented. If the proposal is turned down, a default tax rate ti = t¹i is implemented.
                                             £    © ª¤
    5. Congressional legislator agi proposes gi ; ril  subject to ti ki (ti ; t¡i ) ¸ gi + ri ;
          where all elements are constrained to be nonnegative and the tax rate is the one
          chosen at stage 4.
    7
        One could easily build this into the model (see Persson and Tabellini 2000, ch 10).




                                                      20
   6. Congress votes. If two or more legislators support the expenditure proposal, the
      policy is implemented. If support is absent, the default policy gi = 0 and r¹il = ti ki =3
      is enforced.

   7. Elections.

   Voters are allowed to condition their reservation utilities on whether their legislator
is the agenda setter for either taxes or public expenditure, or for neither. Note however
that voters in all three district obtain the same utility because they pay the same tax and
consume the same amount of public good. The agenda setting power in‡uences the rents
of politicians though. The retrospective voting rule is the same as in (7).
   We now want to derive the properties of the equilibrium in which politicians are re-
elected. Voters would be worse o¤ if politicians are not reelected and maximize tax revenue
without providing public goods. Providing incentives for reelection requires su¢cient rents
for legislators, an aspect we now study in more detail. A precise de…nition of equilibrium
is given in the appendix.
   We start by considering stages 5 and 6 of the game where the agenda setter for the
expenditure needs support from at least one of the two other legislators in order to get her
proposal approved. At this point tax rates in all countries are taken as given. All it takes
is to o¤er the supporting legislator mi a payo¤ rim that makes her indi¤erent between
voting yes and being reappointed, which yields utility °rim + R; and her utility under no
reelection, that is the utility under the default policy r¹im = ti ki (ti ; t¡i ) =3. Legislator agi
therefore o¤ers mi
                                             ti ki (ti ; t¡i ) R
                                     rim =                    ¡ :                               (12)
                                                    3          °

We assume at this point that this rent is nonnegative, but examine further below what
happens if the right hand side is negative.
   In addition to the supporting legislator we need to ensure that the expenditure setter
seeks reelection. The maximum threat agenda setter agi can impose on voters is to collect
all tax revenue ti ki (ti ; t¡i ) for herself after paying o¤ mi with ti ki (ti ; t¡i ) =3: Hence, in
order to provide agi with incentives to run for reelection, she must be o¤ered at least
                                          2                   R
                                    riag ¸ ti ki (ti ; t¡i ) ¡ :                                (13)
                                          3                   °

                                                  21
Clearly (13) is positive if (12) is positive as well. From (12) and (13) it is seen that the
joint incentive constraint on rents that makes legislator agi and mi seek reelection is
                                     g                              2R
                             ri = ria + rim ¸ ti ki (ti ; t¡i ) ¡      :                  (14)
                                                                     °
Equation (14) gives the requirement that the optimal voting rule must satisfy in stage 5 of
the game. Voters in the district of the expenditure setting legislator set their reservation
utility compatible with the incentive constraint. Obviously they will not o¤er more rents
to politicians because for any given tax rate voter utility is increasing in public good con-
sumption. Combining (14) and the government budget constraint means that the amount
of public goods available to voters will be
                                                                    2R
                             g C = gi = ti ki (ti ; t¡i ) ¡ ri =       :                  (15)
                                                                     °

   As seen from (15) the public good level is completely determined, since it is a function
of exogenous parameters only due to of the separation of budgetary powers. At the expen-
diture setting stage, tax revenue is …xed regardless of whether politicians seek reelection
or not. The equilibrium public good level is then simply the sum of the exogenous bene…ts
from being reelected for the expenditure-supporting legislators.
   Next we analyze the tax setting stages 3 and 4. Recall that by assumption agi 6= ati ;
so neither ati nor the voters in her district are the residual claimant of tax revenue. Thus
for ati to be reelected, the optimal voting rule requires taxes to be set as low as possible,
given (14). Since by assumption there is no di¤erence between the two legislators that
may support agi at stage 6, legislator ati will be included in the winning coalition with
probability one half. As a consequence, for ati to agree to play along the path leading to
reelection, she must at least be given
                                       ·                  ¸
                               rim R  1 1 ~ ¡~          ¢
                                  + ¸     ti ki ti ; t¡i ;                                (16)
                                2  °  2 3

where, as before, t~i = t~i (t¡i ) denotes the revenue-maximing tax rate given tax vector t¡i .
The left hand side of this inequality is the expected equilibrium continuation value for
ati of being partner in the winning coalition (divided by °). Diverted rents given to ati
are weighted by one half re‡ecting the probability of being selected as the supporting
legislator at the expenditure stage. The right hand side is the expected utility that ati
derives if she does not seek reelection and is voted out of o¢ce (again discounted by °).

                                                22
In that case the best ati can do is to propose the tax rate that maximizes tax revenue: Since
at stage 5 legislator agi is the residual claimant of tax revenue after paying o¤ legislator
mi , she will always support higher taxes, and t~i will therefore be approved by agi : Since
                                                                        ¡         ¢
ati gets one third of tax revenue in the out-of-equilibrium case, t~i ki t~i ; t¡i is weighted by
one third. In addition, legislator ati is a member of the winning coalition with probability
one half, implying a further weighing by one half. Rewriting (16) ; the rent to legislator
ati must be
                                                      ¡          ¢
                                                 ~i ki t~i ; t¡i
                                                 t                   2R
                                           rim ¸                   ¡    :                                   (17)
                                                        3             °

       Again we assume for now that the right-hand side is non-negative. Voters in the district
of the tax-setter set their reservation utility consistent with the provision of the public
good - as shown in (15)- and the incentive constraints (i.e., the rent to their legislator, as
shown on the right hand side of (14)). The tax rate in the open economy is then found as
the solution to (12) and (17) after imposing symmetry
                                            ¡         ¢
                                       ~i ki t~i ; tC
                                       t            N     3R
                                 tC
                                  N =                   ¡    :                                              (18)
                                             k            k°
This tax rate is supported by the third legislator who in stage 6 will be in the same
situation as the tax setter.
       Recall that we made the initial assumption at stages 5 and 6 that the inequality
ti ki (ti ; t¡i )=3 ¸ R=° holds in country i (eq. (12)): Suppose that was not the case. All
other legislators then prefer reelection over no reelection even when rim is zero. In other
words, overall tax revenue is so small that running away with it and being ousted from
o¢ce is not a relevant alternative. This outcome is of course anticipated at the tax stage.
If there exists a tax rate that will make the inequality hold, the tax setter will propose
so. If adopted, the tax setter is better o¤ because in addition to reelection and earning
R she also obtains rents from the government budget with positive probability. She will
…nd support from the third legislator (who has no agenda power) for the same reason.
A similar remark applies to condition (17).8 If all countries are presidential-congressional
   8
       If the right hand side of (12) is negative, the tax setter seeks reelection even if her rent r is zero. The
tax rate would then be determined by (14), (15) and the government budget constraint. We assume that
in equilibrium the right hand side of (12) is nonnegative, t¤ k=3 ¸ R=°, making the incentive constraint
nontrivial. Alternatively, if we allowed for negative rents, politicians would pay to stay in o¢ce and still
seek reelection. Under this assumption, the …xed public good supply in (15) can always be …nanced.

                                                        23
democracies, the equilibrium that leads to reelection of all legislators is characterized by
(15), (18) and
                                                    ¡        ¢ 5R
                            rC = tC k ¡ g C = t~i ki t~i ; tC ¡   :                       (19)
                                                                °

where t~i (tC ) is the revenue-maximizing tax rate in country i given tC is chosen in all other
countries. Individual rents to legislators are found by using the equilibrium tax rate (18)
in (13) and (17). Also, we can use (15) and (18) to compute the equilibrium utility level
uC , which equals also the reservation utility.
   The closed economy situation is a special case, which proves useful for comparison
purpose. Using the same logic as before the closed economy variables are obtained by
using e
      t = f 0 (k): The closed economy is not …rst-best overall because rents to politicians
are diverted in equilibrium. The public good level typically is not …rst-best either. Similar
to the parliamentary regime we can now contrast the closed and open economy:
Proposition 3 Under a presidential-congressional system, opening up the economy:
                                                       ¡        ¢
    (a) has no e¤ect on the provision of public goods g1C = gNC
                                                                  ;
                                   ¡ C      ¢              ¡          ¢
    (b) reduces rents to politicans r1 > rCN ; lowers taxes t1 > tN , and increases voter
                                                             C      C
        ¡         ¢
utility uC1 < uN if f (ki ) ki is increasing in ki .
                C       0


   We omit a formal proof here because part (a) follows immediately from (15) and the
statements on rents and taxes follow the same logic as in Proposition 1. Voter utility must
increase as taxes fall, but public good provision is unchanged. The results in Proposition
3 are stronger than those under the parliamentary regime. The condition for capital tax
rates and rents to fall is the same under both regimes (although it must be admitted that
these are only su¢cient and not necessary conditions). The key di¤erence, however, is
that the public good level is una¤ected under the presidential-congressional system. This
allows us to sign unambiguously the e¤ect on voter utility. In the parliamentary regime
we showed in Example 1 that in the two-country world utility can be smaller than in the
closed economy.
   The next result concerns the increase in the number of countries in an open econ-
omy. We get qualitative similar results to Proposition 2, which in fact hold under weaker
conditions.



                                              24
Proposition 4 In a world where all countries are presidential-congressional democracies,
increased openness lowers the tax rate on capital and rents to politicians, leaves public
good supply unchanged, and increases voter utility.
   Proof: The e¤ect of N on tax rates is found by totally di¤erentiating the tax rate
expression in (18). Using the envelope condition for the revenue maximizing tax rate t~i ;
the e¤ect is
                                              t~i @ki (ti ;t )
                                                       ~ C
                                  dtC          k      @N
                                      =                              < 0:
                                  dN              ~ @ki (t~i ;tC )
                                          1   ¡ tki @t¡i

    In the appendix we derive comparative statics results used here. In particular we show
that @ki =@N < 0 when country i has the higher tax rate than all other countries. Using
t~i = ¡ki =(@ki =@ti ); the denominator reduces to 1¡(ki =k) > 0 since (@ki =@t¡i )=(@ki =@ti ) =
¡1: It is then easy to see from the government budget constraint that rents to politicians
fall as well: Tax rates decline and public good supply is unchanged. For that reason it is
also clear that utility must increase as the number of countries goes up.¥
    Increased openness is bene…cial by improving private consumption possibilities with-
out a¤ecting public good supply. Proposition 4 is in contrast to the parliamentary regime
(Prop. 2) where an increase in voter utility cannot be guaranteed, and the supply of the
public good falls if competition is very hard. To sum up, Propositions 1-4 and Exam-
ple 1 show that the presidential- congressional system has a (weak) advantage over the
parliamentary regime. This advantage can be explained by the separation of budgetary
powers under the presidential-congressional system, which …xes public good supply to be
proportional to the exogenous bene…t from being reelected. Although a …xed and exoge-
nous R has a meaningful and relevant interpretation, it is of interest to consider other
assumptions concerning the behavior of politicians. In the next section we use a revised
version of our model to investigate the case when R is completely endogenized.



5     Endogenizing the Bene…ts of Holding O¢ce

In previous sections a legislator who was reelected derived utility vil = °ril + R; and R was
taken to be exogenous. As alluded to above, the …xed utility from being reelected could


                                                   25
stem from the joy of being in power and have command over the budget. A di¤erent per-
spective of politicians is to assume that the only bene…t of holding o¢ce is the endogenous
rent extracted from the government budget. In that case R is the expected continuation
value for a legislator at the beginning of each period of holding holding o¢ce before nature
has selected the aganda setter. When a legislator is reappointed R is determined by
                                                    r
                                              R=      + ±R;                                          (20)
                                                    3
where ± 2 (0; 1] is a discount factor. The current-period rent r is weighted by one third
because at the beginning of a period agenda-setting powers have not been assigned yet.
We omit the transaction cost of rent-seeking activities (°) ; since it applies to all variables
pertaining to rent seeking and thus in‡uences the utility level of politicians, but not the
incentive to seek reelection. It cancels out in the calculations. For each political regime
the joint incentive constraint reads
                                                   ¡         ¢
                                         r = t~i ki t~i ; t¡i ¡ 2±R:                                 (21)

We now solve for the equilibrium values under each regime by using equations (20) and
(21) together with the derived values for the tax rate, rent and public good supply under
each regime, as given in sections 3 and 4.9
Parliamentary Democracy
                                               ¡        ¢
       Using the above steps yields RP = t~i ki t~i ; tP = (3 ¡ ±) ; and substituting RP into the
static equilibrium values of the …scal variables gives us
                                                µ          ¶
                             ¡ P¢                    1                          rP + gP
                 P      ~     ~         P
                r = µ ¢ ti ki ti ; t ; g = H  0
                                                             ;           tP =                        (22)
                                                  3(1 ¡ ²)                         k

where µ ´ 3 (1 ¡ ±) = (3 ¡ ±) 2 [0; 1); and the tax rate is implicitly de…ned by combining
the last two conditions. Naturally, the structure of the equilibrium values here are similar
   9
       Note that the main di¤erence between this section and the previous sections is not that the present
model is dynamic and the other one was not, but rather the distinction between exogenous, non-budget
related rents on the one hand, and endogenous, budget-related rents on the other hand. A dynamic model
in which (almost) all future rents are exogenous can be easily built, giving the same results as derived
above. Condition (20) would be replaced by R = F + ±R; where F is now the per-period exogenous rent
from holding o¢ce. For this model the expected continuation value is R = F=(1 ¡ ±) and the analysis
would proceed as done in sections 3 and 4.


                                                     26
to the ones in section 3. Instead of adding a constant to the variable part t~i ki of the
rent r, we now scale the variable part by an expression that involves only the discount
factor. For that reason di¤erentiating rP ; tP ; and g P with respect to N does not change
qualitatively any of the results we obtained in Proposition 2. Note, however, that ± has
to be su¢ciently large, and hence µ to be su¢ciently small, so that public good supply,
                                               ¡        ¢
which can be written as g P = tP k ¡ µ ¢ t~i ki t~i ; tP ; is nonnegative in equilibrium. Voter
utility can now be derived by inserting (22) into (3).
   Of particular interest to us is the change in voter utility following increased openness,
                                    "                            ¡         ¢#
                  duP       0 P                 dtP           @ki t~i ; tP
                       = H (g ) ¢ ("k ¡ µki )       ¡ µ ¢ t~i                 ;         (23)
                   dN                           dN               @N

which corresponds to eq. (11) in section 3. Note that µ tends to reduce those terms
that increase voter utility as the number of countries goes up. One insight now follows
from (23). When the discount factor equals one, the scale parameter is zero and utility
falls whenever tax rates decline and there are at least two countries. Intuitively, when
politicians value the future as strongly as the present, the current period rent becomes
arbitrarily small. An increase in competition then doesn’t increase voter utility but only
aggravates the underprovision problem. Furthermore, at N = 1 utility is unchanged when
the discount rate takes its maximum value, as the elasticity is zero (whereas it was zero
in section 3).
Presidential-Congressional Democracy
      We can solve for the equilibrium values in a similar fashion and obtain RC =
      ¡        ¢
t~i ki t~i ; tC = (3 + 2±) : Fiscal policy variables in equilibrium when legislators are reelected
become
                         ¡         ¢                       ¡         ¢                  ¡         ¢
          3 (1 ¡ ±) ~i ki t~i ; tC
                    t                         (3 ¡ ±) ~i ki t~i ; tC
                                                      t                         2± ~i ki t~i ; tC
                                                                                   t
     rC =                            ;   tC =                          ;   gC =                       (24)
                (3 + 2±)                          k (3 + 2±)                       (3 + 2±)

Again, di¤erentiating rC and tC with respect to N yields the same qualitative results as in
                                                                                                  ¶
Proposition 4. However, the e¤ect of a change in N on g C now di¤ers. Here dg C =dN < 0
for the same reason as in the static model and rents to policians fall. Recall that in our
previous section public good supply was invariant to changes in N so that an increase
in N always improved voter utility. The latter is true here only if the discount factor is


                                                     27
su¢ciently small and the marginal bene…t of the public good is (almost) linear. To see
this, we di¤erentiate utility with respect to N and obtain
                            ¡     ¡         ¢¢ µ        ¶·                ¸
                 duC      @ t~i ki t~i ; tC        1       ±¡3      0
                                                                      ¡ C¢
                      =                                        + 2±H g      :
                  dN             @N              3 + 2±     3

Since the …rst term is negative, utility is increasing if the square bracket is negative as
well. For …xed and …nite H 0 (g), there exists a su¢ciently small ± > 0 that makes the
the bracket negative. A second insight follows from noting that for ± equal one, utility is
decreasing whenever there is underprovision of the public good, that is H 0 (g) > 1=3:
   While the two regimes behave similar at extreme values of the discount factor, we can
try to compare the set of parameter values for which under each regime utility is constant
in N: A general characterization turns out to be di¢cult. Some insights can be o¤ered
though. Under the presidential-congressional regime, the critical value of the discount rate
that de…nes duC =dN = 0 is given by

                                     bC            3
                                     ± =                      :                          (25)
                                           6H 0 (g C )   +1

The value is only implicitly de…ned because public good supply is a function of the tax
rate, which in itself depends on the discount factor. We can derive a similar expression
for the parliamentary regime, for which the critical value is

                                       bP  3(1 ¡ z)
                                       ± =          ;                                    (26)
                                            3¡z
                P        P
where z ´ ²k dt
             dN
                  =(ki dt
                       dN
                           +e
                            ti @k
                               @N
                                 i
                                   ) ¸ 0: Comparing the two critical values in (25) and
(26) is not trivial because in general both right-hand sides depend on all parameters.
An exception is the case where the marginal utility of the public good is constant and
                                       C
greater than one third, in which case b
                                      ± is uniquely de…ned and less than one. The value
                             P
of z determines the size of b
                            ± : When z becomes su¢ciently close to zero, for example
                                                                                      P
by varying the curvature of the production function and/or the number of countries, b
                                                                                    ±
becomes one and the parliamentary regime thus has the higher threshold value. In fact,
this scenario holds for the speci…c functional forms used in Example 1. The opposite result
                                                                                    P
obtains if z becomes su¢ciently large (e.g., equal or greater than one) and hence b± gets
very small. In that case the presidential regime is superior. We summarize in
Proposition 5 Assume the only bene…t of holding o¢ce is the power to divert government
revenues for own purposes.

                                              28
    (a) Increasing tax competition is bene…cial under both regimes if the discount factor of
politicians is small, but harmful if the discount factor is su¢ciently large.
    (b) Under the presidential-congressional system voter utility is increasing in N for a
larger set of discount factors than under the parliamentary regime i¤ (6H 0 (g C ) + 1)¡1 >
(1 ¡ z)=(3 ¡ z):
    We conclude this section with a …nal observation. Note that under the parliamentary
regime public good supply is zero for all ± 0 s smaller or equal to some ±> 0: For discount
rates below this value utility is then increasing in the number of countries, as only private
consumption increases when tax rates fall. While utility is improving, a zero public good
supply is problematic, in particular when the marginal utility of public goods is high.
Such a problem does not arise under the presidential-congressional regime where public
good supply is positive as long as the discount rate is positive.



6     Concluding Remarks

There is considerable dissent about the outcome of increasing competition among juris-
dictions for mobile capital. Those who see individual governments as acting in the interest
of their constituency believe that competition is harmful due to a …scal externality. By
contrast, the Leviathan view of government takes the position that competition is ben-
e…cial since it curbs the rent-seeking activities of politicians. This paper has set up a
model that endogenizes both e¤ects within a single framework in order to see which argu-
ment commands the …eld at the end of the day. In addition we study the role of political
and budgetary institutions which allows us to explain di¤erent responses to increasing
economic integration across the Atlantic.
    A benchmark result is that voters must allow politicians some rents for them to seek
reelection. As a consequence, the closed economy entails too high taxes for the …rst best to
be achieved. This is true even though in a parliamentary democracy public good provision
is at its …rst-best level. A closed economy under a presidential-congressional system is
not e¢cient both because of government waste and inadequate spending on the public
good. In our base model, where politicians seek reelection since it gives them (exogenous)
pleasure to be in power, opening up the economy under both political regimes leads to
a fall in taxes and rents to politicians. The e¤ect on the public good and voter utility

                                             29
di¤ers slightly between regimes however. In a world with only parliamentary democracies
opening up leads to a fall in public good provision, and the e¤ect on voter utility is
generally ambiguous. In contrast, under presidential-congressional regimes the supply of
the public good is una¤ected and voter utility rises.
   Intensi…ed competition over capital (i.e., more countries compete) yields similar re-
sults. Voter utility rises in a setting with parliamentary regimes if the marginal product
of capital is a positive constant. Under presidential-congressional systems a rise in voter
utility is guaranteed. A general insight from our study is therefore a slight presump-
tion in favor of the presidential-congressional system. The di¤erence in results between
the two political systems is driven by the separation of budgetary powers (presidential-
congressional regime) or the lack of it (parliamentary regime). We also consider an al-
ternative formulation of political behavior where the motive of politicians for reelection
is driven by the power to siphon o¤ resources from public budgets for their own bene…t.
This behavioural assumption yields similar, but not identical results. In particular, the
latter assumption seems to make it more likely that tax competition is harmful under
both political systems if the future is not discounted too heavily.
   In our analysis we have made a number of simplifying assumptions, two of which we
would like to discuss in further detail below, suggesting that the thrust of our results
should survive in more general settings. The …rst pertains to introducing a second tax
instrument in addition to the capital tax. Such a tax, levied on the immobile factor
would clearly eliminate the …scal competition problem because a tax on an immobile and
inelastically supplied factor is lump sum. The equilibrium would not be …rst-best due
to rents obtained by politicians. Yet the main question of our analysis - the e¤ect of
increasing competition for mobile capital - could not be meaningfully answered in such a
framework. To remedy this shortcoming, one could allow for elastic supply of the second
factor, which may represent labor.
   In a model setting with elastic supply of the second factor and a …xed world stock of
capital, a decline in capital tax rates - induced by more competition - is likely to reduce
overall tax revenues, as in our model. In a symmmetric equilibrium capital employed is
unchanged implying that gross wages are constant. Therefore a positive labor supply re-
sponse (that would increase revenues from the labor tax) cannot be expected. In addition,
any increase in the labor tax becomes more costly with increasing N because the result-


                                            30
ing decline in labor supply triggers a bigger out‡ow of capital. The loss in government
revenue has di¤erent consequences under the political regimes. As in our base model,
in a presidential-congressional regime taxes are already set when representatives choose
expenditures. We therefore expect public good supply to be una¤ected by globalization
in the more general setting as well. By contrast, the simultaneous choice of taxes and ex-
penditures under a parliamentary democracy is likely to translate into lower public good
provision, and thus a potential decline in voter utility.
   Returning to the case with only capital taxes, a second expansion of the model is to
consider an additional expenditure instrument. Following Persson, Roland and Tabellini
(2000) politicians use tax money to make transfers to their regional constituencies. The
separation of powers in a presidential-congressional regime allows the expenditure-setting
legislator to direct transfers to her voters who trade o¤ transfers with the provision of
a public good. The lack of separation under a parliamentary democracy leads to more
public good provision because voters in the majority districts internalize the bene…ts of
the provision of the public good among themselves. With quasilinear preferences (linear in
private consumption) a fall in tax revenue due to increasing tax competition would prima
facie reduce transfers under both regimes, and not public good provision. Note, however,
that transfers need to be nonnegative, implying that when the constraint is binding, public
good supply would fall. Whether and when the constraint is binding or not depends in a
nontrivial way on the parameters of the model. What can be said, however, is that for a
given amount of spending on transfers and the public good, the constraint is more likely
to be binding under the parliamentary regime precisely because public good supply is
higher in the Persson, Roland and Tabellini (2000) framework. This tends to make the
parliamentary regime more prone to negative e¤ects from globalization.
   Our base model has both positive and normative implications. In particular, increasing
competition for mobile capital reduces the size of the government and overall paints a
fairly positive picture of the e¤ects of globalization. This is in explicit contrast to Rodrik
(1998) who argues that more openness leads to bigger governments and, most likely, lower
welfare. The di¤erence can readily be explained, yet it is interesting. More openness in
Rodrik’s work leads to higher external risk (measured by the volatility of the terms of
trade times the trade-in-GDP share), to which governments respond by increasing the
public sector either through more government employment or bigger transfer payments to
individuals. Obviously, we ignore the risk argument of increasing openness and therefore

                                             31
perhaps overestimate the implications of our model, regarding both the fall in the size of
government and its positive welfare implications. Since the size of government as share of
GDP has been relatively stable in most industrialized countries over the last two decades,
Rodrik’s point seems well taken.10 On the other hand, Rodrik does not address the issue
that we do: How can governments raise revenues to …nance the welfare state when tax
bases become more mobile? Rodrik’s empirical …nding that more open economies have
bigger governments is based on data from the late 1980s and early 1990s. The dramatic
increase in international capital mobility over the last decade may eventually undermine
the desire to increase the government sector. Whether people will be worse o¤ or not,
then depends on the relative strength of increasing, unmitigated external risk on the one
hand and less government waste on the other hand.



7        Appendix

7.1        Useful Comparative Statics Results

Often we are interested in the situation where country i sets tax rate ti and all other
countries choose a common tax rate t¡i : We …rst derive how changes in tax rates a¤ect
the capital stock in country i; followed by how for given tax rates an increase in the
number of countries a¤ects ki : The latter means distributing the …xed world supply of
both factors to more countries on an equal basis.
       All comparative static results are derived by totally di¤erentiating the arbitrage condi-
tion (1) together with the condition for capital market equilibrium. In the situation where
all countries other than i choose the same tax rate tj = t; capital market equilibrium
requires ki + (N ¡ 1)kj = N k: We obtain


                          ¯                 ¯
                     @ki ¯¯            @ki ¯¯                (N ¡ 1)
                          ¯         =¡      ¯        =                               < 0:              (A1)
                     @ti ti 6=tj =t    @tj ti 6=tj =t (N ¡ 1)f 00 (ki ) + f 00 (kj )

  10
       Note that tax rates on capital have fallen in many industrialized countries over the last two decades.
See Sorensen (2000) for a more detailed discussion.




                                                      32
In a symmetric tax situation, these expressions simplify to
                           @ki      @ki       1 N ¡1
                                =¡       = 00            < 0;
                            @ti      @tj   f (k) N

where k = k: Furthermore we obtain
                              d½              @ki
                                 = f 00 (ki )     ¡ 1 < 0;
                             dti              @ti
which in the symmetric case reduces to ¡1=N:
   For the same general situation we consider also an increase in the number of countries
while holding all tax rates constant, that is, we consider adding countries that choose the
same tax rate tj = t for all j 6= i: This changes the capital stock in country i if country i
has a di¤erent tax rate in place than the rest of the world. Formally,

                            ¯
                       @ki ¯¯                  f 00 (kj ) ¢ (ki ¡ k)
                                     =                                           :           (A2)
                       @N ¯ti 6=tj =t (N ¡ 1) ¢ [(N ¡ 1)f 00 (ki ) + f 00 (kj )]


It is easy to see that ki increases (decreases) when ki > (<)k; which is equivalent to saying
that ti < (>)tj = t:


7.2      Parliamentary regime

We de…ne an equilibrium in the parliamentary regime (P ) as follows:
De…nition 1. An equilibrium in the parliamentary regime is characterized by a policy
vector
                                £                  ©              ª                  ¤
               qPi (¹
                    ui (t¡i )) = tPi (¹
                                      ui (t¡i )) ; rPi (¹
                                                        ui (t¡i )) ; giP (¹
                                                                          ui (t¡i ))
                                                   0
and the reservation utilities u
                              ¹Pi (t¡i ) and u
                                             ¹Pi (t¡i ) for all countries i; such that for any pol-
icy vector and reservation utilities in any other country j ( i 6= j), the expected equilibrium
outcome satis…es:

  A. for any given vectors u
                           ¹i (t¡i ) and budgetary proposal at stage 3, the junior coali-
      tion partner m optimally chooses to veto or accept any proposal, given the expected
                                0
      reservation utilities u¹di (t¡i ) and the expected policy outcome in stage 6̂, and given
      the expected policy outcomes and reservation utilities in all other countries;

                                                  33
                                             0
  B. the reservation utilities u¹dP
                                 i  (t¡i ) are optimal for the voters in each district d in
     country i after a government crisis at stage 4, conditional on that policies are set
                     0 ¡ P0       ¢                                  0
     according to q
                  ¹Pi u ¹ i (t¡i ) ; that reservation utilities u¹dP
                                                                  j    (t¡i ) are optimal for voters
     in each district d in country j after a crisis, and taking into account that policies
                                                    0 ¡ P0      ¢
     in all other countries are set according to q
                                                 ¹Pj u ¹j (t¡j ) and i 6= j;
                                                                      0                            0
  C. for any given reservation utility u
                                       ¹i (t¡i ) and u
                                                     ¹i (t¡i ) (and likewise u
                                                                             ¹j (t¡i ) and
       0
     ¹j (t¡i ) ; i 6= j), the agenda setting minister ai prefers
     u
                                      £                  ©              ª                  ¤
                     qPi (ui (t¡i )) = tPi (¹
                                            ui (t¡i )) ; rPi (¹
                                                              ui (t¡i )) ; giP (¹
                                                                                ui (t¡i ))

      given conditions A and B, ti ki (ti ; t¡i ) = gi + ri ; and qPj (uj (t¡i )) ; i 6= j;

  D. the reservation utilities udP
                                 i (t¡i ) are optimal for the voters in each district d in
                                                                                 ¡         ¢
     all countries i, taking into account that policies are set according to qPi uPi (t¡i ) ;
                            0
     takes as given u   ¹Pi (t¡i ) ; that policies after a government crisis are set according to
       0 ¡    0      ¢
     ¹i u
     q     ¹Pi (t¡i ) ; and takes as given optimal reservation utilities in each district in all
     other countries as well as crisis policies in all other countries j 6= i.


Derivation of Equation (9). The maximization problem under the parliamentary
regime is
                                             f (ki ) ¡ f 0 (ki ) ki    k
                            max ui =                                + ½ + H (gi )
                                ti ;gi                3                3

subject to
                      ¡         ¢ 2R
           ri = t~i ki t~i ; t¡i ¡   ;       ti ki (ti ; t¡i ) = gi + ri ; ½ = f 0 (ki ) ¡ ti ¸ 0; and
                                   °

the capital market clearing condition. The rate of return ½ must be positive in the opti-
mum because a small reduction in ti that makes ½ slightly positive implies a large in‡ow
of capital. By the Inada conditions we know that the supply of gi is non-negative. Sub-
stituting the rent constraint in the government budget constraint, and this in turn into
H (gi ) ; we obtain a maximization problem without constraints in one control variable ti :
The corresponding …rst-order condition is then
                                               @½                 ·          ¸
                        ¡f 00 (ki ) ki @ki
                                       @ti
                                           + k @t         0              @ki
                                                 i
                                                     + H (gi ) ¢ ki + ti       = 0:
                                         3                               @ti

                                                        34
   Using symmetry of equilibrium, properties from section 7.1, and the de…nition of the
tax rate elasticity of capital demand, this reduces to equation (9). The other variables
are now implicitly de…ned by the government budget constraint and the individual utility
function.


Proof of Proposition 2. Our …rst step in proving Proposition 2 is to derive the e¤ect of
N on the equilibrium tax rate. The latter is implicitly de…ned by the …rst-order condition
(9), using the government budget constraint to replace the public good, g P = tP k ¡ rP =
tP k ¡ e
       tki (ti ; tP ) + 2R=°. Total di¤erentiation gives
                                    1          ¡2 @²        00
                                                               ¡ P ¢ @gP
                            dtP       (1  ¡  ²)         ¡ H     g @N
                                = 3                  @N
                                                                         < 0;
                                    H 00 (g P ) P ¡ (1 ¡ ²)¡2 @²P
                                                @g P
                            dN                          1
                                                  @t                3   @t
                                        h                       i
                                            @ki        @ 2 ki
where by Assumption 1     @²
                         @tP
                               = ¡ k1        > 0 is the partial e¤ect on ² of one country
                                            @ti
                                                  +     @t2i
                                                                     ³ 2 ´
increasing its tax rate in a symmetric equilibrium, and @N@²
                                                              = ¡ kt @t@i @N
                                                                          ki
                                                                               > 0 is the
e¤ect of N on the tax rate elasticity in the symmetric equilibrium holding tax rates
constant. Furthermore, the partial derivatives @g P =@tP = k ¡ e
                                                               t@ki (ti ; tP )=@tP = k + ki ¢
[(@ki =@t¡i )=(@ki =@ e
                      t)] = k ¡ ki > 0 and @g=@N = ¡ e
                                                     t ¢ @ki =@N > 0 give the direct e¤ects
of a change in the tax rate and the number of countries on public good supply, holding
tax rates constant in the latter case.

      Next we consider the e¤ects on politicians’ rents, which in equilibrium are rP =
      ¡        ¢
t~i ki t~i ; tP ¡ 2R : Using the envelope condition for t~i and substituting for the revenue-
               °
maximizing tax rate, we obtain
                                         ·                ¸
                               drP         @k i @t
                                                  P
                                                      @ki
                                   = t~i            +       < 0;
                               dN          @t¡i @N    @N

where we used our previous result on equilibrium tax rates, @ki =@t¡i > 0 is the e¤ect on
ki when all other countries raise taxes, and @ki =@N < 0 is the e¤ect of N on ki ; holding
all tax rates constant, when ti > tj = t for all countries j other than i (see our derivations
at the beginning of the appendix). Thus rents fall.

   We next do comparative statics on g P using previous results, which yields
                                                                  ¡         ¢
             dg P   dtP      drP     £       ¡ P ¢¤ dtP        @ki t~i ; tP
                  =     ¢k¡       = k ¡ ki t~i ; t       ¡ t~i                :
             dN     dN       dN                      dN           @N

                                                           35
The sign appears ambiguous because the …rst term is negative (the tax rate falls), while
the second one is positive, re‡ecting that an increase in the number of countries lowers the
maximum revenue politicians can extract when they don’t seek reelection. For N ! 1,
however, we see from (A2) that @ki =@N converges to zero, leading to a decline in public
good supply.

   The …nal step is the derivation of duP =dN . In the symmetric equilibrium utility in a
representative country is given by (3). Di¤erentating this and using our previous results
yields
                      duP         k dtP       ¡ ¢ dg P
                              = ¡       + H 0 gP
                      dN          3 dN                dN
                                    1                dtP      ¡ ¢ @g P
                              =           [²k ¡ ki ]     + H 0 gP ¢    :
                                3 (1 ¡ ²)            dN             @N

Since @g P =@N > 0 (because politicians’ rents fall for given tax rates), utility is increasing
if the square bracket is negative. We can write
                                   "                                             #
                                                 eti                   tP
               ²k ¡ ki = (N ¡ 1) ¢                                 ¡               ;
                                     (N ¡ 1)f 00 (ki ) + f 00 (kj ) N ¢ f 00 (k)

where kj is the typical capital stock in all countries other than i that have the same tax
rate. We can sign the term in square brackets when the production function is quadratic
and hence f 00 is a constant. In that case ²k ¡ ki reduces to (N ¡ 1)(e
                                                                      ti ¡ tP )=N f 00 (k) < 0:
We can conclude that duP =dN > 0 :


7.3      Presidential-Congressional System

We de…ne an equilibrium in the presidential-congressional regime (C) as follows:
De…nition 2. An equilibrium in the presidential-congressional regime is characterized by
a policy vector
                 £                 © ¡C                         ¢     ¡                           ¢ª¤
 qC  ui (t¡i )) = tC
  i (¹                ui (t¡i )) ; rC
                   i (¹             i ti (¹           ¹i (t¡i )) ; giC tC
                                          ui (t¡i ) ; u                 i (¹
                                                                           ui (t¡i ) ; u
                                                                                       ¹i (t¡i ))



and a vector of reservation utilities u
                                      ¹Pi (t¡i ) for all countries i such that the expected
equilibrium outcome satis…es:

                                                 36
A. for any given vector u
                        ¹ i (t¡i ) at stage 4, at least one other legislator l 6= ati weakly
   prefers to accept the proposed tax rate ti , given the expected equilibrium proposals
   and the outcome at later stages of the game in country i as well as in any other
   country j (i 6= j);

B. for any given vector u
                        ¹ i (t¡i ) ; at stage 3, ati prefers ti to any other tax rate that
   may satisfy the requirement in A, given the expected equilibrium proposals and the
   outcomes at later stages of the game in country i as well as in any other country j
   (i 6= j);

                        ¹i (t¡i ) ; at stage 5, at least one legislator l 6= agi weakly prefers
C. for any given ti and u
   to accept rather than to reject the proposal
                                                        © C                             ª
                  giC (ti (ui (t¡i )) ; ui (t¡i )) ;     ri (ti (ui (t¡i )) ; ui (t¡i )) ;

                                                         ©                                ª
   given the proposals gjC (tj (ui (t¡j )) ; uj (t¡j )) ; rC
                                                           j (tj (uj (t¡j )) ; uj (t¡j ))   for all
   j; i 6= j;

                 ¹i (t¡1 ) and ti at stage 5, legislator agi prefers the proposal
D. for any given u
                                                        ©                                  ª
                   giC (ti (ui (t¡i )) ; ui (t¡i )) ;       rC
                                                             i (ti (ui (t¡i )) ; ui (t¡i ))


   to any other proposal satisfying C and the budget constraint, taking into account
   proposals in all other countries j 6= i;

E. the reservation utilities udC
                              i (t¡i ) are optimal for all voters in each district d in all
   countries, and takes as given that policies in the current period are set according to
      ¡ C        ¢
   qC
    i  ui (t¡i )   for given reservation utilities in all districts in all countries, as well
   as the identity of all ati and agi in all countries.




                                                 37
References

 [1] Besley, T. and A. Case. ”Incumbent Behavior: Vote-seeking, Tax-setting and
    Yardstick Competition.” American Economic Review 1995, 95, pp. 25-45.

 [2] Besley, T. and M. Smart 2001. ”Does tax competition raise voter welfare?”
    Mimeo, 2001.

 [3] Brennan, G. and J. Buchanan. The Power to Tax: Analytical Foundations of a
    Fiscal Constitution, Cambridge University Press, 1980.

 [4] Burstein,     M.L.    and       A.J.      Rolnick.   ”Congress    Should   End    the
    Economic      War   Among       States.”    Federal   Reserve   Bank   of   Minneapo-
    lis,   1994   Annual   Report     Essay,    The   Region,   1995   (downloaded    from
    http://minneapolisfed.org/pubs/ar/ar1994.html.)

 [5] Edwards, J. and M. Keen. ”Tax Competition and Leviathan.” European Eco-
    nomic Review 1996, 44, pp. 113-34.

 [6] Gordon, R.H. and J.D. Wilson. ”Expenditure Competition.” NBER Working
    Paper 8189, 2001.

 [7] Grossman, G.M. and E. Helpman. ”Protection for Sale.” American Economic
    Review 1994, 84, pp. 833-850.

 [8] Holmes, T.J. ”Analyzing a Proposal to Ban State Tax Breaks to Businesses.” Fed-
    eral Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, 1995, 19, pp. 29-39.

 [9] Lorz, O. ”Capital Mobility, Tax Competition, and the Lobbying for Redistributive
    Capital Taxation.” European Journal of Political Economy 1998, 14, pp. 265-279.

[10] McLure, C.E. ”Tax competition: Is what’s good for the private goose also good for
    the public gander? National Tax Journal 1986, XXXIX, pp. 341-346.

[11] OECD. Harmful Tax Competition: An Emerging Global Issue. Paris: OECD, 1998.

[12] OECD. Harmful Tax Competition: Progress in identifying and eliminating harmful
    tax practices. Report to the Ministers and Recommendations of the Committee on
    Fiscal A¤airs, 2000.

                                               38
[13] Persson, T.; G. Roland, and G. Tabellini. ”Comparative Politics and Public
    Finance”. Journal of Political Economy 2000, 108 (6), pp. 1121-1161.

[14] Persson, T. and G. Tabellini. Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy.
    Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000.

[15] Persson, T. and G. Tabellini. ”The politics of 1992: Fiscal policy and European
    integration.” Review of Economic Studies 1992, 59, pp. 689-701.

[16] Rauscher, M. ”Leviathan and Competition Among Jurisdictions: The Case of Ben-
    e…t Taxation.” Journal of Urban Economics 1998, 44, pp. 59-67.

[17] Rodrik, D. ”Why do more open economies have bigger governments?” Journal of
    Political Economy 1998, 106, pp. 997-1032.

[18] Sørensen, P.B. ”The case for international tax coordination reconsidered.” Eco-
    nomic Policy 2000, 31, pp. 429-472.

[19] Tiebout, C.M. ”A pure theory of local expenditures.” Journal of Political Economy
    1956, 64, pp. 416-24.

[20] Wilson, J.D. ”A theory of interregional tax competition.” Journal of Urban Eco-
    nomics 1986, 19, pp. 296-315.

[21] Wilson, J.D. ”Theories of tax competition.” National Tax Journal 1999, 52, pp.
    269-304.

[22] Wildasin, D.E., and J.D. Wilson. ”Tax competition: bane or boon?” Mimeo,
    2001.

[23] Zodrow, G., and P. Mieszkowski. ”Pigeou, Tiebout, Property Taxation and the
    Underprovision of Local Public Goods.” Journal of Urban Economics 1986, 19, pp.
    356-370.




                                          39
