                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      IS-LM-BP IN THE PAMPAS

                                          Luis Felipe Céspedes
                                            Roberto Chang
                                            Andrés Velasco

                                           Working Paper 9337
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9337


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                     November 2002




We are grateful to seminar participants at Harvard University, the Middle Eastern Technical Institute (Ankara),
Universidad Torcuato di Tella (Buenos Aires) and Universidad de Chile (Santiago) for comments, and to the
Harvard Center for International Development for financial support. The title is borrowed from Taylor (1981).
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Luis Felipe Céspedes, Roberto Chang and Andrés Velasco. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit,
including © notice, is given to the source.
IS-LM-BP in the Pampas
Luis Felipe Céspedes, Roberto Chang and Andrés Velasco
NBER Working Paper No. 9337
November 2002
JEL No. E0, F0

                                           ABSTRACT


       Emerging markets (sometimes endowed with fertile pampas) have limited access to world capital
markets and suffer from original sin: they cannot borrow in their own currency. Does this mean that
monetary and exchange rate policy has non-standard effects in such countries? We develop a simple IS-

LM-BP model with balance sheet effects to study that question. Our answer: it all depends.




Luis Felipe Céspedes                  Roberto Chang                    Andres Velasco
International Monetary Fund           Rutgers University               Kennedy School of Government
700 19th Street, NW                   Department of Economics         79 JFK Street
Washington, DC 20431                  New Brunswick, NJ 08901         Littauer 106
lcespedes@imf.org                     chang@economics.rutgers.edu Cambridge, MA 02138
                                                                  and NBER
                                                                  andres_velasco@harvard.edu
1. Introduction

Most standard macro models of the open economy, such as the textbook IS-LM-

BP model, treat Þnancial markets and international capital mobility as perfect.

In that world, only expectations of future returns, properly arbitraged, guide

capital ßows and investment; corporate balance sheets and current output levels

are irrelevant.

   There are many reasons to be doubtful about this approach. Much recent

research provides reasons to believe that sovereign risk, limited and costly moni-

toring, and imperfect contract enforceability, render international capital markets

particularly prone to failure, in the sense that agents cannot borrow all they want

at the world rate of interest, limited only by intertemporal solvency constraints.

The problem is compounded by original sin, which prevents almost all emerging

countries from borrowing in their own currencies. This leaves them exposed to

currency and relative price risk, making repayment even dicier.

   Policy makers fret a great deal over the potentially harmful balance sheet ef-

fects of devaluation. They were the main reason why Argentina delayed changes in

its peg —despite massive overvaluation and a deepening recession— until the econ-

omy collapsed along with the currency board. Similar concerns have been voiced



                                        2
in Uruguay and in less-dollarized Brazil. Allegedly, IS-LM-BP works diﬀerently

in the pampas of these three countries, and in others like them.

   We have developed several models of the open economy that embed Þnancial

market imperfections in otherwise standard optimizing dynamic models. Here we

present a particularly simple one, a variant of the textbook IS-LM-BP model.

Though it has a simple graphical representation, this model permits us to pose a

richer array of questions, and obtain more nuanced answers, than does the tradi-

tional perfect-capital-mobility approach. In fact, the standard model is simply a

special case of our more general framework.

   Capital market imperfections and balance sheet eﬀects matter in two senses.

First, they magnify the domestic real eﬀects of adverse external shocks, such as

a fall in export volumes or an increase in the world real interest rate. Second,

devaluation may be expansionary (as in the standard model) or contractionary.

The second result requires particularly strong balance sheet eﬀects, arising from

both high sensitivity of risk premia and large inherited dollar debts. Then, and

only then, does IS-LM-BP turn out to operate diﬀerently in the pampas.




                                        3
2. The Model

Monopolistically competitive Þrms in the home economy produce diﬀerentiated

goods using labor and capital. These goods are exported or sold to domestic

agents. There is also a foreign good, which can be imported. Capital is made up

of the domestic and foreign goods, with Cobb-Douglas shares γ and 1 − γ, and

depreciates fully after one period. Prices and wages are pre-set for one period,

but free to adjust thereafter.

      Labor and capital are supplied by distinct agents called workers and entre-

preneurs. Workers work and consume an aggregate of the domestic and foreign

good.1 Entrepreneurs own capital, and also own the Þrms. In order to Þnance

investment in excess of their own net worth, entrepreneurs borrow from the world

capital market. As in Bernanke and Gertler (1989), the cost of borrowing depends

inversely on net worth relative to the amount borrowed.

      In what follows all variables are in percentage deviation from the no-shock

steady state.2 Start with the IS, which is standard:



                                  y = αi i + αx x + αee                              (2.1)

  1
    With Cobb-Douglas shares γ and 1 − γ.
  2
    Except for the world interest rate and the risk premium, which are just deviations (not
percentage deviations) from the steady state.

                                            4
where y is output of the domestically produced good, i is investment, x is the

dollar value of exports and e is the real exchange rate (the value of the foreign

goods in terms of the domestic good), The α’s are positive coeﬃcients, which in

turn are combinations of the underlying preference and technology parameters of

the model (see the appendix for details). Under our assumptions, x is exogenously

given, while e is endogenous (or at least inßuenced by monetary policy when prices

are sticky). For a given e, the IS schedule slopes up in (i, y) space.

       Consider next the LM, which can be written as



                                      m = β y y + βee − β ii                                    (2.2)



where m is the value of money in terms of the domestic good, β y and β i are

positive coeﬃcients (all functions of underlying structural parameters), and β e

may be positive or negative depending on whether the elasticity of money demand

with respect to consumption expenditures is larger or smaller than one.3 The real

exchange rate enters money demand because it is the value of monetary balances

in terms of consumption that matters to the agents who hold it, and they consume

both the foreign and the domestic good. Hence, a change in relative prices (a move

   3
    If this elasticity is smaller than one, then β e is positive, and viceversa. If it is exactly one,
then β e = 0.


                                                  5
in e) alters the home good value of consumption, and changes money demand as

well. The reason why money demand falls with investment is as follows: Holding

other factors constant, money demand today depends inversely on consumption

tomorrow (recall the standard Euler relationship), and consumption tomorrow is

increasing in investment today.

   Turn next to the BP. It contains the non-standard features of the model, so

we derive it in more detail. Begin with the investment demand equation



                                  i = − (ρ + η) + γe                            (2.3)



where ρ is the world rate of interest and η the country risk premium (both in units

of the foreign good). This relationship can easily be derived from the standard

rate of return international arbitrage equation (see the appendix for details). As it

stands, it has a simple intuition: investment is decreasing in the relevant interna-

tional cost of capital (recall entrepreneurs borrow abroad to Þnance investment)

and increasing in the current real exchange rate —because, ceteris paribus, a higher

e today means a lower expected real depreciation between today and tomorrow,

and hence a lower cost of foreign capital, when measured in terms of the domestic

good.



                                          6
   Crucially, the risk premium is endogenously determined and given by



                              η = µ [(1 − γ) e + i − n]                      (2.4)



where n is entrepreneurs’ net worth (in units of the domestic good) and µ is a

positive coeﬃcient. Intuitively, the risk premium increases when the value of cur-

rent investment is high (we can think of (1 − γ) e as the price of the investment

good in terms of the home good) and decreases with net worth. For a derivation

of this relationship from an underlying contract environment with imperfect infor-

mation and costly monitoring, see Céspedes, Chang and Velasco (2001). Notice

that capital markets are perfect if µ = 0.

   Finally, net worth is given by



                                    n = δy y − δee                           (2.5)


where both δ’s are positive coeﬃcients that increase with the initial stock of

dollar liabilities relative to initial net worth. An increase in output raises the

income of capitalists and therefore increases net worth. A depreciation of the

(real) exchange rate increases the output value of debt repayments, because of

dollarization of liabilities, and reduces net worth.

                                          7
   Substituting 2.5 into 2.4 we have



                         η = µ [(1 − γ + δ e ) e + i − δ y y]                 (2.6)



so that the risk premium unambiguously increases with e and i and decreases with

y. Finally, substituting this into 2.3 we arrive at the BP curve:

                   Ã       !     Ã        !      "                  #
                  1      µδ y    γ − µ (1 − γ + δ e )
             i=−     ρ+       y+                      e                       (2.7)
                 1+µ    1+µ            1+µ


Quite naturally, investment is decreasing in the world rate of interest. The other

two terms are more novel. Investment increases with output only if capital markets

are imperfect (µ > 0), since higher output increases net worth and reduces the risk

premium. Hence the BP curve slopes up in (i, y) space for a given real exchange

rate and shock to the world interest rate. If µ = 0, the BP is horizontal.

   Notice also that investment may be increasing or decreasing in the real ex-

change rate. Standard arbitrage forces described above push for an increasing

relationship: a higher e makes borrowing abroad cheaper. But the balance sheet

eﬀect pushes in the opposite direction: a higher e means a higher value of debt

payments, and hence lower net worth and higher risk premia. Notice the balance



                                          8
sheet eﬀect prevails when capital market imperfections are high (large µ) and

when the initial stock of dollar debt is high (large δ e ). If the coeﬃcient on e is

positive, we have a Þnancially vulnerable economy. If the coeﬃcient is negative,

we have a Þnancially robust economy. The size of balance sheets eﬀects also mat-

ter for the slope of the BP curve. The stronger the balance sheet eﬀects (the

larger are µ and δ y ), the larger the slope of the BP curve.

       We solve the model diagrammatically under the regime of Þxed (but ad-

justable) exchange rates. Because the home currency price is predetermined,

a Þxed nominal exchange rate makes the relative price e also predetermined. For

a given e, the intersection of the IS and BP curves pins down investment and

output.4 In turn, the LM yields the level of the money supply necessary for that

particular equilibrium to obtain.5

   4
     We consider only the case in which the slope of the IS is larger that the slope of the BP.
The opposite case is empirically odd, since it implies that an increase in the world interest rate
or a fall in exports leads the economy to a boom in production and investment.
   5
     Recall these are percentage deviations from the no-shock steady state, holding prices and
wages constant. Without nominal stickiness, ouput is exogenous (pinned down by the inherited
capital stock and by equilibrim labor supply l = 0), the IS and BP pin down the equilibrium
real exchange rate for a given output level, and the LM only determines the price level.




                                                9
3. Eﬀects of external and policy shocks

Consider Þrst the eﬀects of a fall in current exports, depicted in Þgure 1. The

shock shifts the IS up and to the left, so that for each level of investment there

is now a smaller corresponding output level. The new intersection is at point A,

with lower investment and output than in the steady state. The output fall is as

in the standard model with perfect capital markets and no balance sheet eﬀects,

but the fall in investment is not. In that model, a fall in exports today does

not aﬀect the proÞtability of capital tomorrow, and hence it leaves investment

unchanged. That is what happens in our model in the special case µ = 0, so that

the BP curve is horizontal. Notice that with stronger balance sheet eﬀects (larger

µ and δ y ) the BP becomes steeper, and magnifying the adverse eﬀects on both

investment and output.

   Consider next the eﬀects of a one-period increase in the world rate of interest.

In Þgure 2, the shock shifts the BP down and to the right, so that investment is

lower for each output level. The result is lower investment and output, as in point

A. This is qualitatively as it would be in the standard model with perfect capital

markets and a horizontal BP curve, but quantitatively there is a diﬀerence: for the

same downward shift, the steeper the BP the larger the reduction in investment



                                        10
and output. The capital market imperfections and resulting balance sheet eﬀects

magniÞes the real eﬀects of adverse interest rate shocks.6

       Can monetary policy play a countercyclical role? To answer that question

we look at the impact of a real depreciation, accommodated by monetary policy.

Start with a Þnancially robust economy. This is the case in which initial dollar

debt is low with respect to net worth and the elasticity of the risk premium with

respect to the ratio of investment spending to net worth is also low. A depreciation

of the real exchange rate shifts the IS down and the BP up. This situation appears

in Þgure 3. Both output and investment unambiguously go up. This is just as

in the standard model: real depreciation is expansionary, and it can be used to

oﬀset the real eﬀects of adverse shocks.7

       Turn next to the Þnancially vulnerable economy. This is the case in which

balance sheets eﬀects are strong, i.e., the initial level of debt is high and the

elasticity µ is also high. Figure 4 illustrates the three possible situations. The IS

still shifts down, but now the BP shifts down as well. The economy may settle

in a point like A with higher output and investment (this is an economy that is

   6
    The same is true of export shocks.
   7
    Notice that the presence of Þnancial imperfections has ambiguous eﬀects on the size of the
expansion. On the one hand, having µ > 0 and δ e large reduces the size of the vertical shift
in the BP; on the other hand, a large µ increases the slope of the BP, which magniÞes the
equilibrium impact of any depreciation.



                                             11
vulnerable but not too much so); a point like B where there is a trade-oﬀ between

investment and output; and a case like C where both output and investment

decline. The last one is the case of unambiguously contractionary devaluation,

and trying to use exchange rate and monetary policy for counter-cyclical purposes

can only make matters worse.

   The intuition of why devaluation can be contractionary is simple: with im-

perfect capital markets, balance sheets matter; if there are enough inherited dol-

lar liabilities, the real depreciation worsens the balance sheet and increases the

risk premium; in turn, this pulls down investment and aggregate demand; if the

standard demand-switching eﬀects of devaluation are not suﬃciently strong, the

overall impact can be contractionary.

   Again, notice that none of this could happen with perfect capital markets. In

that case the BP is horizontal and shifts up after a real devaluation. The only

possible outcome is an increase in both investment and output.



4. Conclusions

The analysis suggests that the currently fashionable conclusion that liability dol-

larization renders monetary policy useless, and fully justiÞes “fear of ßoating,”

is much too simple. When balance sheet eﬀects are not too strong, the model

                                        12
behaves qualitatively just like the standard one, though quantitatively the capi-

tal market imperfections magnify the eﬀects of adverse external shocks. In that

case, monetary and exchange rate policy have the same eﬀects as in the textbook

example.

      With very imperfect international Þnancial markets and large inherited dollar

debts, matters are diﬀerent. An unexpected real devaluation can depress both

investment and output, justifying policymakers’ fears. The task ahead is to sort

out when and how these circumstances arise. In previous work we have found that

it takes unrealistically high steady state debt ratios and risk premia to generate

the contractionary case, but researchers using more disaggregated models and

alternative distributions for shocks may come to diﬀerent conclusions.8 Putting

imperfect credibility into the picture is also important: it is in short supply in

the pampas, and it crucially aﬀects the beneÞcial results of devaluation. Again,

in a previous paper we found that imperfect credibility, even in the presence of

balance sheet eﬀects, does not overturn received wisdom on the desirability of

ßexible exchange rates and countercyclical monetary policy.9 But the issue surely

remains open.



  8
      See Céspedes, Chang and Velasco (2001).
  9
      See Céspedes, Chang and Velasco (2002).

                                                13
A. Appendix

For simplicity we assume only two periods, t = 0, 1, and focus on the eﬀect of

shocks only at the start of period 0.


A.1. Domestic Production


Production of each variety of domestic goods is carried out by a continuum of Þrms

acting as monopolistic competitors. These Þrms have access to a Cobb-Douglas

technology given by



                                   α 1−α
                           Yjt = AKjt Ljt , 0 < α < 1                       (A.1)


where Yjt denotes output of variety j in period t, Kjt denotes capital input and

Ljt denotes labor input. Assume that workers’ labor services are heterogeneous.

The input Ljt is a CES aggregate of the services of the diﬀerent workers in the

economy:


                                     ·Z     1                 ¸ σ−1
                                                                 σ
                                                       σ−1
                             Ljt =              Lijt    σ    di             (A.2)
                                        0



where workers are indexed by i in the unit interval, Lijt denotes the services

purchased from worker i by Þrm j, and σ > 1 is the elasticity of substitution

                                                14
among diﬀerent labor types. The minimum cost of a unit of Lt is given by


                                        ·Z       1                ¸ 1−σ
                                                                     1
                                                           1−σ
                             Wt =                    Wit         di           (A.3)
                                             0



which can be taken to be the aggregate nominal wage. The j th Þrm’s maximizes

expected proÞts in every period. ProÞts are given by


                                         Z       1
                      Πjt = Pjt Yjt −                Wijt Lijt di − Rt Kjt    (A.4)
                                             0




where Rt is the return to capital, and proÞts are expressed in terms of the domestic

currency (henceforth called peso), subject to the production function in A.1 and

the demand for its good


                                                 ·        ¸−θ
                                          Pjt
                                 Yjtd   =                        Ytd          (A.5)
                                          Pt

where Ytd must be understood to include demand from domestic consumers and

investors and foreign consumers. Cost minimization yields the demand for worker

i0 s labor:
                                             µ             ¶−σ
                                          Wit
                                Lijt    =                         Ljt         (A.6)
                                          Wt




                                                     15
where
                                           R1
                                               0   Wijt Lijt di
                                   Ljt =                                           (A.7)
                                                     Wt

   Cost minimization also requires


                                     Rt Kt    α
                                           =                                       (A.8)
                                     Wt Lt   1−α


   Finally, Þrms will set prices for its diﬀerentiated product as a constant markup

over marginal cost. In the symmetric monopolistic competitive equilibrium, prices

are set such that
                               ½           ¾                Ã          !
                                   Wt Lt                 θ−1
                        Et−1                   = (1 − α)                           (A.9)
                                   Pt Yt                  θ


A.2. Workers


There is a continuum of workers, whose total “number” is normalized to one. The

representative worker has preferences over consumption, labor supply, and real

money balances in each period t given by


                               µ           ¶                      Ã        !1−ε
                             σ−1 1 υ     1                            Mt
                    log Ct −       Lt +                                           (A.10)
                              σ  υ      1−ε                           Qt




                                                   16
where υ > 1 and ε > 0. The consumption quantity Ct is an aggregate of home

and imported goods:
                                            ³      ´γ ³            ´1−γ
                               Ct = κ CtH                    CtF                (A.11)


where CtH denotes purchases of a basket of the diﬀerent varieties of goods produced

domestically, CtF purchases of the imported good, and κ = [γ γ (1 − γ)1−γ ]−1 is an

irrelevant constant. Assume that domestically produced goods are aggregated

through a C.E.S. function represented by


                                   ·Z   1                    ¸ θ−1
                                                                θ
                                                  θ−1
                         CtH   =            Cjt    θ    dj           , θ > 1,   (A.12)
                                    0



   Assume also that the imported good has a Þxed price, normalized to one, in

terms of a foreign currency, which we shall refer to as the dollar. Also, we assume

that imports are freely traded and that the Law of One Price holds, so that the

peso price of imports is equal to the nominal exchange rate of St pesos per dollar.

   Assume also that the only asset that workers can hold is money. Then, in

every period t, the ith workers’ choices are constrained by



               Qt Cit = Pt CitH + St CitF = Wit Lit + Tt − Mit + Mit−1          (A.13)




                                                  17
where Pt is the peso price of one unit of the basket of domestically produced

goods, given by


                                     ·Z    1                    ¸ 1−θ
                                                                   1
                                                     1−θ
                              Pt =             Pjt         dj           ,   (A.14)
                                       0




and Qt is the minimum cost of one unit of aggregate consumption, or CPI index:



                                     Qt = Ptγ St1−γ                         (A.15)


   Fiscal policy is as simple as can be: inßation tax revenues are rebated to

workers through lump sum transfers. Then,



                                  Mt − Mt−1 = Tt                            (A.16)

             R1
where Mt =   0    Mit di. This assumption ensures that, in the symmetric equilib-

rium, workers consume their nominal income:



                                     Qt Ct = Wt Lt                          (A.17)


   Now, purchasing consumption at minimum cost requires




                                               18
                            Ã           !
                                1−γ         CtH   St
                                              F
                                                =    ≡ Et                   (A.18)
                                 γ          Ct    Pt

where absence of the subscript i indicates that we have imposed symmetry in

equilibrium. Additionally, we have deÞned Et as the price of foreign goods in

terms of domestic goods, or the real exchange rate.

   Each worker will optimally supply labor to equate his marginal disutility of

labor to its marginal return. Our assumptions on preferences then ensure that


                                             υ
                                        t−1 Lt    =1                        (A.19)



in equilibrium.

   Now adopt the convention that no subscript indicates an initial period variable,

while a subscript 1 indicates a Þnal period variable. Money demands in periods 0

and 1 are given by


                            Ã       !−ε
                                M                1 Q     1
                                          +β           =                    (A.20)
                                Q                C1 Q1   C


                                    Ã        !−ε
                                        M1             1
                                                   =                        (A.21)
                                        Q1             C1


                                             19
A.3. Entrepreneurs


Entrepreneurs borrow from abroad in order to Þnance investment. They do it us-

ing dollar denominated debt contracts which, due to imperfections in the Þnancial

markets, require paying a risk premium over the risk free interest rate. Assume

that entrepreneurs start with some inhered debt repayments, due at the end of the

period, equal to D in dollars. They also they own a quantity K of capital which

is used to produce the home good in period 0. After debt repayments, these en-

trepreneurs borrow from the world capital market in order to Þnance investment

in excess of their own net worth.

   Investment becomes capital next period and is produced by combining home

goods and imports. For simplicity, we assume that capital is produced in the same

fashion as in A.11. Therefore, the cost of producing one unit of capital available

in period 1 is Q. The entrepreneurs’ budget constraint in period 0 is



                                P N + SD1 = QI                             (A.22)



where N represents net worth, D1 denotes the amount borrowed abroad in period

0 and I = K1 investment in period 1 capital.

   Net worth plays a crucial role because the interest cost of borrowing abroad is


                                       20
not simply the world safe rate ρ. Entrepreneurs borrow abroad paying a premium,

η, above this risk free interest rate. We assume that the risk premium is an

increasing function in the ratio of the value of investment to net worth as in

Bernanke and Gertler (1989). In particular, we assume the following functional

form for this relation


                                        µ     ¶µ
                                      QI
                                1+η =                                      (A.23)
                                      PN

   We assume that capital depreciates completely in production. In equilibrium,

the expected yield on capital in dollars must equal the cost of foreign borrowing


                                                µ    ¶
                           R1                   S1
                              = (1 + ρ) (1 + η)                            (A.24)
                           Q                    S




   Given that entrepreneurs own local Þrms, the income that they receive is

not only the payment to capital. They also receive the proÞts associated to the

monopolistic power that each Þrm has. Entrepreneurs’ net worth is



                    P N = RK + Π − SD = P Y − W L − SD                     (A.25)




                                       21
where Π reßects proÞts from the Þrms in pesos.


A.4. Equilibrium


Market clearing for the home goods require that domestic output be equal to

demand. In period 0, the market for home goods will clear when


                                         µ    ¶
                                             Q
                                 Y =γ          (I + C) + EX                                (A.26)
                                             P


Notice the term EX stands for the home good value of exports to the rest of the

world, where X is exogenous.10

       Given that period 1 is the Þnal period, there is no investment on it. Assuming

that entrepreneurs consume only foreign goods, the market clearing condition for

the second period is



                                  P1 Y1 = γQ1 C1 + E1 P1 X1                                (A.27)


       This last equation can be simpliÞed further, since workers consume all their

income each period:

  10
     This is similar to Krugman (1999), and can be justiÞed by positing that the foreign elasticity
of substitution across goods in consumption is one, and that the share of domestic goods in
foreigners’ expenditure is negligible. This last fact allows us to treat X as exogenous.



                                                  22
                                   Y1 = τ E1 X1                             (A.28)

             h            ³        ´i−1
where τ = 1 − γ (1 − α) 1 − θ−1           > 1.


A.5. Linearization


The next step consists in obtaining log-linear approximations around the equilib-

rium with no shocks. Start by noticing that A.15 implies



                      qt − pt = (1 − γ) (st − pt ) = (1 − γ) et             (A.29)


in both periods. Next derive equilibrium relations in period 1. The Þrst relation

is the log-linear version of equation A.17



                                 q1 + c1 = w1 + l1                          (A.30)


Equation A.9 shows that wage income in period 1 is a fraction of the total revenue.

Therefore,



                                 p1 + y1 = w1 + l1                          (A.31)




                                          23
Combining these last three equations we obtain that



                       c1 = y1 − (q1 − p1 ) = y1 − (1 − γ) e1              (A.32)


Assuming no export shocks in period 1, the log-linear version of the market clear-

ing condition for period 1 is



                                      y1 = e1                              (A.33)


Using these two equations together we obtain c1 = γe1 . Now, since under no

shocks labor supply is Þxed at one (recall the Þrst order condition for labor sup-

ply), we have y1 = αi. Combining this with A.33 we have



                                      αi = e1                              (A.34)



Pulling together these results we arrive at



                                     c1 = γαi                              (A.35)



   We can now solve the model in the initial period. The log-linear version of the

resource constraint in period 0 is

                                        24
                   τ y + (1 − τ ) (q + c) = λ (q + i) + (1 − λ) (e + x)         (A.36)


               Q̄I
where λ =   Q̄I+Ē X̄
                        < 1 and where, without loss of generality, we have set p = 0.

   Given that capital is a pre-determined variable in period 0, deviations of output

from its no-shock equilibrium will be matched by changes in labor only:



                                        y = (1 − α)l                            (A.37)


Log-linearizing equation A.17 we have



                                         q + c = l,                             (A.38)



since the nominal wage is pre-set. Combining these last two equations we have

that



                                                   y
                                       q+c=                                     (A.39)
                                                  1−α

Replacing this last relation and A.29 into A.36 and reordering we obtain the IS

curve




                                             25
                   h       ³         ´i−1
             y = τ 1 − γ 1 − θ−1            [λi + (1 − γλ) e + (1 − λ) x] ,   (A.40)


which is equation 2.1 in the text.

   Now focus on the money market. Log-linearize money demand in each period,

given by equations A.20 and A.21, which yields



                                 ε (m1 − q1 ) = c1                            (A.41)




                       εω (m − q) + (1 − ω) (c1 + q1 − q) = c                 (A.42)


where ω = 1 − β Q̄Q1C̄C̄1 . Note that ω is between 0 and 1 as long as the growth of

nominal consumption is not too negative, which we assume from now on. Notice

that ε−1 can be interpreted as the elasticity of money demand with respect to con-

sumption expenditures. Using A.35 and A.39 to substitute out the consumptions,

and rearranging, we have the LM schedule:



                   y      ³       ´           ³        ´
         m=              − ε−1 − 1 (1 − γ) e − ω −1 − 1 ε−1 αi                (A.43)
              εω (1 − α)

which is equation 2.2 in the text.


                                            26
   The Þnal block of equations to be solved is the one associated with the entre-

preneurs. The log-linear version of the arbitrage relation (equation A.24) is



                              (r1 − p1 ) − q = ρ + η + e1 − s                  (A.44)


while the log-linear version of A.8 is r1 − p1 = −i (1 − α). Using this, A.29 and

A.34 we have

                                   i = − (ρ + η) + γe                          (A.45)


which is 2.3 in the text. The log-linear version of the equation for the risk premium

(A.23) is



                                    η = µ (q + i − n)                          (A.46)


which, using A.29, is 2.4 in the text. The log-linear version of net worth equation

(A.25) is


                          h              ³        ´i−1
                  n = θ −1 1 − (1 − α) 1 − θ−1           (1 + ψ) y − ψe        (A.47)


            ED
where ψ =   N
                 > 0. This is 2.5 in the text. Note that when ψ is large, initial debt

is also large relative to net worth.


                                             27
References

[1] Bernanke, B. and M. Gertler, “Agency costs, Net worth, and Business Fluc-

   tuations,” American Economic Review 79, 1989, pp. 14-31.


[2] Céspedes, L., R. Chang and A. Velasco, “Balance Sheets and Exchange Rate

   Policy,” NBER Working Paper No. , 2001.


[3] Céspedes, L., R. Chang and A. Velasco, “Dollarization of Liabilities, Net

   Worth Eﬀects and Optimal Monetary Policy.” Forthcoming in Preventing

   Crises in Emerging Markets, J. Frankel and S. Edwards (eds.), University

   of Chicago Press, 2002.


[4] Krugman, P. “Balance Sheets, the Transfer Problem and Financial Crises,” in

   International Finance and Financial Crises, P. Isard, A. Razin and A. Rose

   (eds.), Kluwer Academic Publishers, 1999.


[5] Taylor, L. “IS/LM in the Tropics: Diagrammatics of the New Structuralist

   Macro Critique.” In W. Cline and S. Weintraub (eds.) Economic Stabilization

   in Developing Countries. Washington DC: The Brookings Institution, 1981.




                                      28
    Figure 1 : fall in exports



           i               IS’
                                 IS



                                      BP


A
                                      y
Figure 2: increase in the world interest rate



                 i
                                   IS



                                          BP
                                          BP’


                                         y
             A
  Figure 3: devaluation in
financially robust economy


        i
                             IS
                                  IS’
                             A          BP’
                                        BP



                                        y
    Figure 4: devaluation in
financially vulnerable economy


           i
                             IS
                                  IS’
                                        BP

                                    BP’
                                     BP’’
                     A
                                             y
               B
                                   BP’’’

       C
