                                     NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




         ECONOMIC INSECURITY AND THE GLOBALIZATION OF PRODUCTION

                                               Kenneth Scheve
                                              Matthew J. Slaughter

                                              Working Paper 9339
                                      http://www.nber.org/papers/w9339


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       November 2002




For financial support we thank the National Science Foundation, the Yale Center for the Study of Globalization, the
Carnegie Corporation’s Globalization and Self-Determination Project at the Yale Center for International and Area
Studies, the Leitner Program in International Political Economy, and the Institution for Social and Policy Studies. For
very helpful data assistance we thank Simon Harrington at the U.K. Office of National Statistics and Ralf Martin. For
helpful comments and discussion we thank Chris Anderson, Samuel Bowles, Rafaela Dancygier, Esther Duflo,
Jonathan Haskel, Hyeok Kwon, Lisa Martin, Fredrik Sjoholm, Mike Tomz, Michael Wallerstein, and seminar
participants at Binghamton University, the Santa Fe Institute, the University of Michigan and the University of
Nottingham. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

© 2002 by Kenneth Scheve and Matthew J. Slaughter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
Economic Insecurity and the Globalization of Production
Kenneth Scheve and Matthew J. Slaughter
NBER Working Paper No. 9339
November 2002
JEL No. F2, J3
                                          ABSTRACT


           A common claim in debates about globalization is that economic integration increases worker
insecurity. Although this idea is central to both political and academic debates about international
economic integration, the theoretical basis of the claim is often not clear. There is also no empirical

research that has directly tested the relationship. In this paper, we argue that economic insecurity among
workers may be related to riskier employment and/or wage outcomes, and that foreign direct investment

may be a key factor contributing to this increased risk by making labor demands more elastic. We present
new empirical evidence, based on the analysis of panel data from Great Britain collected from 1991-1999,
that FDI activity in the industries in which individuals work is positively correlated with individual
perceptions of economic insecurity. This relationship holds in yearly cross-sections, in a panel accounting

for individual-specific effects, and in a dynamic panel model also accounting for individual-specific
effects.



Kenneth Scheve                                          Matthew J. Slaughter
Department of Political Science                         Tuck School of Business
Yale Unviersity                                         Dartmouth College
Box 208269                                              100 Tuck Hall
New Haven, CT 06520-8269                                Hanover, NH 03755
kenneth.scheve@yale.edu                                 and NBER
                                                        matthew.slaughter@dartmouth.edu
                                                                                                                             1


1. Introduction

     Across the world, there appears to be significant opposition to policies aimed at further

liberalization of international trade, immigration, and foreign direct investment (FDI). A large

number of political events in recent years suggest a marked turn away from liberalization, and

many prominent observers have raised alarms about this “globalization backlash.”1

     There is a growing body of research examining what political-economy forces underlie this

backlash. In Scheve and Slaughter (2001 a, b), we documented a strong cleavage between labor-

market skills and U.S. public preferences over trade and immigration policy.                                       Less-skilled

individuals, measured by educational attainment or wages earned, are much more likely to

oppose freer trade and immigration than their more-skilled counterparts. This finding is

consistent with the distributive consequences of liberalization predicted by the factor endowment

model. We also found that many other possible cleavages, surprisingly, do not materialize.

Across both trade and immigration preferences, no other cleavage is as consistently important as

the skills divide. Subsequent research has documented this division in preferences about

international economic liberalization across a wide number of countries, where the magnitude of

the cleavage across countries varies in predictable ways according to national endowments and

labor-market institutions (O’Rourke and Sinnott 2001; Mayda and Rodrik 2001; Hayes, Ehrlich,

and Peinhardt 2002; Dancygier 2002; Mayda 2002; Gabel 1998a, b; Scheve 2000). Thus, the

distributive consequences in the labor market for individuals with varying endowments of human

capital seem to be one factor contributing to the backlash against globalization.

1
  Examples of political events include public protests at virtually every meeting of international economic institutions beginning
with the 1999 WTO meetings in Seattle. In August, 2000, Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan acknowledged that
liberalization efforts have stalled out, with outbreaks of protectionism a distinct possibility: “’Despite extraordinary prosperity,
the ability to move forward on various trade initiatives has clearly come to a remarkable stall … there remains considerable
unease among some segments [of society] about the way markets distribute wealth and about the effects of raw competition on
society … it is quite imaginable that support for market-oriented resource allocation will wane and the latent forces of
                                                                                                                 2


    These distributive arguments, however, largely focus on the relationship between

international economic integration and the level and distribution of wages. Another body of

research has focused on whether globalization has increased individual economic insecurity. This

line of research recognizes that risk-averse workers are concerned not only about the level but

also the volatility of their earnings—in particular, volatility from the risk of unemployment.

    Economic insecurity may contribute to the globalization backlash in at least two ways. First,

there is the potential for a direct effect, very similar to that documented for the skill divide in

opinion formation about international economic policies. Individuals that perceive globalization

contributing to their own economic insecurity are much more likely to develop policy attitudes

hostile towards economic integration. Second, a number of scholars have argued that increases in

economic insecurity from globalization may generate demands for more generous social

insurance that compensates workers for a riskier environment (e.g. Rodrik 1997; Garrett 1998;

Burgoon 2001; Hayes, Ehrlich, and Peinhardt 2002; Boix 2002). However, many scholars have

also suggested that globalization limits the capacities of governments to provide such

compensation (e.g. Rodrik 1997; Desai 1999; Besley, Griffith, and Klemm 2001). Thus,

individuals may develop concerns about globalization because they believe it reduces the

insurance provided by the state for all labor market risks, including those heightened by global

integration.

    The claim that international economic integration increases economic insecurity and thus

contributes to political conflict over globalization is, however, highly contested. Rodrik (1997)

presents evidence that exposure to external risk, measured by the interaction between trade

openness and the standard deviation of a country’s terms of trade, is positively correlated with


protectionism and state intervention will begin to reassert themselves in many countries, including the United States.’”
(Stevenson 2000).
                                                                                             3


both growth volatility and government expenditures.           From this Rodrik concludes that

globalization increases economic insecurity and thus demands for a robust welfare state.

   Iversen and Cusack (2000) argue that it is not sufficient to show that international-price

volatility is correlated with growth volatility and government spending. Rather, they claim it is

necessary either that price volatility in international markets be greater than in domestic markets

or that trade concentrates more than it diversifies economic risks. Iversen and Cusack then

present evidence that, at least for advanced economies, there is no correlation between trade- or

capital-market openness and volatility in output, earnings, or employment.         They therefore

dismiss both the argument that globalization increases economic insecurity and the claim that

this connection leads to demands for welfare-state growth. Similar differences in methodology

and conclusions to those between Rodrik and Iversen and Cusack are found in many of the

contributors to this debate (e.g. Garrett 1998a, b; Burgoon 2001; Garrett and Mitchell 2001;

Hayes, Ehrlich, and Peinhardt 2002; Swank 2002; McLaren and Newman 2002; Cameron and

Kim 2001).

   While this line of research has investigated reasonable hypotheses about how globalization

may increase economic insecurity and thus demands for a robust welfare state, we have two

broad concerns about this approach. The first is theoretical. It is actually not necessary for

globalization to increase the magnitude of price and/or technology shocks for integration to

increase individual economic insecurity in terms of riskier employment and/or wage outcomes.

Thus, a lack of correlation between volatility in terms-of-trade and volatility in employment,

wages, and output does not necessarily imply that globalization has not contributed to increased

economic insecurity. In this paper, we present a simple model of a competitive labor market that
                                                                                                                                4


clarifies this point by illustrating the key mechanism—labor-demand elasticities—through which

we believe globalization may increase economic insecurity.

     Our second concern is methodological. The theoretical connection between globalization

and economic insecurity is an individual-level phenomenon, as is the subsequent connection to

increased demands for a robust welfare state. All the empirical work we know of, however,

employs aggregate country-level data to indirectly test this individual-level phenomenon. We

know of no individual-level empirical study of whether exposure to the world economy increases

worker insecurity.2 Thus, a theoretically informed individual-level test of the prediction that

globalization generates insecurity is lacking both in the political-economy literature on the forces

underlying the backlash against globalization and in the literature on the connection between

globalization and the welfare state.

     In this paper, we present a theoretical model clarifying a critical mechanism through which

globalization can increase individual economic insecurity. Drawing on standard frameworks of

labor economics, we argue that FDI by multinational enterprises (MNEs) may be an important

factor generating worker insecurity. FDI by MNEs may increase firms’ elasticity of demand for

labor. More-elastic labor demands, in turn, raise the volatility of wages and employment, all of

which tends to make workers feel more insecure. It is important to note that this link from

higher labor-demand elasticities to greater labor-market volatility does not require any change in

aggregate shocks to the labor market: it holds even for some fixed amount of aggregate volatility.

     Our emphasis on FDI as the key mechanism by which globalization generates economic

insecurity is rare in the literature. The relative lack of attention on FDI is unfortunate because in


2
   This does not imply that the aggregate-level analyses and methodological debates are without merit. We only show that an
increase in price volatility is not essential in order to argue that globalization increases worker insecurity. Nevertheless, it is not
clear that there is a enough information in the aggregate data to make conclusive inferences about the correlations of interest.
See, for example, Hayes, Ehrlich, and Peinhardt’s (2002) demonstration of the sensitivity of estimates to changes in model
specification to deal with selection problems in the aggregate analyses.
                                                                                                                        5


recent decades, cross-border flows of FDI have grown at much faster rates than have flows of

goods and services or people.3 Moreover, it is the multinationalization of production which a

number of scholars have pointed to as the distinguishing feature of the current phase of

globalization compared to previous episodes (Bordo, Eichengreen, and Irwin 1999). Finally, the

lack of focus on FDI is surprising because, as we demonstrate, there are strong theoretical

reasons to believe that, through its effect on labor-demand elasticities, it substantially influences

economic insecurity among workers by increasing employment and earnings risks.

    This theoretical framework then motivates our empirical test of the relationship between the

multinationalization of production and the economic insecurity of workers. We present new

evidence, based on the analysis of panel data from Great Britain collected from 1991-1999, that

FDI activity in the industries in which individuals work is positively correlated with individual

perceptions of economic insecurity. This relationship holds in yearly cross-sections, in a panel

accounting for individual-specific effects, and in a dynamic panel model also accounting for

individual-specific effects. Consequently, it is not only true that individuals more exposed to

FDI activity are more likely to report greater insecurity. It is also the case that changes in

exposure for a single individual, controlling for previous levels of insecurity, are correlated with

changes in worker insecurity. We regard the individual-level panel results as the first valid

evidence consistent with a causal relationship between globalization and worker insecurity.

    There are four remaining sections to the paper. The next section provides a theoretical

framework for the economics of worker insecurity. Section 3 describes the data to be used in the

study and the econometric models to be estimated. Section 4 reports the empirical results and

the final section concludes.

3
  UNCTAD (2001) reports that from 1986 through 2000, worldwide cross-border outflows of FDI rose at an annualized rate of
26.2%, versus a rate of just 15.4% for worldwide exports of goods and services. In the second half of the 1990s this difference
                                                                                             6




2. Theoretical Framework for Worker Insecurity, Labor-Demand Elasticities, and FDI

2.1 Defining Worker Insecurity

    Although there are a number of alternative definitions of economic insecurity, most often it is

understood to be an individual’s perception of the risk of economic misfortune (Dominitz and

Manski 1997). Consequently, researchers have focused on the risk of events such as the loss of

health insurance, being a victim of a burglary, losing a job, and significant decreases in wages.

Some analysts have distinguished between perceptions of the risk of such events and the actual

anxiety and stress caused by the risk (Anderson and Pontusson 2001, Gardner and Oswald 2001,

Mughan and Lacy 2002).

    For our research this distinction is very important because, as will be discussed below, our

key measure of economic insecurity addresses most directly the anxiety/stress dimension.

Consistent with many researchers in this area, we will assume that perceptions of risk do

generate anxiety, and thus that our stress/anxiety measure is linked to the perceptions of

economic misfortune. There are likely individual characteristics and environmental factors that

influence this link (OECD 1997, Anderson and Pontusson 2001, Mughan and Lacy 2002), and

one important task for our empirical analysis will be to address this.

    It is likely that most people’s perceptions of economic insecurity depend heavily on their

purchasing power, which in turn depends on both their asset ownership and their labor-market

status—both employment and income earned therefrom. In reality, the large majority of people

rely much more on labor income than capital income for purchases; accordingly, we think labor-

market status is the main determinant of perceptions of economic insecurity.



widened to 37.0% versus just 1.9%.
                                                                                                                             7


     In light of this labor-market focus, we conjecture that the economic misfortunes underlying

people’s economic insecurity stem mainly from more-volatile employment and/or wage

interactions with their employers. That is, risk-averse workers are not indifferent between

employment options that yield the same amount of expected earnings but with differing degrees

of certainty. More-certain earnings outcomes—due to more-certain wage and/or employment

realizations—are preferred to less-certain ones, and insecurity rises with this uncertainty.4

2.2 Worker Insecurity in Labor-Market Equilibrium

     Figure 1 visualizes equilibrium in a standard competitive labor market. The vertical axis

plots wages, and the horizontal axis employment (measured in people or, if issues like overtime

are thought to be important, hours).5

     The labor-supply curve, LS, is aggregated across individuals, and is typically assumed to be

upward sloping. At each point along the supply schedule, the elasticity of labor supply, ηS, is

defined as the percentage change in the quantity of labor supplied by workers in response to a

one-percent increase in the price of labor. An increase in wages is typically thought to generate

both a substitution effect and an income effect among persons who work. Higher wages raise the

opportunity cost of choosing leisure rather than work, and thus induce people to substitute

towards more work. But higher wages also raise total income from the initial amount of work,

and thus induce people to work less and choose more leisure. The substitution effect typically




4
  It is important to note that there is now a large body of evidence that labor-market volatility has been rising in many countries,
especially in the 1990s, in terms of greater earnings volatility, declining job tenure, and self reports. Gottschalk and Moffitt
(1994) report substantial increases in year-to-year earnings volatility for the United States over the 1970s and 1980s. Looking at
the 1990s as well, a symposium issue of the Journal of Labor Economics (1999) documented declines in U.S job stability,
especially in the 1990s for large groups of workers such as those with more tenure. Within that symposium issue, Schmidt’s
(1999) analysis of individual surveys finds that U.S. workers in the 1990s were more pessimistic about losing their jobs than they
were during the 1980s. A wide range of surveys have found evidence of rising U.S. job insecurity over the 1990s relative to
earlier decades, despite the ongoing economic expansion (e.g., Bronfenbrenner 2000).
5
  For a formal derivation of key labor-market concepts such as elasticities, see Hamermesh (1993). For discussion of labor-
demand elasticities in general equilibrium trade models, see Reddy (2000).
                                                                                             8


dominates, and thus higher wages induce more work. Aggregated across workers, LS thus

slopes up.

    The labor-demand curve, LD, is aggregated across firms, and is typically assumed to be

downward sloping. At each point along the demand schedule, the elasticity of labor demand,

ηD, is defined as the percentage decline (in absolute value) in the quantity of labor demanded by

that firm in response to a one-percent increase in the price of labor. This elasticity consists of

two parts. One is the substitution effect. It tells, for a given level of output, how much the firm

substitutes away from labor towards other factors of production when wages rise. The second is

the scale effect. It tells how much labor demand changes after a wage change thanks to the

change in the firm's output. Higher wages imply higher costs and thus, moving along the

product-market demand schedule, lower firm output. When wages rise, both the substitution and

scale effects reduce the quantity of labor demanded. The firm substitutes away from labor

towards other factors, and with higher costs the firm produces less such that it demands less of

all factors, including labor.

    Labor-market equilibrium prevails at the intersection of LD and LS at point E, where the

quantity of labor supplied equals the quantity of labor demanded. At that point, suppose that ηS

and ηD are the relevant elasticities. We introduce volatility into the labor market by assuming

that the position of the LD schedule is stochastic. This accords with a wide range of empirical

evidence that labor-market volatility stems mainly from movements in LD rather than LS.

    To see what forces drive volatility in LD, note that the labor demand schedule for each firm

traces out the marginal revenue product of its workers as the wage rate varies. Each profit-

maximizing firm hires workers until the wage paid to the last worker hired just equals the value

of output—i.e., revenue—generated by that last worker. Vary the wage facing the firm, and the
                                                                                                                  9


optimal number of workers to hire by this maximization rule varies. For each firm, the product

prices and technology it faces are two key determinants of marginal revenue products.

     Aggregated across all firms, then, the position of the LD schedule depends crucially on all

relevant product prices and production technologies. Movements in prices and technologies

                                                                                                          ∧
trigger movements in LD and thus in equilibrium wages and/or employment. Define mrp as the

percentage shift in the LD schedule due to shocks to prices and/or technologies. It is then

straightforward to show that the resulting percentage change in equilibrium wages and

                                         ∧            ∧                  η Dη S    ∧                      ∧
                                               ηD                       ∧
employment are respectively given by     w= S         mrp       and   e= S         mrp .   Treating mrp as a
                                            η +η D                      η +η D    
                                                                                  

                                                                                                     2
                                                                                   ∧  ηD                 ∧
random variable and the elasticities as parameters, then                     Var ( w) =  S         Var (mrp )       and
                                                                                         η +η D   
                                                                                                  

                         2
     ∧  η Dη S               ∧
Var ( e ) =  S         Var (mrp) .
             η +η D   
                      


    For workers, the critical issue to note in the above expressions is that volatility in labor-

market outcomes depends not just on the volatility of LD shifters such as product prices and

production technology. It also depends on the magnitudes of the elasticities of labor supply and

demand. If elasticities are assumed to be fixed, then greater labor-market volatility arises if and

only if there is greater aggregate volatility in prices or technology. But this is not the only way

to generate greater labor-market volatility. It can also be generated from increasing the elasticity

of demand for labor, holding fixed the amount of aggregate risk. For some given values of

        ∧                                                     ∧                 ∧
Var (mrp) and ηS, as ηD rises so too does Var ( w) and Var (e) .                         Higher labor-demand

elasticities trigger more-volatile labor-market responses to price or technology shocks to labor

demand.
                                                                                              10


   This can be envisioned graphically by comparing the consequences for wages and

employment of equal shifts in the labor demand curves LD and LD′ in Figure 1. In this figure, an

increase in labor demand elasticity—perhaps induced by globalization as will be discussed

below—would appear as a flattening of the labor demand schedule around the point E. LD′ is

one such labor demand schedule. For an equal shift in LD and LD′ from a shock to prices and/or

technology, there is a greater adjustment in wages and employment along the LD′ schedule

characterized by more elastic demand.

   For risk-averse workers, all this means that more-elastic labor demands should tend to raise

economic insecurity. In the introduction, we highlighted the ongoing question about whether

globalization increases aggregate risk—shocks to prices and/or technologies.            Our simple

framework here clarifies that for issues of worker insecurity, the answer need not be “yes.” But

in that case, the important question to ask becomes whether globalization makes labor demands

more elastic.

2.3 How FDI by MNEs Can Make Labor Demands More Elastic: Theory and Evidence

   Standard models in international trade predict that greater FDI by MNEs should make labor

demands more elastic through both the scale and substitution effects.            This should boost

insecurity via the greater labor-market volatility just described. Consider each effect in turn.

   Many models predict that FDI and its related international trade make product markets more

competitive. Through the scale effect, this should make labor demands more elastic. For

example, liberalization of FDI policies can force domestic firms to face heightened foreign

competition. Or developments abroad related to MNEs (e.g., capital accumulation via FDI) can

be communicated to domestic producers as more-intense foreign competition. In these cases

more competitive product markets mean that a given increase in wages and thus costs translate
                                                                                                                       11


into larger declines in output and thus demand for all factors. Different models predict different

magnitudes of FDI and/or trade’s impact on product-market demand.6

    The second way through which FDI can increase labor-demand elasticities is through the

substitution effect. Suppose that a firm is vertically integrated with a number of production

stages. Stages can move abroad either within firms as multinationals establish foreign affiliates

(e.g., Helpman 1984) or arm's length by importing the output of those stages from other firms

(e.g., Feenstra and Hanson 1997). Globalization of production thus gives firms access to foreign

factors of production as well as domestic ones, either directly through foreign affiliates or

indirectly through intermediate inputs. This expands the set of factors firms can substitute

towards in response to higher domestic wages beyond just domestic non-labor factors to include

foreign factors as well. Thus, greater FDI raises labor-demand elasticities.

    In the literature on globalization and labor markets, there are several recent studies indicating

that MNEs and FDI influence labor-demand elasticities in the ways just discussed. Using

industry-level data for U.S. manufacturing, Slaughter (2001) estimates that demand for

production labor became more elastic from 1960 to the early 1990s, and that these increases were

correlated with FDI outflows by U.S.-headquartered MNEs. Using plant-level data for all U.K.

manufacturing from 1973 to 1992, Fabbri, Haskel, and Slaughter (2002) estimate that both U.K.-

multinational plants and foreign-owned plants as well each had larger increases than did U.K.

domestic plants in the elasticity of demand for production labor.                              They also estimate that

increases were driven largely by greater substitutability between production labor and materials.



6
  One example is a monopolistically-competitive industry producing for Dixit-Stiglitz consumers who value product variety (e.g.,
Helpman and Krugman, 1985). Here the representative firm is usually assumed to face a demand elasticity (greater than one) that
equals the elasticity of substitution (EOS) among product varieties in consumers' utility function. But the actual demand
                                                                                      (1-EOS)
elasticity is only approximately equal to the EOS. It equals EOS plus a second term,     N    , where N is the number of firms
in the industry. As N rises—thanks, for example, to FDI by foreign MNEs— so, too, does this elasticity.
                                                                                          12


   One important margin on which MNEs may affect elasticities is on the extensive margin of

plant shutdowns. In response to wage increases, MNEs may be more likely than domestic firms

to respond by closing entire plants. Evidence that multinational plants are more likely to close

than are domestically owned plants has now been documented for the manufacturing sectors in at

least three countries. For the United Kingdom, Fabbri, et al (2002) estimate that multinational

plants—again, both U.K.- and foreign-owned—are more likely to shut down than domestic

plants are (conditional on a set of operational advantages enjoyed by multinationals that make

them less likely to shut down, like being older and larger). Gorg and Strobl (2002) find that

foreign-owned plants in Irish manufacturing are more likely to exit. And for the United States,

Bernard and Jensen (2002) report higher death probabilities for plants owned by firms that hold

at least 10% of their assets outside the United States.

2.4 Summary of Theory Framework

   To summarize, standard economic models of labor markets suggest that the globalization of

production via MNEs may increase labor-demand elasticities. This, in turn, will tend to make

labor-market outcomes more volatile and thus workers more insecure. This analysis suggests an

empirical test of whether individual self-assessments of economic insecurity are related to FDI

exposure in the labor market. The remainder of this paper turns to this empirical test.

   Before doing that, we want to note one other important aspect of MNEs and labor markets.

Several studies—of both developed and developing countries—have documented that

establishments owned by MNEs pay higher wages than do domestically owned establishments.

This is true even controlling for a wide range of observable worker and/or plant characteristics

such as industry, region, and overall size. The magnitudes involved are big. Doms and Jensen

(1998) document that for U.S. manufacturing plants in 1987, worker multinational wages
                                                                                                                  13


exceeded domestically owned wages by a range of 5 to 15 percent, with larger differentials being

enjoyed by production workers rather than non-production workers.7

    What accounts for this “multinational wage premium” remains unknown, largely because this

cross-sectional evidence is consistent with several alternative explanations, about which very

little is currently known. The premium could be accounted for by higher worker productivity

due to superior technology and/or capital at multinationals; or by higher worker productivity due

to unobservable worker qualities; or by multinationals being more profitable and therefore able

to share more rents with workers. Our framework in this section suggests another possibility:

that MNEs pay more to compensate workers for the greater labor-market volatility associated

with MNEs—e.g., for the greater risk of plant shut-downs. If workers for MNEs face a greater

risk of job separation because MNEs have more elastic labor demands than purely domestic

firms do, then to compensate they may receive higher wages.

    Regardless of the cause(s) of the multinational wage premium, its existence is very important

for considering how the globalization of production affects economic insecurity. All else equal,

this premium is very likely to make multinational employees feel more economically secure.

Our focus on elasticities and labor-market volatility highlights MNE influences on different

dimensions of the overall worker-firm relationship. These contrasting issues of labor-demand

elasticities and wage premia suggest that the net impact of MNEs on worker insecurity is ex ante

unclear. Whether the wage premiums are sufficient to compensate workers for increases in risks

from higher elasticities is an empirical question.




7
 Production workers receive an average of 6.9 percent less at comparable domestic plants employing more than 500 employees
and 15.2 percent less at comparable domestic plants employing fewer than 500 employees. Non-production workers receive an
average of 5.0 percent less at comparable domestic plants employing more than 500 employees and 9.5 percent less at
comparable domestic plants employing fewer than 500 employees. For additional U.S. evidence see Howenstine and Zeile
                                                                                                                  14


3. Data Description and Empirical Specification

3.1 Data Description

    The objective of our empirical work is to examine the impact of international capital mobility

on economic insecurity. Specifically, we evaluate how individual self-assessments of economic

insecurity correlate with the presence of highly mobile capital in the form of FDI in the

industries in which individuals work. Our data cover Great Britain, which we think is an

excellent case to examine both because inward and outward FDI have long figured prominently

in the overall U.K. economy and because of the high quality of data available.

    The individual data are from the British Household Panel Survey (BHPS) (2001). This study

is a nationally-representative sample of more than 5,000 U.K. households and over 9,000

individuals surveyed annually from 1991 to 1999.8 It records detailed information about each

respondent’s perceptions of economic insecurity, employment, wages, and many other

characteristics. The most important pieces of survey information required for the analysis in this

section is a measure of economic insecurity, identification of the respondents’ industry of

employment, and repeated measurement of the same individual over time.

    We measure economic insecurity by responses to the following question asked in each of the

nine years of the panel.

         “I’m going to read out a list of various aspects of jobs, and after each one I’d like
         you to tell me from this card which number best describes how satisfied or
         dissatisfied you are with that particular aspect of your own present job—job
         security.”

The ordered responses are on a seven-point scale ranging from “not satisfied at all” to

“completely satisfied.” As discussed in the previous section, economic insecurity is most often



(1994). Griffith (1999) presents similar evidence for the United Kingdom; Globerman, et al (1994) for Canada; Aitken et al
(1996) for Mexico and Venezuela; and Te Velde and Morrissey (2001) for five African countries.
8
  The BHPS is ongoing but our data are through 1999 only.
                                                                                                                  15


in the literature understood either to be an individual’s perception of the risk of economic

misfortune and/or to be the anxiety or stress caused by the risk. We interpret our BHPS question

as measuring the latter concept, as it has individuals report on their (dis)satisfaction with job

security rather than on job security per se.                 We follow previous studies in assuming that

perceptions of economic insecurity generate anxiety or lack of satisfaction, and thus that our

BHPS question correlates with individual economic insecurity—albeit mediated by individual

characteristics and environmental factors.

    Using our BHPS question, we constructed the variable Insecurity by coding responses in the

reverse order from the original question with a range from 1 for individuals who give the

response “completely satisfied” to a 7 for those individuals giving the response “not satisfied at

all.” Higher values of Insecurity thus indicate less satisfaction with job security.

    Our theoretical framework hypothesizes that high FDI activity in industries may generate

economic insecurity among workers in those industries by increasing labor-demand elasticities.

To test this hypothesis, we constructed the variable FDI to measure FDI exposure. We obtained

data about inward and outward FDI investment positions in all 2-digit 1992 Standard Industry

Classification (SIC92) industries for the U.K. from 1991 to 1999.9 Since the BHPS records the

industry the respondent is employed in according to the 1980 Standard Industry Classification

(SIC80), we concorded the FDI data to 2-digit SIC80 industries.10 We then merged the industry-

level FDI data with the BHPS survey.

    The variable FDI is a dichotomous industry-level variable that we set equal to one if two

conditions were met: if the industry had any positive FDI investment, inward or outward, and if


9
   This data was obtained directly from the Office of National Statistics. We thank Simon Harrington for his assistance in
generating this data.
10
   The BHPS records industry of employment according to the SIC80 classification scheme in all years but does report this
information according to the SIC92 system in two years.
                                                                                                                              16


the industry’s activities do not require producers and consumers to be in the same geographic

location. If either of these conditions were not met, we coded FDI equal to zero.

     Our logic in defining FDI with these two conditions runs as follows. The first condition for

an individual’s industry of employment to have positive FDI investment is straightforward. Any

inward or outward FDI activity satisfies this.11 The second condition recognizes that FDI

activity is less likely to alter labor-demand elasticities if business activities cannot be outsourced

across countries because the consumer and producer must be in the same geographic location.

Consider the examples of wholesale trade, retail trade, and personal services (e.g., haircuts). The

large majority of business activities in these industries require the co-location of producers and

consumers: customers interacting with sales clerks, or sitting in the barber’s chair. The notions

of economic insecurity related to FDI that we discussed in Section 2 focus on the ability of

MNEs to shift business activities across countries (i.e., on the substitution effect). In reality, in

many industries, FDI does not have this characteristic; indeed, this FDI arises precisely because

foreign customers cannot be served at a distance via international trade. Accordingly, our FDI

variable identifies not all industries with FDI, but instead only those industries with FDI in which

business activities can be outsourced across countries. So for industries such as wholesale trade,

retail trade, and personal services we coded FDI as zero regardless of the data on actual FDI.

     It is important to recognize the level of aggregation for the FDI regressor. The 2-digit SIC80

level we use is dictated by the FDI data available from the U.K. Office of National Statistics.

Theoretically, we could imagine a more specific FDI exposure regressor that indicated FDI

activity at the level of the respondent’s company, rather than at the more-aggregated industry


11
  It is theoretically ambiguous if, in addition to the existence of FDI activity, the actual amount matters. Moreover, it is not clear,
given that both inward and outward FDI must be measured, how to normalize the amount of activity across sectors. Thus, for
both theoretical and empirical considerations, we employ a dichotomous measure. We discuss alternative measures of FDI
exposure in Section 4.
                                                                                                                           17


level.12 Our specification implicitly mixes the FDI activity of firms within each industry, and

thereby assumes that within each industry the individual perceives any threat from FDI equally

regardless of whether s/he works for a firm with foreign investment activity. This assumption

seems reasonable. We are simply assuming that the labor-demand schedule faced by workers is

set in the industry of employment rather than the firm or, for that matter, the entire economy.13

     Given that our dependent variable measures the anxiety generated by economic insecurity,

rather than that economic insecurity per se, it is critical that we control for differences among

individuals in the link between the risk of economic misfortune and the stress caused by such

risk.    Previous research has suggested that there is systematic variation in perceptions of

economic insecurity across demographic groups.

     For our baseline cross-sectional analysis, we constructed four standard controls. The variable

Income is equal to annual household income in thousands of U.K. pounds.14 Education is a

categorical variable ranging from one to four, with higher values indicating increasing

educational attainment.15 The variable Gender is equal to one for female respondents and zero

for males. Finally, the variable Age equals the respondent’s age in years at the time of survey.

     Each of these control variables is likely to account for some of the differences among

individuals in perceptions of economic insecurity in general, and in the link between the risk of

job misfortune and the resulting anxiety generated in particular. However, it must be

acknowledged that other unmeasured or unobservable differences among individuals may matter.

12
   Of course, this is only a theoretical possibility. Even if we had firm-level FDI data, it would not be usable because the BHPS
does not report the respondent’s firm.
13
   Our focus on industries as the relevant aggregate for labor market effects is also consistent with many empirical findings in the
labor-economics literature. For example, a common finding in studies of profit-sharing is that wage-bargaining keys off of
industry profits above and beyond firm considerations. Of course, over longer time horizons than we consider in this paper,
workers should be assumed to be facing an economy-wide labor demand curve.
14
   Annual household income is a variable calculated by the BHPS to include income from all sources in the twelve months prior
to the September of the survey year as virtually all of the fieldwork for each survey year is done from September to December.
The BHPS does impute some data in constructing this variable.
                                                                                                                    18


For example, individuals almost surely vary in their degree of risk aversion.                                In addition,

individuals probably vary in their interpretation of the BHPS question. One individual may think

about job security in compensated terms and assess satisfaction with job security conditional on

their wages and any perceived compensating wage differential. Another individual in otherwise

similar circumstances may respond without conditioning in this manner.

     Unmeasured or unobservable individual heterogeneity is, of course, a problem that faces all

survey research but it seems particularly acute in this analysis where our key variable to be

explained is answers to a question that permits variation in interpretation. To address this

heterogeneity, above and beyond our demographic controls we will exploit the panel structure of

our data by including individual-specific effects for each respondent.

     For each year of our panel, Table 1 reports summary statistics of our measure of economic

insecurity and explanatory variables. The summary statistics and the analyses reported below are

based on the BHPS sub-sample of private sector, full-time workers who are not self-employed.

It is for this group of workers that our theoretical framework most directly applies; at the end of

Section 4, we discuss the robustness of the results for larger samples. The average score on the

insecurity scale is just below 3 in most years, suggesting that the average respondent was fairly

satisfied with his or her job security.

     FDI, our key explanatory variable, averages slightly over half in most years—i.e., slightly

over half of respondents worked in FDI-exposed industries in most years.                                 Industries that

satisfied the two conditions for an FDI-exposed sector include metal manufacturing, mechanical

engineering, and banking and finance. Among FDI-exposed industries in 1991, the sector with

the most respondents was mechanical engineering. The industries meeting the two conditions for


15
   For example, category one indicates no qualifications or still in school and no qualifications, and category four includes
teaching qualifications, first degree, or higher degree.
                                                                                                                              19


being FDI-exposed vary across each of the nine years of the panel, with sectors such as

instrument engineering and business services being added to the list.16

3.2 Econometric Models

     By matching each BHPS observation with the relevant industry FDI information, we

examine how self-assessments of economic insecurity relate to FDI activity. Our starting point

is to examine cross-sectional variation in economic insecurity for each year of the panel. This

cross-section analysis can be formalized as follows,

                                        Insecurityi = α + βFDIi + γZ i + ε i (1)

where the subscript i indexes individuals; Insecurityi is our measure of economic insecurity;

FDIi is our measure of FDI presence; the vector Zi is our set of control regressors discussed

above; α, β, and γ are parameters to be estimated; and εi is an additive error term. We treat our

measure of individual economic insecurity as a normally distributed random variable, and

estimate the parameters in the equation using ordinary least squares regression with

heteroskedastic consistent standard errors.17



16
   The two-digit 1980 SIC industries designated as FDI-exposed sectors vary for each of the nine years of our data. To get a sense
of the variation over time, we list in this footnote the FDI sectors with BHPS respondents for the first and last years of our data.
In 1991, the FDI-exposed sectors are agriculture & horticulture; coal extraction & manufacture of solid fuels; extraction of
mineral oil & natural gas; metal manufacturing; chemical industry; production of man-made fibers; manufacture of metal goods
not elsewhere specified; mechanical engineering; electrical & electronic engineering; manufacture of motor vehicles & parts
thereof; manufacture of other transport equipment; food, drink & tobacco manufacturing industries; textile industry; manufacture
of paper & paper products, printing and publishing; processing of rubber & plastics; postal service & telecommunications;
banking & finance; insurance, except for compulsory social security. In 1999, the FDI-exposed sectors are agriculture &
horticulture; extraction of mineral oil & natural gas; mineral oil processing; nuclear fuel production; production & distribution of
electricity, gas, & other forms of energy; water supply industry; metal manufacturing; extraction of minerals not elsewhere
specified; manufacture of non-metallic mineral products; chemical industry; manufacture of metal goods not elsewhere specified;
mechanical engineering; manufacture of office machinery & data processing equipment; electrical & electronic engineering;
manufacture of motor vehicles & parts thereof; manufacture of other transport equipment; instrument engineering; food, drink &
tobacco manufacturing industries; textile industry; manufacture of leather & leather goods; footwear & clothing industries;
timber & wooden furniture industries; manufacture of paper & paper products, printing and publishing; processing of rubber &
plastics; other manufacturing industries; postal service & telecommunications; banking & finance; insurance, except for
compulsory social security; business services; renting of movables; owning & dealing in real estate; education; research &
development.
17
   All the cross-sectional results reported below are robust to alternative specifications in which Insecurity is treated as an ordinal
categorical variable and ordered probits are estimated.
                                                                                              20


   The coefficient estimates of β indicate whether and to what extent individual perceptions of

economic insecurity are correlated with FDI activity. Exposure to FDI activity is increasing in

the variable FDI, and we expect this may be positively correlated with the dependent variable

Insecurity. This is the central hypothesis of our empirical work. Thus, our null hypothesis is that

β = 0, with the alternative β > 0.

   Estimating the effect of FDI on insecurity using period-by-period cross-sectional regressions

is, however, inefficient because it fails to take advantage of all the information available in panel

data sets (Wawro 2002, Yoon 2000). Pooling the data across the years of the panel has obvious

advantages but generates a number of estimation issues regarding individual heterogeneity.

Since the same respondents are surveyed over time, it is likely that observations for the same

individual will be more similar than observations across different individuals. This might be in

part because there is persistence in an individual’s perceptions of economic insecurity, or

because there are unmodeled characteristics about the individual that cause them to have similar

perceptions in each period. This is particularly pertinent to our analysis because, as discussed

above, there are good reasons to think that there are unobserved factors that may affect

perceptions of economic insecurity. We can model this heterogeneity by revising the cross-

sectional equation for the pooled data,

                            Insecurityit = α i + βFDI it + γZ it + ε it (2)

where the variables and parameters are the same as in Equation 1 but now each observation is

indexed by i and t, for individuals and years. Further, α is allowed to vary across individuals to

model unmeasured or unobserved heterogeneity across respondents, and Z now includes

dichotomous indicator variables for each year of the survey.
                                                                                            21


   Equation 2 can be estimated via random- or fixed-effects estimators. The random-effects

estimator generates consistent parameter estimates if the individual effects are uncorrelated with

the explanatory variables. The fixed-effects estimator is also consistent under this assumption,

but is less efficient. Under the alternative hypothesis that the individual effects are correlated

with the explanatory variables, only the fixed-effects estimator is consistent. We use both

methods to estimate Equation 2, and report diagnostics to evaluate the estimators.

   Although modeling individual-specific effects is one way of accounting for persistence in

panel data, it does not allow us to differentiate between the idea that persistence in observations

of insecurity are accounted for by the influence of past experiences of insecurity on present

perceptions and the alternative that some types of individuals just have unobserved

characteristics that lead them to have certain types of perceptions (Green and Yoon 2002, Wawro

2002). To make this assessment and to verify the robustness of our estimates of β, it is necessary

to add a lag of the dependent variable to Equation 2. The final model we estimate is

                  Insecurityit = ρIn sec urityit −1 + α i + βFDI it + γZ it + ε it (3)

where ρ is the coefficient on the lag of the dependent variable.

   This specification is a dynamic panel model. Introducing a lag of the dependent variable to

the equation generates correlation between the individual-specific effects and the lag of the

dependent variable. Consequently, this equation clearly cannot be estimated using random

effects. Moreover, when the number of periods is small, as in our data, the fixed-effects

estimator is also biased and inconsistent in the presence of a lagged dependent variable. Wawro

(2002) reviews a number of alternative estimators for this situation, some of which first-

difference Equation 3 to deal with individual-specific effects and then use instrumental variables

to address the correlation between the error term and lagged dependent variable generated by the
                                                                                             22


initial transformation of Equation 3. We use the Arellano-Bond generalized method-of-moments

estimator, and report diagnostics to evaluate the assumptions required for its valid application.

4. Empirical Results

4.1 Baseline Specifications

   Table 2 reports the results of our cross-sectional analysis. These results are ordinary least

squares coefficient estimates for the parameters in Equation 1, with heteroskedastic consistent

standard errors. The key finding is that FDI activity is positively correlated with individual

economic insecurity.    Holding other factors constant, individuals employed in FDI sectors

systematically report less satisfaction with their job security. The coefficient estimate for the

variable FDI ranges between 0.274 (with a standard error of 0.070) in 1994 to 0.397 (with a

standard error of 0.071) in 1993. In every year, the estimated parameter is significantly different

from zero at at least the 99% level. Although there is some variation across years in the size of

the estimate, in most years it is very close to 0.30 and no trend is evident. Substantively, it

generally has the largest effect of any of the regressors. We regard the cross-sectional estimates

in Table 2 to be strongly consistent with the hypothesis that FDI activity generates economic

insecurity among workers.

   The results in Table 2 for the demographic control variables are also of interest. Older and

more educated respondents are generally less satisfied with their job security than those who are

younger and less educated. The education effect may be related to the “aspiration effect”

documented in previous studies of general job satisfaction: more educated workers are thought

to expect more from all aspects of their jobs, perhaps including job security. The results also

indicate that women are more satisfied with their job security than men. This difference, while

statistically significant in all years, declines in magnitude over time. Finally, the estimates in
                                                                                                                      23


Table 2 indicate an unstable relationship between household income and economic insecurity.

The only statistically significant estimates are negative, consistent with wealthier households

being able to self-insure against the risks of job separation and thus more satisfied with their job

security. This result, however, holds in only half the years in the panel.

    Despite the robustness of the correlation between FDI and our measure of economic

insecurity, there are number of reasons to be concerned about the validity of these inferences.

The period-by-period cross-sectional analysis is inefficient. Further, and more importantly,

unmeasured and perhaps unobservable differences among individuals—such as variation in risk

aversion—are likely correlated with both perceptions of economic insecurity and the propensity

to be employed in a FDI exposed sector—correlations which would bias cross-sectional

parameter estimates. These issues were discussed in detail in Section 3.

    To address these concerns, we pooled the panel data sets and explicitly modeled individual-

specific effects as in Equation 2. Table 3 reports the results of the random-effects and fixed-

effects estimators of this equation.18 For both estimators, the main substantive finding is, as in

Table 2, a continued positive correlation between FDI and the dependent variable Insecurity.

The magnitude of the estimated effect is over twice as large in the random effects specification.

Both specifications include a full set of year indicator variables; the coefficients of which

indicate whether mean levels of insecurity deviated in each year from the base year 1991. The

parameter estimates are negative for every year except 1992, and turn significantly negative in

both specifications after 1995. This indicates lower average levels of insecurity in later years. It




18
   In results not reported, we included the demographic control variables Gender, Education, Age, and Income in the random
effects specification and Education, Age, and Income in the fixed effects model (Gender is time invariant so cannot be included
in the fixed effects model). All the results for the FDI parameter are robust to retaining these variables. They were dropped
because the parameters for these regressors are all not significantly different from zero in our preferred specification in the
dynamic panel reported below.
                                                                                              24


is broadly consistent with the pattern of U.K. macroeconomic performance over the 1990s:

initial recession followed by increasingly strong economic growth.

   Although the main substantive story is the same across the two specifications in Table 3, it is

still necessary to determine our relative confidence in the two estimators. We employed the

Hausman specification test: if the random-effects assumption that the individual-specific effects

are uncorrelated with the explanatory variables is true, then coefficient estimates from the two

models should not be statistically different. The test statistic is χ2 distributed with degrees of

freedom equal to the number of coefficients (9 in our application) and is equal to 54.03. This

rejects the null hypothesis that the coefficients do not differ statistically, and suggests violation

of the key random-effects assumption. Consequently, the fixed-effects specification is preferred.

   It is important to contrast the sources of variation in Tables 2 and 3 that are generating our

main finding of a positive correlation between FDI presence and economic insecurity. The

cross-section estimates of Table 2 exploit variation across individuals in their industry of

employment and economic insecurity at a single point in time. In contrast, the panel estimates of

Table 3 identify off of changes in FDI exposure over time. Individuals for whom there is no

change in the FDI activity in their industry and who also do not change their industry of

employment have their FDI-presence measure fully absorbed by their individual fixed effects.

Variation across these individuals was used in Table 2 but is not in Table 3.               Instead,

identification in Table 3 comes from changes over time in individuals’ self-assessments of

economic insecurity that occur either with changes over time in FDI activity in individuals’

industry of employment and/or with changes over time in individuals’ industry of employment.

   Table 4 reports the results of Equation 3, our application of the Arellano-Bond estimator that

adds a lag of the dependent variable to our econometric model of economic insecurity. This
                                                                                                25


addition is substantively of interest because it allows us to differentiate two ideas: the idea that

persistence in observations of insecurity for any given respondent are accounted for by the

influence of past experiences of insecurity on present perceptions, and the alternative that some

types of individuals just have unobserved characteristics that lead them to have certain types of

perceptions. Recall that the Arellano-Bond estimator purges individual-specific effects by first-

differencing the data. It then uses instrumental variables to address the correlation between the

error term and lagged dependent variable generated by the first-differencing.

   In comparing the results in Table 4 with those in earlier tables, it is important to note that the

number of individuals and total observations has significantly declined. First differencing and

the use of lagged instruments results in the loss of the 1991 and 1992 data altogether. It also

means that individuals must be retained in the panel for three years to be included in the analysis.

   The estimate for the coefficient on the lagged dependent variable, ρ, is equal to 0.198 with a

standard error of 0.021. This suggests that past shocks to individual perceptions of economic

insecurity do affect current perceptions though the magnitude of this effect is not large. In this

sample, persistence in individual economic insecurity depends both on individual-specific

characteristics that make some individuals more likely to have particular perceptions and also on

the effect of past perceptions of insecurity on those in the present.

   The estimate of the coefficient β is 0.110 with a standard error of 0.049. To interpret, the

long-run effect of FDI exposure on economic insecurity, it is necessary to divide this estimate by

1-ρ (i.e. 1-0.198). Consequently, the estimated impact of FDI exposure on economic insecurity is

0.137. The magnitude of this estimate is approximately the same as for the pooled fixed-effects

estimator reported in Table 3, and it is statistically significant at the 0.05 level. We regard this to

be a quite rigorous test of our central hypothesis. A significant correlation between exposure to
                                                                                                                    26


FDI and perceptions of economic insecurity remains conditional on our controls for individual

heterogeneity, for the persistence of perceptions of economic insecurity, and for year-to-year

shocks in insecurity.

     To assess the validity of the results reported in Table 4, we conducted three diagnostic tests

recommended by Arellano and Bond (1991). These results are reported in Table 5.19 The

consistency of their estimator requires that the errors, εit, in Equation 3 are serially uncorrelated.

Arellano and Bond point out that if this is the case, then the first differenced residuals should

display negative first-order serial correlation but not second-order serial correlation. Table 5

reports that we can reject the null hypothesis of no first-order serial correlation but cannot reject

the null of no second-order serial correlation. Arellano and Bond also develop a Sargan test that

helps further assess whether the assumptions about serial correlation hold. The null hypothesis

of this test is that the model’s overidentifying restrictions are valid; rejection of the null suggests

the need to respecify the model (see Arellano and Bond, 1991, and Wawro, 2002). Table 5

reports that we do not have evidence to reject the null hypothesis that the overidentifying

restrictions are valid.        Overall, the three diagnostic tests reported in Table 5 do not raise

significant concerns about the basic assumptions required for valid implementation of the

Arellano-Bond estimation results reported in Table 4.

4.2 Robustness Checks

     To verify our main findings in Tables 2 through 5, we conducted a number of robustness

checks. One important issue is the possibility of estimation bias due to endogeneity and/or

measurement error. On endogeneity, it might be argued that individual FDI exposure is not

strictly exogenous because individuals may choose their industry of employment based (at least


19
   Following Arellano and Bond (1991), we report coefficient estimates based on their one-step estimator with robust standard
errors and diagnostics based on their two-step estimator.
                                                                                            27


partly) on their perceptions of economic insecurity. Less-secure risk-averse workers might

choose not to work in FDI-exposed sectors, while risk-loving workers might choose the opposite.

On measurement error, it might be argued that our key FDI regressor is an imperfect measure of

the underlying economic concept of interest, the labor-market riskiness linked to multinationals.

   The endogeneity of worker industry choice is certainly a possibility. That said, in the panel a

substantial proportion of changes over time in individual FDI exposure arise from changes in

industry FDI status, which are clearly exogenous relative to individual perceptions, rather than

from changes in individual industry of employment. Moreover, to the extent that people do

switch industries endogenously, this should bias the coefficient on FDI exposure in the negative

direction—away from the hypothesized positive effect. These considerations mean that our

results reported in Tables 2 through 5 may underestimate the effect of FDI exposure on

perceptions of economic insecurity.

   Nonetheless, both to relax the strict exogeneity assumption and to address measurement

concerns, we used the panel structure of the data by allowing previous errors—i.e., unforecasted

realizations of Insecurity—to influence future changes in FDI. The model estimated is the same

dynamic panel reported in Table 4, but now our FDI regressor is instrumented for using its

lagged levels and changes in the same way that the Arellano-Bond estimator uses instruments for

the lagged dependent variable. This approach accounts for potential endogeneity, and it also

generates consistent estimates on FDI in the presence of random measurement error.

   The results of this analysis are reported in the first column of Table 6. As expected, the

coefficient estimate on FDI is substantially larger than before: the implied long-run effect is

now 0.34, well over twice as large as the estimate in Table 4. Although the standard error is also

now relatively larger, the coefficient estimate is still significant at the 0.15 level. One method
                                                                                                                       28


for evaluating whether relaxing the strict exogeneity assumption is warranted is comparing the p-

value of Sargan test in the two specifications. Since the p-values are essentially identical, there

is little evidence that the specification in Table 6 is preferred. Based on our results in this table

and our related discussions, we conclude that endogeneity and measurement error are not serious

problems for the key result that FDI exposure influences perceptions of economic insecurity.20

     Another important issue we considered was specification choice and potential omitted-

variable bias. For example, all the empirical evidence in Section 2.3 on how multinationals

influence labor-demand elasticities involves the manufacturing sector only. That suggests that

the FDI regressor might actually be capturing something about manufacturing, not FDI. To test

for this possibility we constructed and included in regressions the dichotomous variable

Manufacturing, equal to one if an individual worked in a manufacturing industry and zero

otherwise.21 In both cross-section and pooled analyses, our FDI estimates were not substantially

affected by including this variable (which usually had a positive and significant coefficient only

in the cross sections). The second column of Table 6 reports one such pooled estimate.

     A second specification check we tried was to add to the regressions reported in Tables 3, 4,

and 6 our various demographic controls from Table 2. These had no effect on our key FDI

regressor, and in our preferred dynamic panel specification, none of the estimated coefficients

for the demographic variables are significantly different from zero. One final check we mention

is sensitivity to estimation sample. Our core results are for a sample of private-sector, full-time,

not-self-employed workers—the labor market participants for which the theoretical framework




20
   For measurement error, we also investigated whether small changes in the industry-by-industry coding of the FDI variable had
any effect on its coefficient estimates. For example, we re-estimated all tables when agriculture and mining industries were not
included as possible FDI-exposed industries. All changes we investigated had minimal impact on our core results.
21
   The one-digit SIC industries that constitute manufacturing are manufacture of metals, mineral products, and chemicals; metal
goods, engineering, and vehicle industries; and other manufacturing industries.
                                                                                            29


most directly applies. In estimates of key specifications using broader BHPS samples, our FDI-

insecurity correlation of interest maintained.

5. Conclusions

   A central question in political and academic debates about international economic integration

is whether globalization increases economic insecurity. In this paper, we present a theoretical

framework clarifying a critical mechanism through which globalization can increase individual

economic insecurity. Drawing on standard frameworks of labor economics, we argue that FDI

by multinational enterprises (MNEs) may be an important factor generating worker insecurity.

FDI by MNEs may increase firms’ elasticity of demand for labor. More-elastic labor demands,

in turn, raise the volatility of wages and employment, all of which tends to make workers feel

more insecure. It is important to note that this link from higher labor-demand elasticities to

greater labor-market volatility does not require any change in aggregate shocks to the labor

market: it holds even for some fixed amount of aggregate volatility.

   We then provide the first empirical test at the individual level of the relationship between the

multinationalization of production and the economic insecurity of workers. Our analysis of

panel data from Great Britain over the 1990s finds that FDI activity in the industries in which

individuals work is positively correlated with individual perceptions of economic insecurity.

This relationship holds in yearly cross-sections, in a panel accounting for individual-specific

effects, and in a dynamic panel model also accounting for individual-specific effects.

Consequently, it is not only true that individuals more exposed to FDI activity are more likely to

report greater insecurity but also the case that changes in exposure for a single individual,

controlling for previous levels of insecurity, are correlated with changes in worker insecurity.
                                                                                          30


We regard the individual-level panel results as the first valid evidence consistent with a causal

relationship between globalization and worker insecurity.
                                                                                        31


                                         References

Aitken, Brian, Ann Harrison, and Robert E. Lipsey. 1996. “Wages and Foreign Ownership: A
Comparative Study of Mexico, Venezuela, and the United States.” Journal of International
Economics, Vol. 40 (3-4), May, pp. 345-371.

Anderson, Christopher, and Jonas Pontusson. 2001. “Welfare States and Employment Insecurity:
A Cross-National Analysis of 15 OECD Countries.” Paper presented at the 2001 Annual
Meetings of the American Political Science Association.

Arellano, Manuel, and Stephen Bond. 1991. “Some Tests of Specification for Panel Data: Monte
Carlo Evidence and an Application to Employment Equations.” Review of Economic Studies
58:277-297.

Bernard, Andrew B., and J. Bradford Jensen. 2002. “The Death of Manufacturing Plants.”
Working Paper.

Besley, Tim, Rachel Griffith, and Alexander Klemm. 2001. “Empirical evidence on fiscal
interdependence in OECD countries.” LSE Working Paper.

Boix, Carles. 2002. “Globalization and the Egalitarian Backlash: Protectionism Versus
Compensatory Free Trade.” Paper prepared for the workshop on “Globalization and Egalitarian
Redistribution,” Santa Fe Institute.

Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, and Douglas Irwin. 1999. “Is Globalization Today Really
Different from Globalization a Hundred Years Ago?” NBER Working Paper 7195.

Bronfenbrenner, Kate. 2000. “Uneasy Terrain: The Impact of Capital Mobility on Workers,
Wages, and Union Organizing.” Working Paper, September.

Burgoon, Brian. 2001. “Globalization and Welfare Compensation: Disentangling the Ties that
Bind.” International Organization Vol. 55 No. 3 (Summer):509-551.

Cameron, David. 1978. “The Expansion of the Public Economy: A Comparative Analysis.”
American Political Science Review 72:1243-61.

Cameron, David, and Soo Yeon Kim. 2001. “Trade, Political Institutions, and the Size of
Government.” Yale University Working Paper.

Dancygier, Rafaela. 2002. “Individual Trade Preferences and the Welfare State.” Yale University
Working Paper.

Desai, Mihir. 1999. “Are We Racing to the Bottom? Evidence on the Dynamics of International
Tax Competition.” In Proceedings of the 91st Annual Conference on Taxation, 176-187.
Washington D.C.: National Tax Association.
                                                                                      32


Dominitz, Jeff, and Charles F. Manski. 1997. “Perceptions of Economic Insecurity.” Public
Opinion Quarterly Volume 61:261-287.

Doms, Mark E., and J. Bradford Jensen. 1998. “Comparing Wages, Skills, and Productivity
Between Domestically and Foreign-Owned Manufacturing Establishments in the United States.”
In Robert Baldwin, Robert Lipsey, and J. David Richardson (eds.), Geography and Ownership as
Bases for Economic Accounting. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 235-255.

Fabbri, Francesca, Jonathan E. Haskel, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2002. “Do Multinational
Firms Have More-Elastic Labor Demands?” Working Paper.

Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson. 1997. "Foreign Direct Investment and Relative
Wages: Evidence from Mexico's Maquiladoras." Journal of International Economics (42)3-
4:371-393.

Gabel, Matthew. 1998a. Interests and Integration: Market Liberalization, Public Opinion, and
European Union. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.

Gabel, Matthew. 1998b. “Economic Integration and Mass Politics: Market Liberalization and
Public Attitudes in the European Union.” American Journal of Political Science 42 No. 3
(July):936-953.

Gardner, Jonathan, and Andrew J. Oswald. 2001. “What Has Been Happening to the Quality of
Workers’ Lives in Britain?” Working Paper.

Garrett, Geoffrey. 1998a. Partisan Politics in the Global Economy. Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.

Garrett, Geoffrey. 1998b. “Global Markets and National Politics.” International Organization
Vol. 52 No. 4 (Autumn):787-824.

Garrett, Geoffrey, and Deborah Mitchell. 2001. “Globalization, Government Spending, and
Taxation in the OECD.” European Journal of Political Research 39:145-177.

Globerman, Steven, John Ries, and Ilan Vertinsky. 1994. "The Economic Performance of
Foreign Affiliates in Canada." Canadian Journal of Economics XXVII (1):143-156.

Gorg, Holger, and Eric Strobl. 2002. “Footloose Multinationals?” Manchester School,
forthcoming.

Gottschalk, Peter, and Robert Moffitt. 1994. “The Growth of Earnings Instability in the U.S.
Labor Market.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 2. Washington, D.C.: Brookings
Institution, pp. 217-254.
                                                                                             33


Green, Donald P., and David H. Yoon. 2002. “Reconciling Individual and Aggregate Evidence
Concerning Partisan Stability: Applying Time-Series Models to Panel Survey Data.” Political
Analysis Vol. 10 No. 1 (Winter):1-24.

Griffith, Rachel. 1999. “Using the ARD Establishment Level Data to Look at Foreign Ownership
and Productivity in the U.K..” Economic Journal, 109, June, pp. F416-F442.

Hamermesh, Daniel S. 1993. Labor Demand. Princeton: Princeton University Press.

Hayes, Jude, Sean Ehrlich, and Clint Peinhardt. 2002. “Globalization, the Size of Government,
and Labor Market Institutions: Maintaining Support for Openness among Workers.” Paper
presented at the 2002 Annual Meeting of the Midwest Political Science Association.

Helpman, Elhanan. 1984. "A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational
Corporations." Journal of Political Economy Vol. 92 (3):451-471.

Helpman, Elhanan and Paul Krugman. 1989. Trade Policy and Market Structure. Cambridge,
MA: MIT Press.

Howenstine, Ned G., and William J. Zeile. 1994. “Characteristics of Foreign-owned U.S.
Manufacturing Establishments.” Survey of Current Business, Vol. 74 (1), January, pp. 34-59.

Iversen, Torben, and Thomas Cusack. 2000. “The Causes of Welfare State Expansion.” World
Politics 52 (April):313-49.

Journal of Labor Economics. 1999. Symposium Issue on “Changes in Job Stability and Job
Security.” October, Volume 17, Number 4, Part 2.

Katzenstein, Peter. 1985. Small States in World Markets. Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Mayda, Anna Marie. 2002. “Who is Against Immigration?” Harvard University Working Paper.

Mayda, Anna Marie, and Dani Rodrik. 2002. “Why Are Some People (and Countries) More
Protectionist Than Others?” Harvard University Working Paper.

McLaren, John, and Andrew Newman. 2002. "Globalization and Insecurity." Mimeograph,
July.

Mughan, Anthony, and Dean Lacy. 2002. “Economic Performance, Job Insecurity, and Electoral
Choice.” British Journal of Political Science Vol. 32:513-533.

OECD. 1997. Employment Outlook. Paris: Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development.
                                                                                      34


O’Rourke, Kevin, and Richard Sinnott. 2001. “The Determinants of Individual Trade Policy
Preferences: International Survey Evidence.” Brookings Trade Forum: 2001. Washington, D.C.:
Brookings.

Reddy, Sanjay. 2000. “Essays on International Integration and National Regulation.” Harvard
University Ph.D. Dissertation.

Rodrik, Dani. 1997. Has Globalization Gone Too Far?       Washington, D.C.:    Institute For
International Economics.

Scheve, Kenneth F. 2000. "Comparative Context and Public Preferences over Regional
Economic Integration." Paper presented at the 2000 Annual Meeting of the American Political
Science Association.

Scheve, Kenneth F., and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2001a. "What Determines Individual Trade-
Policy Preferences." Journal of International Economics 54 (2):267-292.

Scheve, Kenneth F., and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2001b. "Labor-Market Competition and
Individual Preferences Over Immigration Policy." Review of Economics and Statistics 83:133-
145.

Schmidt, Stefanie R. 1999. “Long-Run Trends in Workers’ Beliefs about Their Own Job
Security: Evidence from the General Social Survey.” Journal of Labor Economics 17 (4):S127-
S141.

Slaughter, Matthew J. 2001. “International Trade and Labor-Demand Elasticities.” Journal of
International Economics 54 (1):27-56.

Stevenson, Richard W. 2000. “Trade Support Is Dwindling, Fed Chief Says.” The New York
Times, August 26.

Swank, Duane. 2002. Global Capital, Political Institutions, and Policy Change in Developed
Welfare States. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Te Velde, D.W., and O . Morrissey. 2001. “Foreign Ownership and Wages: Evidence from Five
African Countries.” CREDIT Discussion Paper.

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development.       2001. World Investment Report:
Promoting Linkages. New York: United Nations.

Wawro, Gregory. 2002. “Estimating Dynamic Panel Data Models in Political Science.” Political
Analysis Vol. 10 No. 1 (Winter):25-48.

Yoon, David. 2000. “Application of Panel Data Analysis to Kramer’s Economic Voting
Problem.” Paper prepared for presentation at the Summer Methods Conference July 2000.
                                       35




Figure 1: Labor Market Equilibrium


W
       LD               LS


                E
                             LD′




                                   L
                                                                                                                                                                   36




                                                          Table 1: Summary Statistics

                                                                                        Year
    Variable               1991           1992           1993            1994           1995            1996           1997            1998           1999

Insecurity                2.978           3.026          2.902          2.917           2.881          2.789           2.682          2.663          2.726
                         (1.982)         (1.747)        (1.663)        (1.701)         (1.642)        (1.563)         (1.532)        (1.465)        (1.579)
FDI                       0.425           0.425          0.612          0.551           0.573          0.625           0.584          0.599          0.582
                         (0.494)         (0.494)        (0.487)        (0.497)         (0.495)        (0.484)         (0.493)        (0.490)        (0.493)
Gender                    0.349           0.353          0.363          0.369           0.352          0.356           0.349          0.352          0.346
                         (0.477)         (0.478)        (0.481)        (0.483)         (0.478)        (0.479)         (0.477)        (0.478)        (0.476)
Education                 2.262           2.325          2.399          2.437           2.468          2.511           2.540          2.558          2.539
                         (0.897)         (0.893)        (0.898)        (0.910)         (0.905)        (0.901)         (0.884)        (0.870)        (0.877)
Age                      35.459          35.563         35.425          35.447         35.644         35.550          35.508         35.809          36.111
                        (12.017)        (11.719)       (11.572)        (11.574)       (11.566)       (11.527)        (11.723)       (11.885)        (11.718)
Income                   23.778          25.278         25.902          26.486         27.804         29.319          29.666         30.572          30.721
                        (13.564)        (14.126)       (13.596)        (14.564)       (15.789)       (16.417)        (17.260)       (20.565)        (22.782)

Observations               2,649          2,385          2,280           2,410          2,377           2,525          2,695           3,060          4,059
Notes: The BHPS sample in each year is private-sector, full-time workers who are not self-employed. Each cell reports the variable mean and, in parentheses, its
standard deviation. Insecurity takes values from 1 to 7, with higher values indicating greater job insecurity. FDI is a dichotomous variable equal to one in
industries with FDI presence as defined in the text. Gender is a dichotomous variable equal to one for females. Education takes values from 1 to 4, with higher
values indicating more education. Age is age in years. Income is household income in thousands of pounds.
                                                                                                                                                                      37




                                    Table 2: Cross-Sectional Analysis of Economic Insecurity


                                                                                         Year
   Regressor             1991            1992            1993            1994            1995            1996            1997            1998            1999

FDI                      0.311           0.322           0.397          0.274           0.315           0.278           0.296           0.371           0.300
                        (0.079)         (0.073)         (0.071)        (0.070)         (0.069)         (0.063)         (0.060)         (0.053)         (0.050)
Gender                   -0.289          -0.334          -0.285         -0.336          -0.164          -0.158          -0.109          -0.176          -0.106
                        (0.081)         (0.074)         (0.071)        (0.070)         (0.071)         (0.064)         (0.063)         (0.054)         (0.052)
Education                0.062           0.113           0.135          0.078           0.189           0.128           0.011           0.047           0.000
                        (0.045)         (0.042)         (0.041)        (0.042)         (0.039)         (0.036)         (0.036)         (0.032)         (0.030)
Age                      0.009           0.007           0.011          0.012           0.011           0.009           0.011           0.011           0.010
                        (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.002)
Income                   -0.001          0.000           -0.005         0.001           -0.005          0.000           -0.003          -0.002          -0.003
                        (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.003)        (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.001)         (0.001)
Constant                 2.519           2.497           2.174          2.230           2.031           2.027           2.232           2.059           2.318
                        (0.186)         (0.175)         (0.168)        (0.165)         (0.160)         (0.152)         (0.150)         (0.135)         (0.127)

S.E.R.                   1.967           1.726           1.636           1.679          1.619           1.548           1.519           1.444           1.566
Observations             2,649           2,385           2,280           2,410          2,377           2,525           2,695           3,060           4,059

Notes: These results are ordinary least squares regression coefficient estimates for each year for equation (1). Each cell reports the coefficient estimate and, in
parentheses, its heteroskedastic-consistent standard error. For variable definitions, see the notes to Table 1.
                                                                                                                      38


               Table 3: Panel Analysis of Economic Insecurity, 1991-1999


                                                                                 Random               Fixed
                            Regressor                                            Effects              Effects

FDI                                                                                0.234               0.105
                                                                                  (0.024)             (0.032)
Year 1992                                                                          0.067               0.099
                                                                                  (0.038)             (0.039)
Year 1993                                                                         -0.092              -0.027
                                                                                  (0.039)             (0.041)
Year 1994                                                                         -0.069              -0.014
                                                                                  (0.038)             (0.041)
Year 1995                                                                         -0.090              -0.020
                                                                                  (0.039)             (0.042)
Year 1996                                                                         -0.196              -0.127
                                                                                  (0.038)             (0.042)
Year 1997                                                                         -0.280              -0.205
                                                                                  (0.038)             (0.041)
Year 1998                                                                         -0.295              -0.203
                                                                                  (0.037)             (0.042)
Year 1999                                                                         -0.243              -0.174
                                                                                  (0.036)             (0.042)
Constant                                                                           2.832               2.855
                                                                                  (0.031)             (0.032)


Observations                                                                      24,636              24,636
Individuals                                                                        7,320               7,320
T                                                                                1≤T≤9               1≤T≤9

Notes: Each cell reports the coefficient estimate and, in parentheses, its standard error for equation (2). For variable
definitions, see the notes to Table 1.
                                                                                   39


             Table 4: Dynamic Panel Analysis
            of Economic Insecurity, 1993-1999


                                                            Arellano-
                  Regressor                                  Bond

∆ Insecurity(t-1)                                             0.198
                                                             (0.021)
∆ FDI                                                         0.110
                                                             (0.049)
∆ Year 1993                                                   -0.091
                                                             (0.041)
∆ Year 1994                                                   -0.043
                                                             (0.042)
∆ Year 1995                                                   -0.002
                                                             (0.041)
∆ Year 1996                                                   -0.088
                                                             (0.039)
∆ Year 1997                                                   -0.171
                                                             (0.036)
∆ Year 1998                                                   -0.093
                                                             (0.033)
Constant                                                      -0.025
                                                             (0.009)


Observations                                                 13,377
Individuals                                                   3,781
T                                                           1≤T≤7
Notes: Each cell reports the coefficient estimate and, in parentheses, its
heteroskedastic-consistent standard error for equation (3). For variable
definitions, see the notes to Table 1. The Arellano-Bond estimator is a first-
difference estimator so the dependent variable is actually the difference
between the Insecurity measure in period t and period t-1.The sample estimated
in this table is two years shorter than in Table 3 because two lags are required
to estimate the model.
                                                                       40




  Table 5: Specification Tests for Dynamic Panel Analysis of Economic
                          Insecurity: 1993-1999

                                    Test                      Results

1st-order serial correlation test:
   Z                                                          -20.43
   Probability value under null of no autocorrelation          0.000

2nd-order serial correlation test:
  Z                                                            1.15
  Probability value under null of no autocorrelation          0.250

Sargan test of over-identifying restrictions:
   χ2(27)                                                     29.45
   Probability value under null that overidentifying          0.339
   restrictions are valid
                                                                                                                    41



                         Table 6: Robustness Checks for Pooled Analyses
                                                                 Arellano-Bond with              Arellano-Bond with
                      Regressor                                  Instruments for FDI             Instruments for FDI


∆ Insecurity(t-1)                                                         0.230                            0.230
                                                                         (0.016)                          (0.016)
∆ FDI                                                                     0.260                            0.289
                                                                         (0.179)                          (0.198)
∆ Manufacturing                                                                                            -0.078
                                                                                                          (0.146)
∆ Year 1993                                                               -0.115                           -0.120
                                                                         (0.051)                          (0.053)
∆ Year 1994                                                               -0.056                           -0.059
                                                                         (0.046)                          (0.046)
∆ Year 1995                                                               -0.015                           -0.016
                                                                         (0.043)                          (0.043)
∆ Year 1996                                                               -0.109                           -0.111
                                                                         (0.043)                          (0.043)
∆ Year 1997                                                               -0.182                           -0.181
                                                                         (0.037)                          (0.037)
∆ Year 1998                                                               -0.100                           -0.100
                                                                         (0.034)                          (0.034)
Constant                                                                  -0.033                           -0.034
                                                                         (0.011)                          (0.011)

Observations                                                             13,377                           13,377
Individuals                                                               3,781                            3,781
T                                                                       1≤T≤7                            1≤T≤7
Notes: Each cell reports the coefficient estimate and, in parentheses, its heteroskedastic consistent standard error for equation
(3) relaxing the assumption that the FDI exposure variable, FDI, is completely exogenous. In these specifications,
unforecasted changes in Insecurity are allowed to affect future changes in FDI exposure. Instrumental variables from lagged
levels and lagged changes in FDI are used in the same way that the Arellano-Bond estimator instruments for the lagged
dependent variable. For variable definitions, see the notes to Table 1.
