NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

CROSS-BORDER TRADING AS A MECHANISM FOR CAPITAL FLIGHT:
ADRs AND THE ARGENTINE CRISIS
Sebastian Auguste
Kathryn M.E. Dominguez
Herman Kamil
Linda L. Tesar
Working Paper 9343
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9343
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
November 2002

We are grateful to Ariel Burstein and Juan Carlos Hallak for planting the seed for this paper last fall. We
would also like to thank seminar participants at the University of Michigan Business School Argentina
Conference, Ben Chabot, Andrew Karolyi, Maria Jose Luna, Augusto Darget, and especially Juan Ignacio
Gomez Vega for helping us track down data and for many helpful conversations and suggestions.The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
© 2002 by Sebastian Auguste, Kathryn M.E. Dominguez, Herman Kamil, and Linda L. Tesar. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.

Cross-Border Trading as a Mechanism for Capital Flight: ADRs and the Argentine Crisis
Sebastian Auguste, Kathryn M.E. Dominguez, Herman Kamil, and Linda L. Tesar
NBER Working Paper No. 9343
November 2002
JEL No. F32, F36, G12, G15
ABSTRACT

This paper examines the surprising performance of the Argentine stock market in the midst of the
country’s most recent financial crisis and the role played by ADRs in Argentine capital flight. Although
Argentine investors were subject to capital controls, they were able to purchase stocks with associated ADRs
for pesos in Argentina, convert them into ADRs, re-sell them in New York for dollars and deposit the dollar
proceeds in U.S. bank accounts. In the paper we show that: (1) ADR discounts went as high as 60% (indicating
that Argentine investors were willing to pay significant amounts in order to legally move their funds abroad),
(2) the market anticipated (correctly) a 40% devaluation, (3) local market factors in Argentina became more
important in pricing peso denominated stocks with associated ADRs, while the same stocks in New York were
mainly priced based on global factors, (4) capital outflow using the ADR market was substantial (our estimate
is between $835 million and $3.4 billion) .

Sebastian Auguste
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109

Kathryn M. E. Dominguez
Ford School of Public Policy
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
kathrynd@umich.edu

Herman Kamil
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109

Linda Tesar
University of Michigan
611 Tappan Street
Lorch Hall
Ann Arbor, MI 48109
and NBER
ltesar@umich.edu

“In the emerging Markets, the star performance came from Argentina. The Merval rose
25.6%. This rise occurred when the country’s fundamentals took a distinct turn for the
worse. Draconian capital controls were introduced to preempt a massive build-up of
capital flight... The reason the market is going up is simply that the stock market is seen
as a way of protecting assets and a means, by ADR conversion, of getting money out of
Argentina.” Investavenue.com, 12-10-01.
“Buenos Aires' normally sleepy stock exchange jumped 25% in the week following
Cavallo's announcement. The short-lived rally was prompted by investors who loaded up
on shares in a handful of Argentine blue chips, then converted them into their
corresponding American depositary receipts, sold them on the New York Stock Exchange
for dollars, and parked the proceeds abroad. Since few U.S. investors want these shares,
Argentines have to sell their ADRs at a loss. But apparently those in search of a safe
haven for their money are willing to pay a price”. Argentines Dust Off Their Survival
Skills: They're using a vast array of tricks to outwit capital controls . Business Week,
December 24, 2001

1. Introduction
This paper examines the surprising performance of the Argentine stock market in the
midst of the country’s most recent financial crisis and the role played by ADRs1 in Argentine
capital flight. Although the exact timing and causes of Argentina’s economic fall from grace are
contentious, there is little disagreement that by the last quarter of 2001 Argentina was on the
brink of a full-scale collapse.2 Between July and November 2001, Argentines withdrew over $15
billion from banks -- on November 30, 2001 alone, banks saw withdrawals of $1.3 billion. On
December 3rd, in a desperate effort to prevent further massive capital outflows, financial market
controls were established (these are known as the “Corralito”), which among other restrictions,
imposed a ceiling of $1,000 a month on bank withdrawals.3 In January the Argentine peso was
1

American Depositary Receipts (ADRs) are shares of non-U.S. (in this case Argentine) corporations sold in the U.S
(and denominated in dollars). Although Depositary Receipts (DRs) can be issued in a number of markets, all of the
cross-listed firms from Argentina issued DRs in the United States; consequently, we will refer to Argentine crosslisted shares as ADRs.
2
Mussa (2002) makes the case that the persistent inability of the Argentine government to run responsible fiscal
policy was the primary cause of the economic collapse. Others point to the deleterious effects of an over-valued
currency on exports (see, for example, Feldstein (2002)) and the sudden stop in foreign capital inflows (Calvo,
Izquierdo, and Talvi (2002)).
3
A literal translation of “Corralito” is little corral. It is also the word for “playpen.”

1

officially devalued, all bank deposits and debts were “pesofied”, and U.S. dollar accounts were
no longer permitted.
In contrast to the experiences of other emerging markets, the crisis appears to have been
“good news” for the Argentine stock market.4 Figure 1 shows the stock market indices
(denominated in dollars) in Argentina, Malaysia, Mexico and Thailand during their respective
financial crises.5 The stock markets in Malaysia, Mexico and Thailand stagnated in the weeks
preceding their currency devaluations, and then sharply declined after devaluation. While the
market in Argentina was also in a slump two months before the devaluation, the Corralito
triggered a 50 percent expansion of the market. One interpretation of the stock market run up in
Argentina is that for some reason investors viewed the likely devaluation of the peso as
beneficial for firms, whereas in other countries such crises are generally harmful.6 The
contention of this paper, however, is that the idiosyncratic reaction of the Argentine stock market
was largely due to the specific restrictions in the Corralito that allowed investors to use their
frozen bank deposits to purchase Argentine stocks, and, in so doing, provided a legal mechanism
for transferring funds abroad via ADRs.7 Based on data on ADR discounts and trading volume
we find that Argentine investors were willing to pay a substantial price to move their deposits out
of Argentina through ADR conversions. At their peak, some ADRs were trading at a discount of

4

It is interesting to note that the Argentine stock market began its upturn when the Corralito was first imposed on
December 3rd, and then rose even higher after President De La Rua and Finance Minister Domingo Cavallo resigned
(December 19 and 20th) when expectations of an impending devaluation intensified. It was not until after the
announcement of the devaluation (on January 7th) that the stock market, measured in US dollars, began its decline.
5
The vertical line on the figure marks the corresponding devaluation date for each country. The flat intervals in the
plot indicate periods when the Argentine market was closed. All returns are measured in U.S. dollars.
6
See, for example, Forbes (2002).
7
It is clear that the Argentine government understood the role ADRs might play in allowing citizens to transfer
funds abroad. However, because ADRs were associated with most of the largest publicly traded Argentine
companies it would have been difficult for the government to disallow ADR transactions (and risk sending the
Argentine stock market into a tail spin). Also, the fact that ADR conversions did not have a direct impact on Central
Bank reserves, a topic we will return to, meant that the government was less concerned about this channel of capital
outflow.

2

in excess of 40 cents on the dollar. A rough estimate is that such transactions resulted in a capital
outflow of roughly $835 million to $3.4 billion between December 1, 2001 and May 31, 2002.
[Figure 1 here]
There is an extensive literature on ADRs and their role in the global integration of
financial markets (see, for example, the survey by Karolyi (1998)). The holder of an ADR has
the right to redeem the receipt for the underlying shares at any point, so that in the absence of
capital market restrictions, and adjusting for the exchange rate, the ADR and the underlying
share are perfect substitutes.8 Cross-listing in the United States allows firms in foreign markets to
enjoy the advantages of greater liquidity, transparency and access to the U.S. capital market.9
From the perspective of U.S. investors, ADRs are a convenient way of obtaining global
diversification.10 In general, the literature suggests that ADRs are efficiently priced – after
correcting for differences in exchange rates and transactions costs, the law of one price does
appear to hold for cross-listed stocks (Kato et al. (1991) and Park and Tavakkol (1994)).
Viewed against this backdrop, Argentina appears to be a unique case in which a country
with a significant number of cross-listed stocks and relatively well-integrated financial markets
subsequently attempted to close its financial borders. The unusual set of circumstances in
Argentina give ADRs a new, and previously unstudied, role as a mechanism for capital flight.11
The Argentine case suggests that, once having established ADRs and other kinds of contractual

8

Conversely, the holder of the underlying shares has the option of converting the shares into ADRs. Each ADR
denotes a specific number of the underlying shares (which remain on deposit at the depositary’s custodian bank in
the issuer's home market).
9
See, for example, Alexander, Eun and Jankiramanan (1987), Foerster and Karolyi (1999), Miller (1999), Ahearne,
Griever, and Warnock (2001), and Doidge, Karolyi and Stulz (2002).
10
See, for example, Officer and Hoffmeister (1987), Whahab and Khanduala (1993) and Jiang (1998). Domovitz,
Glen and Madhavan (1997), Errunza, Hogan and Hung (1999), and Karolyi and Stulz (2002) examine the broader
influences of ADR programs on the development and integration of markets.
11
Melvin (2002) also documents the unusual behavior of the Argentine stock market and the role of ADRs during
the Corralito period.

3

arrangements across markets, it may be difficult if not impossible to reverse the process of
capital market integration with (even draconian) capital controls.
The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides details about the specific
restrictions of the Corralito and defines the arbitrage premium/discount between local and U.S.
ADR prices. Section 3 examines the behavior of non-ADR and ADR returns pre- and postCorralito and calculates arbitrage bounds for ADRs based on the transactions costs that U.S. and
Argentine investors faced during the December 2001 to July 2002 period. We then use the ADR
premium to estimate the market’s expectation of the devaluation. Section 4 examines the market
factors that influenced ADR portfolio returns in New York and Argentina before and after the
imposition of the Corralito. Finally, in section 5 we discuss the decline of ADRs as a
mechanism for capital outflow in March 2002 and the rise of Argentine certificates of deposit
(CEDEARs) as an alternative channel for arbitrage and capital flow.

2. ADRs, The Corralito and the Argentine Stock Market
In principle the performance of the Argentine stock market in the pre-devaluation period
is puzzling. Just one month before a widely anticipated devaluation of the peso and in the midst
of a staggering financial crisis with massive capital outflows and bank runs, the stock market was
booming. To place the recent performance of the stock market in some perspective, Figure 2
shows Argentina’s stock market index, the Merval, in pesos and U.S. dollars, from January 1990
to April 2002. Argentina’s currency board was established in March 1991, triggering a stock
market boom that lasted until June 1992. The market was negatively affected by the Mexican
crisis in late 1994, and again by the Asian crisis in 1997, but stayed well above its pre-March
1991 level. Beginning in early 2000, however, the market began a steady decline, sliding down
to levels not seen in a decade.

4

[Figure 2 here]
2.1 The Corralito
By mid-2001, years of stagnating economic growth, lagging exports, weak banks and
mounting fiscal deficits had taken their toll. In October negotiations over a bailout package with
the IMF failed and Argentina was on the brink of financial collapse. To stave off a run on banks
and a speculative attack on the peso, on December 1, 2001 Finance Minister Cavallo announced
a series of restrictions on bank withdrawals and dollar transfers abroad. Under the Corralito,
depositors were limited to withdrawals of 250 pesos per week but could access their accounts to
transfer funds within the banking system.12 Wire transfers required Central Bank approval,
foreign currency futures transactions were prohibited, and in effect, all investors, foreign and
domestic, were prohibited from transferring funds abroad. The restrictions were announced as
temporary measures that would remain in place until the danger of the speculative attack had
passed.
The Corralito, did not, however, restrict investors from trading Argentine securities
including those that were cross-listed on another market. Indeed, to do so would have seriously
destabilized the local market as it would have prevented investors from trading in some of the
largest and most liquid stocks on the market. The ADR “loophole” worked as follows:
Argentine residents were allowed to use bank deposits in excess of the $1,000 monthly ceiling to
purchase Argentine stocks. If a stock happened to be cross-listed in another country those shares
could be legally converted from Argentine shares into ADRs. The ADRs could then be sold in
the United States and the dollar proceeds deposited in a U.S. account. Under normal
circumstances the dollar proceeds would appear in the Argentine Balance of Payments as a

5

capital inflow, as U.S. residents have acquired claims on Argentine firms. Under the Corralito,
however, the capital inflows did not occur, and the dollars and/or shares remained outside of
Argentina. In effect, the ADR “loophole” allowed Argentines to transfer monies abroad, but the
transactions did not result directly in a fall in Argentina’s international reserves (or a fall in
Argentine bank deposits). ADR conversions, however, did reduce the number of (underlying)
shares available on La Bolsa.
2.2 Costless and instantaneous arbitrage premia
To help fix ideas, it is useful to define the trade-offs facing U.S. and Argentine investors.
We first assume that arbitrage between the two markets is instantaneous and costless. While this
is clearly unrealistic, it will establish a useful benchmark for examining transactions costs.
We will use the following definitions:

Pt L

= price of local shares, in pesos

Pt ADR = price of ADR in the United States, in dollars
St

= spot exchange rate, U.S. dollars per peso

ξ

= number of underlying shares per unit of depositary receipt

Consider the return to an Argentine investor who purchases local shares and then
converts them to an ADR. We take the view that given the extent of dollarization of the
Argentine economy, investors were concerned about preserving the dollar value of their assets,
and therefore we compute dollar returns. The instantaneous arbitrage premium on holding the
ADR is then:

12

Some of the original withdrawal limits were eventually modified, though the main restrictions on capital outflow
still remain in place. See Appendix 1 for a detailed timeline of the changes in financial market regulations in
Argentina beginning in October 2001.

6

ptADR − Stξ ptL
(1) π =
Stξ ptL
1
t

The premium/discount changes with local price, the U.S. price (which is a function of U.S.
demand) and the exchange rate.
From the perspective of a U.S. investor, the rate of return would be
(1’) π t2 =

Stξ ptL − ptADR
ptDR

2.3 Arbitrage with transactions costs

Argentine investor
Consider again an Argentine investor in period t who has purchased cross-listed
stocks. The investor can sell the stocks in Buenos Aires or transform the stocks into
ADRs and sell them in the United States. Transforming the stock into an ADR, setting
up a U.S. account and selling the stock takes time, and involves transaction costs and
different risks.13 Define n0 as the minimum time required to sell the ADR in New York,
and consider the following two strategies:
1) Sell the stock in Buenos Aires at ptL+ n
2) Sell the ADR in New York at ptADR
+n
where n≥n0. If the expected return of strategy 2 is larger than the expected return of strategy 1,
then every risk neutral local investor (assuming all the other investing opportunities are
arbitraged) would transform their stocks into ADRs and follow strategy 2. On the other hand,
under normal conditions risk-neutral local investors would simply hold their local shares when

13

Information from brokers suggests that the time to conversion and the implicit exchange rate used in the
conversion process varied considerably across type of investor and across time. For this reason we use
contemporaneous prices and exchange rates as a benchmark in computing arbitrage returns.

7

the expected return of strategy 1 is bigger than expected return of strategy 2. The expected return
(at period t) in U.S. dollars of following strategy 2 is:14
(2)

L
Et [ ptADR
+ n (1- τ 3 )(1- τ 5 )] - τ 4 -[ξ pt (1 + τ 1 + τ 2 ) St ]
EtR2=
[ξ ptL (1 + τ 1 + τ 2 ) St ]

where ξ Pt L (1 + τ 1 + τ 2 ) is the pesos the investor needs to buy ξ local shares to obtain one ADR,

and Et [ ptADR
+ n (1- τ 3 )(1- τ 5 )] is the dollar amount that the Argentine investor expects to obtain after
selling the ADR in the U.S. at time t+n after taxes and expenses. Argentine investors typically
face a broker’s fee, τ1, and a transactions fee, τ2. A second broker’s fee, τ3, is incurred when the
asset is sold in the United States. We also include a fixed fee in dollars, τ4, that the investor must
pay to transform the regular shares into an ADR. Finally, the cost of opening a bank account in
the United States is τ5. Note that the investor does not have to physically obtain dollars to carry
out this operation (the return is simply expressed in dollar units) so the investor does not pay a
fee for obtaining foreign exchange. Note also that all of the transactions in (2) were permitted
under the Corralito.
If the Argentine investor were to instead use the dollar amount [ξ ptL (1 + τ 1 + τ 2 ) St ] to
buy local shares and sell them in Buenos Aires in period t+n for the expected (net of taxes) price,
her expected return at time t will be:
(3)

EtR1=

Etξ ptL+ n (1- τ 1 - τ 2 ) St + n − ξ ptL (1 + τ 1 + τ 2 ) St
ξ ptL (1 + τ 1 + τ 2 ) St

Where ξ ptL (1 + τ 1 + τ 2 ) St is the amount, expressed in dollars, the investor needs in order to buy
enough shares of the local stock to reach the equivalent of one ADR, and Etξ ptL+ n (1- τ 1 - τ 2 ) St + n

14

Here we are assuming the conversion fee is paid in dollars in the U.S. once the operation is complete, and the
amount is withdrawn from the investor’s banking account.

8

is the amount of money she receives for selling the shares after n periods. The returns are
calculated net of the broker’s fee and the local transactions fee.
For the investor to be willing to convert shares to ADRs, it must be the case that EtR1 ≤
EtR2 or
(4)

L
Et [ ptADR
+ n (1- τ 3 )(1- τ 5 )] - τ 4 − Et [ξ pt + n (1- τ 1 - τ 2 ) St + n ] ≥ 0

U.S. investor
We next derive the trade-off facing a U.S. investor. The trade-off is different for the two
investors because of the asymmetries in fees, taxes and institutional regulations in the two
markets. The U.S. investor purchases the ADR in the U.S. and can either
I) Sell the ADR in New York at ptADR
+ n or
II) Sell the stock in Buenos Aires at ptL+ n .
The first strategy gives the expected return to holding the ADR for n periods:
(5)

EtRI=

ADR
Et ptADR
+ n - pt
ptADR

U.S. investors do not face a broker’s fee or a stock market transactions fee.15 The return to
converting the ADR to local shares, and repatriating the earnings is given by:
(6)

Etξ ptL+ n (1- τ 1 - τ 2 )(1 − τ 6 ) St + n −
EtRII=
ptADR

ptADR

.

When selling the shares in Argentina, we assume that the U.S. investor incurs charges in
using a local broker and must pay the stock market transactions fee. Since we assume that he
would like to return the profits from the sale back to the U.S., he incurs an additional tax ( τ 6 ) for

15

It is not strictly true that U.S. investors face zero transactions costs. However, our empirical analysis focuses on
the arbitrage conducted by Argentine investors during the Corralito, so we abstract from the relatively small U.S.
transaction costs for simplicity.

9

transferring the funds. Note that under the Corralito repatriating the dollars directly is illegal.
Presumably there are other means of circumventing the controls, but by ignoring these
restrictions we are in effect understating the transactions costs faced by U.S. investors.
A risk-neutral investor will cancel an ADR when Et RI ≥ Et RII or:
(7)

Etξ ptL+ n (1- τ 1 - τ 2 )(1 − τ 7 ) St + n −

ptADR ≥ 0

This suggests that if local prices (expressed in dollars) exceed the ADR price investors should
buy ADRs, convert them back to local shares and sell them in Argentina.
Arbitrage bounds
The trade-offs faced by Argentine and U.S. investors yield arbitrage bounds for
capital inflow into and outflow from the Argentine market. Equation (4) can be rewritten to show the bound facing an Argentine investor who is contemplating
converting his local stocks into an ADR:

(8)

L
Et ptADR
τ4
(1 − τ 1 − τ 2 )
+ n − E t ξp t + n S t + n
+
−
≥
1
(1 − τ 3 )(1 − τ 5 ) (1 − τ 3 )(1 − τ 5 ) Et ξptL+ n S t + n
Et ξptL+ n S t + n

Capital outflows to the U.S. will not occur if the transaction costs on the left-hand-side of (8)
(which are a function of the local price and the exchange rate) exceed the returns to the
conversion.
Equation (9) shows the corresponding arbitrage bound for capital inflows into
Argentina. If the transactions costs faced by a U.S. investor are less than the returns of selling
ADRs for local shares then we should observe capital inflows into Argentina.

(9)

(1 − τ 1 − τ 2 )(1 − τ 6 ) − 1 ≥

Etξ ptL+ n St + n − Et ptADR
+n
Etξ ptL+ n St + n

10

If the ADR premia/discount lies between the bounds in (8) and (9) neither investor would engage
in arbitrage between the markets. Premia outside of the bounds should, in principle, be arbitraged
away. In the section below we use estimated transactions costs during the Corralito to calculate
the arbitrage bounds.

3. ADR premia during the Corralito
Table 1 provides a list of ADRs listed in Argentina as of December 1, 2001. The top
part of the table lists the shares that are publicly traded in the United States and Argentina. These
12 companies will be the sample for most of our analysis. The remaining 11 shares are traded
over the counter (Rule 144a and OTC stocks) and as such are not required to meet U.S.
accounting standards.16 In December 2001, the 12 ADRs in Table 1 accounted for 85% percent
of the Merval.
[Table 1 here]
During the Corralito, ADRs played three roles for Argentine investors. ADRs provided
(1) liquidity value (they allowed asset transformation of bank deposits – which could potentially
be expropriated by the government or lost in a full-scale bank run -- into stocks); (2) capital
control circumvention value (they allowed investors to legally deposit dollars abroad); and (3)
hedge value (against the likely devaluation of the dollar value of the peso). The first effect, asset
transformation, should increase the value of all Argentine stocks during the Corralito, and the
premium associated with asset transformation should remain until all depositors in Argentina
have re-optimized their savings portfolios or the deposit restrictions are removed. The second
effect, capital outflow, should appear as an additional premium in ADR prices over non-ADR
prices in Argentina, and again should last until all Argentine investors are indifferent between

11

holding their assets at home or abroad. This could be achieved either when all of the available
funds have left the country, or the cost of moving funds becomes prohibitively high. The third
effect, the exchange rate hedge, will be an additional premium associated with ADRs until the
devaluation takes place.
The difference in the ADR premium post- and pre-devaluation yields the market
forecast of the magnitude of the devaluation. In effect, prior to the devaluation the stock market
served as a shadow exchange market and we exploit this to back out expectations of the
devaluation. After the devaluation there still exists exchange rate risk, but it is now priced in the
foreign exchange market rather than in the stock market.
Figure 3 shows price indices for equal-weighted portfolios of ADRs17 and all other
Argentine stocks over the July 1, 2001 to May 31, 2002 period. As predicted, both portfolios
reverse their downward trend in the pre-Corralito period, increasing immediately following the
imposition of capital controls. The ADR portfolio experiences a bigger increase than the nonADR portfolio, reflecting the second two effects discussed above. The additional premium on
ADR stocks over non-ADR stocks remains until May 2002. We also observe a dramatic change
in the trading volume in ADRs in Argentina. Figure 4 shows the steady decline in the aggregate
trading volume on La Bolsa over the last two and a half years. However, as shown in Figure 5,
the fraction of ADRs in the total volume traded jumps dramatically at the time of the Corralito
from roughly 40 percent of the total volume to over 80 percent. Perez Companc alone accounted
for nearly 50 percent of the total volume of trading in the month of December 2001.

16

We dropped Nortel from our ADR portfolio even though it is not an OTC stock because it is a preferred stock
with very few transactions over this period.
17
We use the equal-weighted portfolio to get a better sense of the movement in all share prices and to reduce
idiosyncratic noise. Using the value-weighted portfolio reflects mainly movements in YPF, with a market
capitalization that represents 44% of the ADR portfolio, and Perez Companc, with a market capitalization that
represents another 16% of the ADR portfolio.

12

[Figures 3, 4 and 5 here]
Table 2 examines the changes in prices of the ADR portfolio and individual ADRs
following the imposition of the Corralito, Cavallo’s resignation on December 19, 2001 and the
announcement of the discontinuation of the currency board on January 4, 2002.18 (All prices are
measured in U.S. dollars). In the week following the imposition of the Corralito, the ADR
portfolio jumped 7.6 percent. There is considerable heterogeneity in the price responses of
different ADRs ranging from increases of 23 percent for Siderca and 15.6 percent for Perez
Companc to a decline of 1.6 percent for IRSA. Cavallo’s resignation, which increased the
likelihood of a devaluation, increased the value of ADRs even further. The ADR portfolio
increased an additional 7.5 percent and Metrogas, TECO and Perez Companc increased over 30
percent in value. All dollar share prices fell after the devaluation, reflecting the change in the
exchange rate.
[Table 2 here]
Changes in ADR premia
Changes in Argentine prices during the Corralito tell only part of the story. We now
turn to the arbitrage premia/discount on Argentine shares relative to the price of ADRs in the
U.S. Figures 6 and 7 show local and U.S. prices in dollars and the ADR discounts for two (Perez
Companc and Siderca) of the 12 companies in our sample of ADRs over the July 1, 2001 to May
31, 2002 period.19 The figures also show the arbitrage bounds based on our estimates of

18

The devaluation was announced on January 7th and took place on January 11th (to a new exchange rate of 1.4).
The free float started on February 11th. See appendix 2 for more information regarding exchange rate developments
over this period. Note also that the stock market was closed on several days over this period which may have
impacted the behavior of returns. We simply use observable prices on day when the market was open in our
calculations.
19
Similar figures for the rest of the ADRs are available upon request.

13

transactions costs (see Table 3).20 The bottom half of Table 2 summarizes the average discounts
during pre-Corralito, Corralito pre-devaluation and post-devaluation periods for each company
and the averages across the twelve companies.21
[Figures 6 and 7 here]
[Table 3 here]
The information in Table 2 and the plots indicate that the average pre-Corralito
premium for all companies except Metrogas was close to zero, suggesting that arbitrage between
Argentina and the U.S. kept prices in close alignment. During the Corralito, the average ADR
discount (the local price less the ADR price) jumped to 20 percent. The plots suggest that the
ADR discounts were relatively small at the beginning of the Corralito and peaked just prior to
the devaluation. One interpretation of this evidence is that the shadow value of the exchange rate
hedge via ADRs increased as the devaluation became more likely in early January 2002. At their
peak, the discount reached close to 40 cents on the dollar for Banco Frances, Banco Galicia,
Perez Companc and Siderca.22

20

The transactions costs we use in the calculations (based on conversations with brokers and investment bankers in
Argentina) are: τ1=.3025 τ2=.1025 τ3=.3025 τ4=.2 τ5=1.0. In table 3 we provide transaction cost ranges that reflect
amounts that were charged to both small and large Argentine investors. Our sources indicate that the standard length
of time required for an ADR conversion was nine days. Large investors, such as institutional investors and bankers
faced substantially lower costs than smaller investors, and could also complete the ADR conversion in a shorter
period of time. We ignore the time delay in our calculations of premia/discounts. The difference between the lower
bound and upper bound in our estimations is around 500 basis points. Rabinovitch, Silva and Susmel (2000), using
data for 6 Argentinean stocks with ADRs for the period 1993-2000 estimate arbitrage bands of around 270 basis
points, suggesting both that transactions costs increased during the Corralito and that the transactions fees we use in
our calculations provide maximum arbitrage bands.
21
Here the adjustment to the law of one price is apparently accomplished in the Argentinean price rather than the
U.S. ADR price. Huang and Stoll (2001), find a similar adjustment in the 1992 UK crisis (where the local price
jumped to adjust to the expected devaluation), but for 1994 Mexico, they find that the adjustment was in the
Mexican ADR price, rather than in the local price.
22
According to brokers and the financial press, the most demanded ADRs have been (in order of importance): Perez
Companc (PC), Grupo Financiero Galicia, Siderca and Telecom. In December 2001, the number of shares of PC
traded in NYSE increased 170%. The likely reason investors preferred these specific stocks is that they were the
ones with the highest liquidity in the U.S. market. Our preliminary research on the cross sectional differences in the
stocks’ premia (based on panel data) confirm that liquidity seems to be the most important factor in explaining the
differences in premia across firms.

14

Expected Devaluation
We use three methods to estimate the market’s expectation of the magnitude of the
devaluation on January 11, 2002.23 The first measure is to look at the price impact of Cavallo’s
resignation on December 19, 2001. It could be argued that up to that point the Corralito was still
viewed as a temporary measure to bolster the peg. The news of the resignation was clearly a
signal that the peg would be abandoned. Column B in Table 2 shows the weekly change in the
local price of ADRs before and after the resignation. On average, prices jumped 16.7 percent,
suggesting a roughly 17 percent increase in the value of the exchange rate hedge.24
The second measure of the anticipated devaluation is to examine the difference
between the ADR discount in the pre- and post-devaluation periods. Under the assumption that
the shadow value of ADRs as a means of converting bank deposits and for capital outflow over
the period remained constant, the difference between the pre- and post-devaluation periods
isolates the value of the exchange rate hedge. The difference between the average discount in the
two periods is shown in Table 2 column G. The difference ranges considerably across ADRs,
averaging out to roughly 8%. This is likely to be an understatement of the hedge term, however,
because the ADR discount started small and increased dramatically in the pre-devaluation
sample. It is more likely that prices on the eve of the devaluation came closest to reflecting the
market’s expectation of the change in the exchange rate. Using the discounts just before and just
after the devaluation as our measure, column H shows an average devaluation of 40.4 percent
(with a range of between 19 and 76 percent). This is larger than the other two estimates and it is
23

Becjker, Gelos and Richards (2002) estimate devaluation expectations from the relative performance of a cross
section of Mexican publicly traded firms around the 1994 peso crash. Using an estimate of the exchange rate
exposure of the different firms, they construct a measure of the shadow exchange rate prior to devaluation. In future
research we will further explore the information from our cross-section of ADRs for alternative measures of
expected devaluation.
24
One could also argue that the resignation was a further sign of political instability, which would also increase the
demand for ADRs as vehicles for capital outflow.

15

exactly the magnitude of the official devaluation for foreign trade operations, although it is less
than the free market rate devaluation of 70 percent that applied to all other transactions.
In addition to calculating the expected magnitude of the devaluation, we can use ADR
transactions data to estimate the magnitude of capital outflow. The most accurate measure of the
volume of outflow would be to use the number of ADR conversions that occurred after the
imposition of the Corralito. Unfortunately, these figures are not publicly available. An
alternative measure is to take the post-Corralito cumulated volume of sales of Argentine ADRs
in New York, under the assumption that all ADR sales reflect cashing out by Argentine
investors. This figure comes to $835 million.25 This is likely to be an underestimate of the
volume of outflow, since many investors may simply hold the stock rather than sell at depressed
prices. Another measure is the cumulated volume of purchases of local stocks with associated
ADRs in Buenos Aires over this period. Under the assumption that all these purchases are
intended for ADR conversion, the value of capital outflow comes to $3.4 billion dollars. This is
likely an overestimate, since Argentines may have had other reasons for purchasing these stocks
besides ADR convertibility.

4. Market Factors and the Pricing of ADRs
Until this point, we have analyzed the time series of ADR and local prices in
isolation. We now turn to the pricing of ADR stocks in the context of overall market movements
in Argentina and New York.
In theory, in a fully liberalized and integrated financial environment, we would expect
ADRs to be priced based on global market factors. Investors with access to global assets should
expect returns to be based on covariances of individual stocks and the global market portfolio.

25

This is the cumulated sum between December 1, 2001 and May 31, 2002.

16

That said, in practice, Karolyi and Stulz (2002) find that home bias tends to increase local
influences on asset prices. They find that local market portfolios often better explain the crosssectional variation in expected returns for local stocks, though they also find that equity flows
and cross-country correlations increase global influences on asset prices. 26 The pricing of
Argentine ADRs provides an interesting natural experiment in the context of this literature. Prior
to the imposition of the Corralito, Argentina’s financial markets were considered fully
liberalized. The Corralito, although allowing ADR transactions to continue, was intended to
control capital outflows and therefore presumably led to a less globally integrated Argentine
capital market. In terms of the market model, we should therefore expect that local market
factors in Argentina became more important in pricing stocks with associated ADRs during the
period in which capital controls were in force.
We test whether the imposition of the Corralito led to changes in the pricing of
Argentine stocks with associated ADRs using a standard market model; where Rit is the return
G
is the return on the global
on asset i at time t, R ft is the return on the risk-free rate at time t, Rmt

market portfolio at time t, and RmtL is the return on the local market portfolio at time t:
(10)

G
Rit − R ft = β1 ( Rmt
− R ft ) + β 2 ( RmtL − R ft ) + ε it .

Evidence of market segmentation would be indicated by a significant coefficient on the local
market index, β2. Table 4 presents daily time series results27 from regressions of returns from the
26

Also see Errunza and Losq (1985), Eun and Janakiramanan (1986) and Alexander et al (1987) who examine the
pricing of ADR portfolios in the context of the market model and generally find evidence that global market factors
dominate local factors in explaining ADR returns.
27
Daily returns correspond to close-to-close prices including dividends and excluding weekends and holidays. A
potential problem with daily market model regressions is the occurrence of non-overlapping trading hours across
markets due to different time zones, trading schedules and country-specific holidays. In our study, the extent of nonsynchronous trading across national stock markets is compounded by the fact that the Argentine stock market was
closed for several days during the height of the crisis. We include dummy variables in the regressions to control for
the possibility of abnormal returns after these market closures and in future drafts of the paper we will include the
Scholes and Williams (1977) non-synchronous trading correction.

17

portfolio of Argentine stocks that have associated ADRs on the Morgan Stanley Capital
International (MSCI) world index and an orthogonalized local Argentine equal-weighted
portfolio index (excluding the stocks with associated ADRs).28 Regression results are presented
both for the period prior to the imposition of the Corralito (specifically October 1997 through
November 2001)29 and for the post-Corralito period (over rolling subperiods to take into account
potential parameter instability).30
[Table 4 here]
The results in table 4 suggest that both Argentine market factors and global market
factors were important in pricing Argentine stocks with associated ADRs even before the
imposition of the Corralito. In the period when the Corralito was in place, both indices continue
to be statistically significant, though the beta on the Argentine market index is typically larger in
magnitude. The beta on the Argentine market index rises almost twofold (to 1.5) in the two
months immediately following the imposition of the Corralito, indicating that stocks with
associated ADRs magnified Argentine market movements in this period. These results confirm
our initial hypothesis that local market factors in Argentina became more important in pricing

28

The correlation between the MSCI and the non-ADR Argentine portfolio is quite high (.53 for the period October
1997 – July 2002). We therefore orthogonalize the non-ADR Argentine portfolio by regressing it on the MSCI and
L

use the residuals from this first stage regression for Rmt in the estimation of equation 10.
29

In the pre-Corralito subperiod regressions seven dummy variables are also included as independent variables in
the market model as controls for days on which we might expect abnormal returns due to non-market factors. The
first dummy variable indicates dates when the Argentine market was closed due to holidays, the second indicates
days when the Argentine market was closed for other reasons (days on which the New York market was closed are
omitted). And, the other five dummy variables were included to indicate the day on which a new ADR was included
in the ADR portfolio (Banco Galicia entered on 7/4/2000, APSA on 11/15/2000, PC on 1/26/2000, Nortel on
6/19/1997 and Siderca on 5/21/2001) as we might expect the return on the overall ADR portfolio to rise on these
days in reaction to its new composition. These estimates are not reported in the tables but are available upon request.
30
In the post-Corralito subperiods we also include the change in the peso/dollar exchange rate as a third factor in
the market model to control for the large devaluation that took place on January 11, 2002. The coefficient on the
exchange rate term is generally statistically significant and ranges in magnitude from .1 to .5 depending on the
subperiod. This coefficient can also be interpreted as an estimate of the peso exposure of the ADR portfolio.

18

stocks with associated ADRs (and presumably all Argentine stocks) during the period in which
capital controls were in force.
The model in section 2 and the data description in section 3 of this paper suggest that the
pricing of ADR stocks in Argentina and New York may have diverged during the Corralito
period. And, in particular, we might expect that while local factors influenced prices in
Argentina (as reported in table 4), they may not have been as important for prices of the same
stocks sold in New York (given that investors in New York were not subject to the restrictions of
the Corralito). Table 5 presents time series results from regressions of Argentine ADR portfolio
returns in New York (NYSE and Nasdaq) on the MSCI world index and an orthogonalized local
Argentine equal-weighted portfolio (excluding the ADRs).
[Table 5 here]
The results for the pricing of ADR stocks in the post-Corralito subperiod reported in
table 5 differ markedly from those in table 4. Recall that the dependent variable for the
regressions reported in table 4 is the return in Argentina of a portfolio of stocks with associated
ADRs, while in table 5 we examine the pricing of these same stocks after they are converted to
ADRs and traded in New York. In both sets of tests the results in the pre-Corralito period are
similar. The results suggest that although the Argentine market was relatively more integrated
before the imposition of the Corralito – it is still the case that local (Argentine) market factors as
well as global factors were important in explaining ADR portfolio returns in both Argentina and
New York. In the period immediately following the imposition of the Corralito (and when
volume in the ADR market was at its peak) neither the global market index nor the Argentine
market index explain ADR portfolio returns in New York (whereas in Argentina local market
factors become more important in explaining the pricing of stocks with associated ADRs over

19

this period). In the subsequent two-month rolling subsamples the global market index beta
regains statistical significance and rises in magnitude for the ADR portfolio returns in New
York. The coefficient on the local market index also regains statistical significance, though the
size of the local market beta falls dramatically from .88 in the pre-Corralito subperiod to .08 in
the subperiod including January through March 2002. 31 These results suggest that after the
imposition of the Corralito Argentine market factors no longer had as much influence on the
pricing of Argentine ADRs in New York. Or, put another way, ADRs in New York became less
like other Argentine stocks (including those with associated ADRs) with the advent of capital
controls.

5. The Emergence of the CEDEAR market
In late February 2002 volume in the ADR market, which had reached its peak in
December 2001 just after the imposition of the Corralito, leveled off.32 Although the Corralito
continued to be in effect, several regulatory changes, starting in February 2002, may have
diminished investor’s incentives to use the stock market as a means to gain access to frozen
assets.33 At the same time as interest in ADRs was stalling, volume in the CEDEAR
(certificados de depositos Argentinos) market began to rise dramatically, so much so that by May
2002 volume in CEDEARs exceeded volume in all other listed stocks on La Bolsa.

31

The regression goodness of fit also falls dramatically from .55 in the pre-Corralito period to .17 for the period
January through March 2002.
32
This is particularly true in New York where ADR volume declines steadily from its peak in December 2001.
Volume in February 2002 was 18 percent lower than the previous December, and by May 2002, volume was a mere
23% of what it had been in December 2001.
33
In February investors were allowed to withdraw (once and for all) 7,000 U.S. dollars from any of their bank
accounts. In March investors were given the option to convert deposits into bonds (in pesos or dollars) and they
were allowed to use their deposits to purchase properties, and more recently, cars.

20

CEDEARs are shares of non-Argentine firms (mostly U.S. firms) that are crosslisted on the Argentine exchange and sold for pesos.34 They were first introduced on the
Argentine stock exchange in 1997, though volume in the market was negligible until late
February 2002.35 Before the imposition of the Corralito it is not clear why an investor would
have preferred holding a CEDEAR (in pesos) to holding the foreign stocks directly (and in
dollars), especially given that they had to pay high conversion fees for the CEDEARs. However,
after the imposition of the Corralito investors were no longer able to use dollars to purchase nonArgentine stocks. Indeed, one of the few ways investors were able to gain access to their frozen
bank deposits was to purchase shares on La Bolsa. For this reason we might have expected
Argentine demand for CEDEARs to have increased during the Corralito and especially after the
devaluation, both because underlying CEDEAR assets are denominated in dollars (although
CEDEARs are priced in pesos), and because holding shares of non-Argentine firms would serve
as a better means of hedging against the looming economic crisis. Volume in the CEDEAR
market, however, did not immediately pick up in large part because there was little incentive for
anyone to convert U.S. stocks into peso denominated CEDEARs before the devaluation.36
Starting in late February 2002, however, liquidity in CEDEAR stocks gradually
increased. Discussions with brokers in Argentina suggest that the increase in CEDEAR
liquidity came from three sources. First, mutual funds, pension funds and other institutional
investors are required to hold assets rated above BBB, and at this time all Argentine stocks and
bonds were below the minimum ranking, forcing these funds to purchase non-Argentine
34

Most CEDEARs are issued by Deustche Bank, which acts as the depositary bank, and is the only authorized
institution that can transform CEDEARs back into shares sold on U.S. exchanges. The most traded CEDEARs in
this period included Cisco Systems, Honeywell, International Paper, JP Morgan Chase and Wal-Mart stores.
35
In December 2001 the volume of CEDEARs was approximately 0.2% of the total volume traded (stocks plus
CEDEARs) on La Bolsa, whereas in June 2002 CEDEARs made up 70% of total volume traded.
36
Traders had little incentive to convert U.S. stocks into CEDEARs prior to the devaluation both because of peso
value uncertainty and because the Corralito restricted repatriation of any peso returns.

21

securities. Since the Corralito disallowed direct purchases of foreign assets CEDEARs were
among the few assets that they could acquire. Second, Argentines who held dollars abroad
(possibly as a result of an earlier sale of ADRs) started to purchase U.S. stocks with CEDEAR
conversions, and re-sell the CEDEARs in Argentina for pesos, as a means to bring monies back
into Argentina (and at the same time gaining the CEDEAR premium). 37 Third, using operations
called “via cable” investors were able to buy foreign bank checks that allowed them to purchase
the underlying U.S. shares, convert these into CEDEARs, and then sell the CEDEARs (at a
premium) in Argentina for pesos.38
Once liquidity in the CEDEAR market was established, investors had an alternative
means of escaping the Corralito, by purchasing CEDEARs in Argentina for pesos, converting
them back to the underlying dollar denominated stocks, and selling them in New York for dollars
(that then are deposited in dollar accounts).39 The transaction costs of CEDEAR conversion are
similar to those in the ADR market, and the increased demand for CEDEARs in Argentina led to
similar price spreads on CEDEARs in Argentina relative to the underlying prices of the stocks in
New York. Before the Corralito, the mean CEDEAR premium was approximately zero, but in
March 2002 the premium increased to 5 percent.40
There is clear indication that the Argentine government understood that CEDEARs
were serving a similar purpose as ADRs in allowing investors to transfer funds (legally) outside

37

One reason to do this was that after “the pesofication” investors could repay dollar debts with pesos.
Another way that CEDEARs may have been created is through a practice termed “pre-releasing” where the
Depositary Bank lends out the underlying securities that make up the CEDEAR to brokers in the market. The
brokers then sell the CEDEARs to investors who pay in pesos and then request that the broker convert the
CEDEARs back into the underlying U.S. shares (and sell them in New York for dollars).
39
Investors also purchased (in pesos) dollar denominated Argentine government bonds (specifically Global 2008s)
and re-sold them in New York (for dollars) for similar reasons.
40
Since liquidity for most of the CEDEARs in Buenos Aires is low and the transactions occur at irregular and
infrequent intervals, we calculate the premium for each of the CEDEARs on the days when there is a closing price in
both markets. The index is then the average of the daily premia. This is obviously a rough measure of the CEDEAR
premia, and we leave a complete analysis of this market to future analysis.
38

22

of Argentina. On March 25, 2002 a report in the official BCRA press communication suggests
that the government considered adopting new measures to avoid capital outflows using ADR and
CEDEAR transactions. However, no restrictions were imposed at that time. In September 2002,
regulations were changed that increased the cost of conversions.41 Despite the increased costs,
ADR and CEDEAR market conversions continue to take place.

6. Conclusions
Argentina in late 2001 and early 2002 provides an unusual opportunity to analyze the
reactions of investors to capital controls. The Corralito, originally put in place to stave off a
devaluation of the peso, effectively served to provide incentives for Argentines to invest in the
Argentine stock market, helping to fuel a boom in La Bolsa even as the Argentine economy was
headed toward collapse. The Corralito also provided a new role for ADRs as a (legal)
mechanism for capital flight. Investors were able to purchase Argentine stocks with associated
ADRs for pesos in Argentina, convert them into ADRs, re-sell them in New York for dollars and
deposit the dollar proceeds in U.S. bank accounts.
In the paper we show that ADR discounts went as high as 60% in the pre-devaluation
period, indicating that Argentine investors were willing to pay significant amounts in order to
move their funds abroad and to hedge the dollar value of their assets. In effect, the stock market
served as a shadow exchange market, which allows us to back out the market’s implicit forecast

41

The central bank passed a very restrictive regulation (circular #3723) that mandated that every stock be traded in
its original currency. Since access to dollars and the use of dollars was greatly restricted already, this effectively
killed the CEDEAR market. After intense opposition from the financial community, the central bank rescinded
#3723 and instead passed a resolution (circular #3727) that forbids “contra cable” operations. These operations
allowed brokers to sell stocks purchased in Buenos Aires instantaneously in New York (or any foreign market) using
the Mercado de Valores as a clearinghouse. Under #3727 it is still possible for investors in Argentina to convert
CEDEARs and sell them in New York, but this new restriction significantly increases the transactions costs to do so.
CEDEAR trading volume has fallen more than 35% since “contra cable” operations were disallowed.

23

of the size of the devaluation. On the eve of the devaluation, we estimate that the market
(correctly) anticipated a 40% devaluation.
We also test whether the imposition of the Corralito led to changes in the underlying
pricing structure of ADR stocks in Argentina and New York. The Corralito, although allowing
ADR transactions to continue, was intended to control capital outflows and therefore should have
led to a less globally integrated Argentine capital market. We find strong evidence of an
increase in Argentine market segmentation after the imposition of the Corralito. We find that
local market factors in Argentina became more important in pricing peso denominated stocks
with associated ADRs, though we find that the same ADRs in New York are mainly priced based
on global factors.
Argentine investors continue to use financial markets, and increasingly the CEDEAR
market, to gain access to their frozen bank deposits and to place their assets abroad in dollar
accounts. We estimate that capital outflow using the ADR market over the December 2001 to
May 2002 amounted to $835 million to $3.4 billion. If we include capital outflows via
CEDEARs and other cross-listed securities, it is likely that the amount of capital that has
(legally) left Argentina since the imposition of the Corralito is many times higher.

24

References
Ahearne, A., Griever, W., Warnock,F., 2001. Information costs and home bias:
an analysis of U.S. holdings of foreign equities. Working Paper, FRB Board of Governors.
Alexander, G., Eun, C., Janakiramanan, S., 1987. Asset Pricing and Dual Listing on Foreign
Capital Markets: A Note. Journal of Finance 42, 151–158.
Bailey, W., Chan, K., Chung, P., (2000). Depositary Receipts, Country Funds, and the Peso
Crash: The Intraday Evidence. Journal of Finance 55, 2693-2717.
Becjker, T., Gelos, G.,Richards,A., 2002. Devaluation Expectations and the Stock
Market: A New Measure and an Application to Mexico 1994/1995. International
Journal of Finance and Economics 7, 195-214.
Calvo, G., Izquierdo, A., Talvi,E., 2002. Sudden Stops, the Real Exchange Rate and Fiscal
Sustainability: Argentine Lessons. Paper Presented at the Annual Meetings of the Board of
Governors, Inter-American Development Bank.
Doidge, C., Karolyi, G.A., Stulz,R., (2002). Why Are Firms that List in the U.S. Worth More?
Ohio State University working paper.
Domowitz, I., J. Glen, and A. Madhavan., 1997. Market Segmentation
and Stock Prices: Evidence from an Emerging Market. Journal of Finance 52 (3), 1059-1085,
1997.
Errunza, V., Hogan K, Hung, M., 1999. Can The Gains From International
Diversification Be Achieved Without Trading Abroad?, Journal of Finance, 54, 2075-2107.
Errunza, V., Losq, E., 1985. International asset pricing under mild segmentation: theory and test.
Journal of Finance 40, 105–124.
Eun, C., Janakiramanan, S., 1986. A model of international asset pricing with a constraint on the
foreign equity ownership. Journal of Finance 41, 897–913.
Feldstein, M., 2002. Argentina’s Fall: Lessons from the latest financial crisis. Foreign Affairs,
March/April issue.
Foerster, S., Karolyi, G.A., 1999. The effects of market segmentation and investor recognition on
asset prices: evidence from foreign stocks listing in the US, Journal of Finance 54, 981–1013.
Forbes, K. 2002, How do large depreciations affect firm performance? NBER Working Papre #
9095.
Huang and Stoll, 2001. Exchange rates and firms' liquidity: evidence from ADRs. Journal of
International Money and Finance 20,297-325.

25

Jiang, C. X., 1998. Diversification with American Depositary Receipts: The Dynamics and the
Pricing Factors. Journal of Business Finance and Accounting 25, 683-699.
Karolyi, G.A., 1998. Why do companies list shares abroad? A survey of the evidence and its
managerial implications, financial markets. Financial Markets, Institutions and Instruments 7, 1–
60.
Karolyi, G.A., Stulz, R.M., 2002. Are Financial Asset Priced Locally or Globally? forthcoming
in The Handbook of the Economics of Finance, George Constantinides, Milton Harris and René
Stulz, editors, North-Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Kato, K., Linn, S., Schallheim, J., 1991. Are there arbitrage opportunities in the markets for
American depositary receipts? Journal of International Financial Markets Institutions and Money
1, 73–89.
Kim, M., Szakmary, Andrew, C. and Mathur, I., 2000. Price Transmission Dynamics Between
ADRs and their Underlying Foreign Securities. Journal of Banking & Finance, 24, 1359 – 1382.
Melvin, M., 2002. A Stock Market Boom during a Financial Crisis? ADRs and Capital Outflows
in Argentina, mimeo, June.
Miller, D.P., 1999. The market reaction to international cross-listings: evidence from depositary
receipts. Journal of Financial Economics 51 (1), 103–123.
Mussa, M. 2002. Argentina and the Fund: From Triumph to Tragedy. Institute for International
Economics, Washington D.C.
Officer, D., Hoffmeister, R., 1987. ADRs: A substitute for the real thing? Journal of Portfolio
Management 13, 61–65.
Park, J., Tavakkol, A., 1994. Are ADRs a dollar translation of their underlying securities?
Journal of International Financial Markets, Institutions and Money 4, 77–87.
Rabinovitch, R., Silva, A.C., Susmel, R., 2000. The Impact of Capital Controls and Transaction
Costs on the Return Distribution of Dually Traded Securities: Evidence from Chile and
Argentina. Department of Finance, CBA, The University of Houston, Houston.
Scholes, M and J. Williams., 1977. Estimating Beta from Nonsynchronous Data. Journal of
Financial Economics 5, 309-32.
Wahab, M., Khanduala, A., 1993. Why not diversify internationally with ADRs? Journal of
Portfolio Management 20, 75–82.

26

Table 1 Argentine Stocks Cross-Listed in the United States

EXCH

RATIO
ADR:ORD

APSA
BFR
CRESY
GGAL
IRS
MGS
PC
SDT
TEO
TAR
TGS
YPF

NASDAQ
NYSE
NASDAQ
NASDAQ
NYSE
NYSE
NYSE
NYSE
NYSE
NYSE
NYSE
NYSE

1:40
1:03
1:10
1:10
1:10
1:10
1:10
1:10
1:05
1:10
1:05
1:01

Real Estate
Banking
Food-Agribus-Tobacco
Fin Serv-Investment
Real Estate
Oil & Gas-Service
Util-Gas,Elec&Water
Steel
Telecom-DatNtwk
Telecom-DatNtwking
Oil & Gas-Service
Oil & Gas-Service

BHIPRR
-CAPPP
COSPP
PUEPP
-MIRPP
-SDRPP
SCDPF
SLEOY

PORTAL
-PORTAL
PORTAL
PORTAL
-PORTAL
-PORTAL
PORTAL
OTC

1:01
1:01
1:02
1:10
1:05
1:01
1:01
1:08
1:08
1:01
1:01

Banking
Banking
Util-Gas,Elec&Water
Oil & Gas-Service
Oil & Gas-Service
Auto-Auto Parts
Auto-Auto Parts
Mining & Minerals
Mining & Minerals
Fin Serv-Investment
Oil & Gas-Service

SYMBOL

INDUSTRY

EFF. DATE

ADRs
ALTO PALERMO S.A.
BBVA BANCO FRANCES S.A.
CRESUD S.A.C.I.F. Y A.
GRUPO FINANCIERO GALICIA
IRSA INVERSIONES Y REPRES S.A.
METROGAS S.A.
PEREZ COMPANC
SIDERCA S.A.I.C
TELE ARG STET-FRANCE TELE
TELEFONICA DE ARGEN.
TRANSPORTADORA DE GAS DEL
YPF S.A.

10-Nov-00
1-Nov-93
18-Mar-97
22-Jun-00
1-May-94
26-Feb-01
26-Jan-00
23-May-01
31-Mar-92
23-Dec-91
17-Nov-94
1-Jun-93

Rule 144A and OTC shares
BANCO HIPOTECARIO S.A. 144A
BANCO HIPOTECARIO S.A. REG S
CAPEX S.A. GDR
CENTRAL COSTANERA S.A.
CENTRAL PUERTO, S.A. 144A
MIRGOR S.A.C.I.F.I.A. - REG S
MIRGOR S.A.C.I.F.I.A. 144A
SIDERAR S.A.I.C. - REG S
SIDERAR S.A.I.C. GDR
SOCIEDAD COM DEL PLAT.
SOL PETROLEO S.A.

Source: Bank of New York

27

27-Jan-99
27-Jan-99
23-Jun-94
23-Dec-93
1-Dec-93
27-Oct-94
27-Oct-94
3-May-96
3-May-96
1-Aug-93
1-Nov-93

Table 2 Price Impact of Corralito and Estimates of Expected Devaluation
I. PERCENT CHANGE IN PRICE (IN $US): WEEK BEFORE EVENT TO WEEK AFTER EVENT
CAVALLO
CORRALITO*
RESIGNATION** DEVALUATION
(A)
(B)
C
EQUAL WEIGHTED PORTFOLIOS
1. ALL STOCKS
4.71
4.47
2. ADRS
7.58
7.45
3. NON-ADRS
2.52
1.78
INDIVIDUAL ADRS
APSA
0.00
0.00
-46.17
FRAN
9.58
12.36
-48.98
CRES
2.98
6.31
-35.80
GAL
3.83
11.02
-46.60
IRSA
-1.63
11.39
-42.70
METRO
3.09
30.52
-44.83
SIDERCA
23.00
19.72
-40.28
TEL ARG
7.54
0.00
-32.98
TGS
9.98
20.35
-44.53
TECO
2.75
32.35
-40.36
PC
15.56
30.26
-44.60
YPF
4.93
10.58
-39.91
II. AVERAGE DISCOUNT (LOCAL PRICE IN DOLLARS RELATIVE TO US PRICE)

PRE-CORRALITO
(D)

CORRALITO
PRE-DEVAL
(E)

CORRALITO
POST-DEVAL
(F)

EXPECTED EXPECTED
DEVAL
DEVAL (2)***
(G) = (E) - (F)
(H)

INDIVIDUAL ADRS
APSA
FRAN
CRES
GAL
IRSA
METRO
SIDERCA
TEL ARG
TGS
TECO
PC
YPF

-0.01%
0.43%
0.16%
-0.13%
-3.45%
-0.05%
-0.81%
-0.10%
0.00%
-0.07%
1.61%

24.01%
11.27%
25.97%
16.96%
9.14%
26.66%
12.73%
26.63%
24.24%
27.74%
17.95%

8.12%
11.46%
3.03%
7.54%
5.31%
30.25%
8.60%
-0.56%
47.63%
7.45%
10.03%

15.89%
-0.19%
22.94%
9.43%
3.84%
-3.59%
4.13%
27.19%
-23.39%
20.29%
7.92%

59.99%
19.29%
58.82%
33.29%
28.64%
23.72%
45.52%
76.00%
29.13%
38.97%
22.62%
48.72%

Average

-0.22%

20.30%

12.62%

7.68%

40.39%

*pre-corralito week 11/28/2001, post-corralito week 12/5/2001-12/7/2001
** pre-resignation week 12/17/2001 - 12/19/2001; post-resignation week 12/20/2001 - 12/27/2001
*** change between 1/4/2002 and 1/11/2002

28

Table 3 Transaction Cost Ranges for ADR Conversions
Location
of
Trade or
Activity

Buenos
Aires
Stock
Market

American
Depositary
Bank

NYSE
Stock
Market

Parameter

τ1

The brokerage fee is not regulated in
Argentina, but for market operations
larger than 10,000 pesos, the fee is in
the range [0.25% , 1% ] of total
settlement, before Value Added Tax.
For amounts smaller than 10,000 the
fee is nonlinear, during December
most of the capital control- evading
transactions were settled for amounts
larger than 10,000 pesos.

τ2

Fee that the Buenos Aires stock
exchange market charges for every
transaction.

τ4

ADR issuance (conversion) fee
charged by the broker, (this is a
markup over the conversion fees
charged by depositary banks.)
Argentinean brokers selling the ADR
in the US are charged the same fee as
they are when buying or selling stocks
in the local market.
Approximate cost of opening a
banking account in the US and wire
transferring the foreign currency to a
US bank.

τ3

τ5

Argentinean
Bank

Description

τ6

Approximate cost of transferring
money from Argentina to the US.
During the capital controls period
these transactions were not allowed.

Source: invertironline.com and portfoliopersonal.com

29

Estimated Range of Values
(percent of total value of
stock market transaction,
except where noted)

[0.3025, 1.21]

0.1025

[0.10 dollar, 0.20 dollars]

[0.3025, 1.21]

1

1

Table 4 Explaining Argentine Stock (with associated ADRs) portfolio returns in Argentina Using
a Global Market Portfolio and an Argentine (Non-ADR) Market Portfolio
Global
Local
Market
Market
TIME PERIOD
Index
Index
β1
0.417

t-stat
8.426

β2
0.832

t-stat
21.684

R2
0.45

Obs
1038

Pre-corralito
Post-corralito
Dec ’01 - Feb ‘02
0.477
0.939
1.459
7.469
0.69
48
Jan - Mar ‘02
0.338
0.789
1.224
8.552
0.86
52
Feb - Apr ‘02
0.269
0.879
1.026
6.599
0.87
53
Mar – May ‘02
0.68
1.661
0.909
3.673
0.7
57
Note: The global market index is the MSCI world index return and the local market index is an
orthgonalized equal-weighted portfolio (in dollars) of all the stocks traded in Buenos Aires
except those with an associated ADR. The dependent variable is the return in Argentina of an
equal-weighted portfolio of the 12 stocks with associated ADRs. Data source: Economatica.
Table 5 Explaining ADR Portfolio Returns in New York Using A Global Market Portfolio and
an Argentine (Non-ADR) Market Portfolio
Global
Local
Market
Market
Time Period
Index
Index
β1
0.616

t-stat
12.44

β2
0.883

t-stat
22.78

R2
0.55

Obs
1054

Pre-corralito
Post-corralito
Dec ’01 – Feb ‘02
0.336
1.176
0.057
1.322
0.06
61
Jan – Mar ‘02
0.596
1.945
0.084
2.304
0.17
61
Feb – Apr ‘02
0.496
1.992
0.168
3.748
0.27
62
Mar – May ‘02
0.733
3.648
0.128
3.287
0.35
64
Note: The global market index is the MSCI world index return and the local market index is an
orthgonalized equal-weighted portfolio (in dollars) of all the stocks traded in Buenos Aires
except those with an associated ADR. The dependent variable is the return in New York of an
equal-weighted portfolio of the 12 ADR stocks. Data source: Economatica

30

Figure 1 Emerging Markets’ Stock Market Response During Currency Crises
60-day window centered on the corresponding devaluation date
(Dollar Stock Market Indices; Base=100 on the day of the devaluation)
170.00

150.00
Devaluation
130.00

110.00
A rgentina
Mex ico

90.00

Malaysia
Thailand

70.00

50.00
Corralito I
in A rgentina
60

56

52

48

44

40

36

32

28

24

20

16

8

12

4

0

-4

-8

-12

-16

-20

-24

-28

-32

-36

-40

-44

-48

-52

-56

-60

30.00

Source: Datastream
Figure 2 Argentine Merval Index (January 1990-June 2002)
900

900

Merval in dollars
Merval in pesos

800

800

700

700

600

600

500

500

400

400

Asian
Crisis

300

300

Russia Default

200

Brazil's Devaluation
January 1999

Tequila Crisis

Corralito (cash
w ithdraw als limits)
December 1, 2001

Beginning Currency Board
(March 1991)

100

200

Peso
floats

Source: Datastream

31

1/8/02

7/8/01

1/8/01

7/8/00

1/8/00

7/8/99

1/8/99

7/8/98

1/8/98

7/8/97

1/8/97

7/8/96

1/8/96

7/8/95

1/8/95

7/8/94

1/8/94

7/8/93

1/8/93

7/8/92

1/8/92

7/8/91

1/8/91

7/8/90

0
1/8/90

0

100

Figure 3 Equal-Weighted Portfolios of ADR and Non-ADR Stocks
(July 2001 – May 2002; December 2001=100)
210
200
190
ADR portfolio

180
170
160
150

Non-ADR portfolio

140
130
120

CORRALITO

110
100

5/19/02

5/5/02

4/7/02

4/21/02

3/24/02

3/10/02

2/24/02

2/10/02

1/27/02

1/13/02

12/30/01

12/2/01

12/16/01

11/18/01

11/4/01

10/21/01

10/7/01

9/23/01

9/9/01

8/26/01

8/12/01

7/29/01

7/15/01

7/1/01

90

Source: Datastream

Figure 4 Number of Shares Traded and Dollar Volume of Argentine Stocks
7,000,000

80,000,000

70,000,000

6,000,000
# of shares

40,000,000
3,000,000
30,000,000
2,000,000

20,000,000

1,000,000

10,000,000

32

7/3/02

6/5/02

6/19/02

5/22/02

5/8/02

4/24/02

4/10/02

3/27/02

3/13/02

2/27/02

2/13/02

1/30/02

1/16/02

1/2/02

12/5/01

12/19/01

11/21/01

11/7/01

10/24/01

10/10/01

9/26/01

9/12/01

8/29/01

8/1/01

-

Volume (in dollars)

50,000,000
4,000,000

8/15/01

Number of shares

60,000,000

volume

5,000,000

Figure 5 Trading Volume in ADRS as a percent of Total Trading Volume
90%
80%

ypf
70%

pc
nortel

60%

tgs

PC
50%

tear
teco

40%

siderca
30%

metro
Telecom

20%
IR SA

10%
0%
20

00

Siderca
Galicia

irsa
gal
cres
fran

Frances

6
5
4
3
2
1
2
1
0
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
2
1
0
9
8
-0 0-0 0-1 0-1 0-1 1-0 1-0 1-0 1-0 1-0 1-0 1-0 1-0 1-0 1-1 1-1 1-1 2-0 2-0 2-0 2-0 2-0 2-0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20
20

Source: Bloomberg

33

34

upper bound

40%
lower bound

30%

20%

10%

0%

-10%
5/19/2002

5/5/2002

discount

5/19/2002

60%
4/21/2002

DISCOUNT AND ARBITRAGE BOUNDS: PEREZ COMPANC

5/5/2002

devaluation

4/7/2002

3/24/2002

3/10/2002

2/24/2002

2/10/2002

1/27/2002

1/13/2002

12/30/2001

12/16/2001

12/2/2001

11/18/2001

11/4/2001

10/21/2001

10/7/2001

9/23/2001

9/9/2001

8/26/2001

8/12/2001

7/29/2001

7/15/2001

7/1/2001

1.70

4/21/2002

4/7/2002

3/24/2002

3/10/2002

2/24/2002

2/10/2002

1/27/2002

1/13/2002

12/30/2001

12/16/2001

12/2/2001

11/18/2001

11/4/2001

10/21/2001

10/7/2001

9/23/2001

9/9/2001

8/26/2001

50%

8/12/2001

7/29/2001

7/15/2001

7/1/2001

Figure 6 Argentine and U.S. Prices and Premia for Perez Companc (U.S. Dollars)

LOCAL AND US PRICE IN $US: PEREZ COMPANC

2.10

1.90
corralito
US price

Arg price

1.50

1.30

1.10

0.90

0.70

0.50

0.30

35

5/19/2002

5/5/2002

4/21/2002

7/1/2001

5/19/2002

5/5/2002

4/21/2002

4/7/2002

3/24/2002

3/10/2002

2/24/2002

2/10/2002

1/27/2002

1/13/2002

12/30/2001

12/16/2001

12/2/2001

11/18/2001

11/4/2001

10/21/2001

10/7/2001

9/23/2001

9/9/2001

8/26/2001

8/12/2001

7/29/2001

7/15/2001

2.60

4/7/2002

3/24/2002

3/10/2002

2/24/2002

2/10/2002

1/27/2002

1/13/2002

12/30/2001

12/16/2001

12/2/2001

11/18/2001

11/4/2001

10/21/2001

10/7/2001

9/23/2001

9/9/2001

40%

8/26/2001

8/12/2001

7/29/2001

7/15/2001

7/1/2001

Figure 7 Argentine and U.S. Prices and Premia for Siderca (U.S. Dollars)

LOCAL AND US PRICE IN $US: SIDERCA

3.00

2.80
US price

Arg price

2.40

2.20

2.00

1.80

1.60

1.40

1.20

1.00

DISCOUNT AND ARBITRAGE BOUNDS: SIDERCA

50%

discount

upper bound

lower bound

30%

20%

10%

0%

-10%

Appendix 1
Argentina’s Financial Market Event Time Line
October 28, 2001

October 29, 2001

November 19, 2001
November 30, 2001

December 2, 2001

December 3, 2001

Minister Cavallo starts negotiations with the IMF and the U.S.
Treasury to purchase collateral for new bonds to be issued in an
exchange for the nearly $100 billion of local and external debt.
Mr. Cavallo defines the debt exchange operation as voluntary.
The old debt would exchange for bonds paying seven percent
per year and be guaranteed by tax revenues. The IMF and U.S.
Treasury ask for compliance with a zero deficit and an
agreement with the provinces on tax revenue sharing before
any kind of financial support is given.
The IMF announces it will not make any new disbursements
(around 1.3 billion dollars) without being satisfied that the
country has secured the goals previously designated.
End of a debt swap with local banks and pension funds for
more that 55 billion (over a total public debt of 160 billions).
The government announces cash withdrawal limits (Corralito)
and limits dollar transfers abroad as a last-ditch effort to fend
off a devaluation and prevent a major banking crisis.
Withdrawals are limited to 250 pesos (dollars) per week per
account. Depositors, however, may still access their funds for
larger purchases through checks or debit cards and transfer
their money among banks. No limits are placed on domestic
payments through the use of checks, credits, debit cards and
electronic MEP (Metodo Electronico de Pagos) payments.
Initially the government stated that the Corralito would last 3
months.
The measures announced on Dec 2nd come into full effect
through Decree 1570-01 on Dec 3rd. They can be summarized
as follows:
a) Wire transfers are not allowed without prior Central Bank
approval.
b) Cash withdrawals from the Banking System will be limited
to US$ 1000 per month.
c) Financial Argentine institutions may not participate in
foreign currency futures transactions.
d) Financial Argentine institutions are prohibited from issuing
new bank loans denominated in Argentine Pesos. All new loans
must be issued in U.S. dollars and existing peso loans must be
converted to U.S. dollar loans at a one to one rate.
e) Foreign investors trading in the Argentine Securities Market
are subject to the repatriation restriction. Funds related to
securities transactions must remain in the country until
government approval is obtained or the measure is officially
revoked.

36

December 4, 2001

December 7, 2001

December 19, 2001
December 20, 2001

December 21, 2001
December 23, 2001

December 24, 2001
December 30, 2001
December 31, 2001
January 2, 2002
January 7, 2002

The Merval Index (Buenos Aires Stock Exchange) increases
6%. According to the local press, there was incipient trading in
ADRs.
Following Decree 1570, the Central Bank established an
information procedure for the processing of automatic and nonautomatic authorizations of repatriation. According to this rule,
coupon payments on National Government Bonds have
automatic transfer authorization and all other types of payments
and repatriations of U.S. dollars are subject to Central Bank
approval.
Mr. Cavallo and all other ministers resign.
President Dela Rua resigns and Mr. Ramon Puerta becomes
interim president. Country Risk reaches 4618 points. Global
(sovereign) bond yields reach their historical maximum of 49%
annual return in dollars.
The official Foreign Exchange Rate market is closed until the
10th of January, 2002.
Mr. Rodriguez Saa, governor of one of the provinces, becomes
the new interim president for 60 days, until elections are called
in March, 2002. He declares the suspension of external debt
payments for at least 60 days, totaling $166bn in federal and
provincial debt.
The government announces that a new fiat currency (i.e.,
without foreign-currency backing) would be created (the
argentino).
Interim president Mr. Rodriguez Saa resigns and the legislative
assembly elects Mr. Eduardo Duhalde as new president.
In the midst of political instability and closed foreign exchange
markets, the peso trades on the black market at 1.35 pesos per
dollar.
Mr. Duhalde assumes power.
The new Minister of Finance, Mr. Lenicov, announces the
devaluation of the peso and a new dual foreign exchange rate
regime, to be implemented on the 9th of January, 2002.

37

January 11, 2002

January 21, 2002

February 3, 2002

After several delays, the exchange rate market re-opens and the
new dual exchange rate system is put in place, under the
“Public Emergency and Exchange Regulations” approved by
Congress. The main articles and measures are the following:
a) 1 Argentinean peso= 1 U.S. dollar parity (Convertibility
Plan) is abolished. For emergency reasons, the Executive
Power- President- has been authorized to determine both the
new official rate of exchange between the Argentinean peso
and foreign currency and exchange rate regulations.
b) All debts (capital and interests) agreed in ARG currency
with financial entities - converted into U.S. dollars according to
the Decree 1570/2001- will be reconverted into the original
currency agreed (pesos).
c) The official, fixed conversion rate - 1 U.S Dollar=1.4 pesos
will be relevant for foreign trade operations. The free or
floating rate will be used for all other transactions and freely
determined by the market.
The peso was quoted at 1.8 per dollar at money-changers in
Buenos Aires. The peso's decline was limited by the
government's decision to reduce the amount of money in
circulation through a freeze on deposits, withdrawal restrictions
and a central bank order blocking banks from selling the U.S.
currency via electronic transactions.
The government announces the easing of bank withdrawal
restrictions:
a) Up to 7,000 pesos can be withdrawn from term deposits in
pesos (transferring that money to a checking account)
b) Up to 5,000 dollars can be withdrawn from term deposits in
dollars (transferring that money to a checking account at the
official exchange rate, 1.40).
c) Up to 5,000 dollars in a saving account can be pesofied at
the official exchange rate.
Mr. Lenicov announces an asymmetric pesofication and the end
of the dual exchange rate regime. The fundamental economic
measures were the following:
a) pesofication of all dollar deposits at 1.4 pesos per dollar.
b) corporate and consumer debts are also pesofied, but at the
exchange rate prevailing during the Convertibility period. Both
deposits and credit will be indexed to inflation.
c) the end of the dual exchange rate regime and a unified
floating exchange rate determined by market forces.
d) the right to withdraw wage and pension income from the
corralito without any amount restrictions (before workers could
only extract up to 1.500 pesos).

38

February 4, 2002

February 8, 2002

February 11, 2002

February 12, 2002

March 26, 2002

The official foreign exchange market is closed again until the
11th of February.
While the foreign exchange market is closed and before
devaluation uncertainty is resolved, the stock market index
increases. The pesification of all debts announced in Argentina
drives up share prices of firms heavily indebted in pesos and
banks.
The mix of announced policy measures not yet implemented,
(including the pesification of all debts and the prospects of a
large devaluation once the market re-opened) and the nonoperation of the exchange rate market, induce some investors to
reverse the capital-outflow process, converting ADRs back into
underlying shares and selling them in the Argentinean market.
The implicit dollar rate obtained through this operation was
2.56 pesos (above the 2.35 pesos in the black market) and
allowed the repayment of pesofied corporate debt.
The BCRA establishes a new unified free foreign exchange
market, which replaces the two markets - official and free implemented in January. The exchange rate market re-opens
and the floating dollar exchange rate reaches 2.1 pesos, well
below the devaluation expectations built-into asset prices.
The stock market drops an accumulated 18% in the two
business days following the launching of the new exchange rate
regime.
The Central Bank announces new measures related to foreign
exchange transactions and ADR/CEDEAR conversions.
According to the press release, these were aimed at improving
the functioning of the foreign currency market and regulating
the buying and selling of foreign currency by order and for the
account of the Central Bank.
The press communication also mentions that there will be
coordination between the Comision Nacional de Valores
(CNV) - the equivalent to the SEC in the U.S. - and the Bolsa
de Comercio de Buenos Aires (BCBA) - the Buenos Aires
Stock Exchange - in order to adopt new measures to regulate
capital outflows via ADR and CEDEAR transactions.
However, neither the CNV nor the BCBA have yet issued any
official communication regulating these transactions.

Sources: Ambito Financiero, La Nacion and Clarin (various issues) and Pictet.

39

Appendix 2
Argentine Exchange Rate Market Developments
FOREIGN EXCHANGE MARKET REGIMES IN ARGENTINA
Daily Exchange Rate in Pesos per Dollar: December 3rd 2001 - 31st of May 2002
(solid black line denotes period when official market was closed)

4
3.5

Convertibility Plan
(fixed, convertible
dollar parity)

Dual Exchange
Rate Regime (fixed, non
convertible official parity)

Unified and Floating
Exchange Rate Regime

3
2.5
2

Market Rate

1.5
1
0.5

Official Rate

0
12/3/2001

12/18/2001

1/2/2002

1/17/2002

2/1/2002

2/16/2002

3/3/2002

3/18/2002

4/2/2002

4/17/2002

5/2/2002

The Argentine foreign exchange rate market was closed (feriado cambiario) from the 21st of
December until the 10th of January (inclusive). During this period the shadow (or parallel)
market exchange rate quoted at around 1.5-1.6 pesos per dollar, well above the official parity of
1 peso per dollar prevailing before markets were closed.
On January 4th the Minister of Finance announced the discontinuation of the currency board and
on January 7th, the Minister of Finance announced the devaluation of the peso and a new
exchange rate regime. The new exchange rate regime was a dual one, featuring an official, fixed
non-convertible rate of 1.4 pesos per dollar (relevant for exporters and financial institutions) and
a free or floating dollar, for all other operations and determined by supply and demand. This new
dual regime came into full effect on Friday the 11th of January when the markets were re-opened.
On January the 11th there were two different values for the free exchange rate: dollars purchased
with cash at 1.7-1.8 “free pesos” per dollar, and a higher exchange rate for dollars purchased
with checks from funds in the Corralito (1.9-2 “trapped pesos” per dollar).
Exchange rate market operations were again suspended from the 4th of February to the 8thth of
February, inclusive. On Sunday, February 3rd, the new Minister of Finance announced the end of
the dual exchange rate regime and a unified floating exchange rate was put in place on Monday,
February 11th. On the 11th, the floating exchange rate opened at 2.10 pesos per dollar.

40

