                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        ONE SIMPLE TEST OF SAMUELSON’S DICTUM
                                FOR THE STOCK MARKET

                                              Jeeman Jung
                                             Robert J. Shiller

                                          Working Paper 9348
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w9348


                          NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                   1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
                                             November 2002




The authors are indebted to John Y. Campbell, Paul A. Samuelson, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho for
comments. Ana Fostel provided research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Jeeman Jung and Robert J. Shiller. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given
to the source.
One Simple Test of Samuelson's Dictum for the Stock Market
Jeeman Jung and Robert J. Shiller
NBER Working Paper No. 9348
November 2002
JEL No. G14

                                            ABSTRACT



        Samuelson (1998) offered the dictum that the stock market is “micro efficient” but “macro
inefficient.” That is, the efficient markets hypothesis works much better for individual stocks than it
does for the aggregate stock market. In this paper, we present one simple test, based both on
regressions and on a simple scatter diagram that vividly illustrates that there is some truth to
Samuelson’s dictum. The data comprise all U.S. firms on the CRSP tape that have survived since
1926.



Jeeman Jung                                             Robert J. Shiller
Division of Economics and Interantional Trade           Cowles Foundation and
Sangmyung University                                    International Center for Finance
Seoul, Korea 110-743                                    Yale University
                                                        New Haven, CT 06511
                                                        and NBER
                                                        robert.shiller@yale.edu
           One Simple Test of Samuelson’s Dictum for the U. S. Stock Market1

                             by Jeeman Jung and Robert J. Shiller


        Paul A. Samuelson has argued that one would expect that the efficient markets

hypothesis should work better for individual stocks than for the stock market as a whole:

        Modern markets show considerable micro efficiency (for the reason that
        the minority who spot aberrations from micro efficiency can make money
        from those occurrences and, in doing so, they tend to wipe out any
        persistent inefficiencies). In no contradiction to the previous sentence, I
        had hypothesized considerable macro inefficiency, in the sense of long
        waves in the time series of aggregate indexes of security prices below and
        above various definitions of fundamental values.”2

We will put this dictum the test in terms of the simplest efficient markets model that

asserts that stock prices equal the expected present value (with constant discount rates) of

expected future dividends. We will examine Samuelson’s dictum by the simple method

of running a regression of future multi-year dividend changes on current dividend-price

ratios and testing whether the dividend-price ratio predicts these changes, along lines

shown in Campbell and Shiller [1998], [2001], but for individual stocks 1926-2001, as

well as for stock indexes. This will allow us to see in very direct terms whether the

simple efficient markets model works better for individual stocks than it does for indexes.

It will allow us some new insights into the claim of LeRoy and Porter [1981] and Shiller

[1981] that stocks are excessively volatile to be justified in terms of information about


1. The authors are indebted to John Y. Campbell, Paul A. Samuelson, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho
for comments. Ana Fostel provided research assistance.
2. This quote is from a private letter from Paul Samuelson to John Campbell and Robert Shiller.
The quote appears, and is discussed, in Robert J. Shiller, Irrational Exuberance, 2nd Edition, 2001,
p. 243. Samuelson’s dictum is also treated in Samuelson [1998].


                                                3
future dividends, and the conclusion of Campbell [1991] that variance of news about

future cash flows accounts for only a third to a half of the variance of unexpected stock

returns.

       Our use of individual stock data over a 75-year interval also allows us another

advantage over tests of market efficiency based on stock-price indexes. When we assume

that stock prices are, according to efficient markets theory, optimal forecasts of the

present value of dividends discounted by an estimated constant rate, it follows that the

present value gives weight to future dividends many years in the future. Since few firms

survive as separate firms for as long a time as the present value formula gives substantial

weight to, the efficient markets model has usually been tested using stock price indexes,

which continue without interruptions through time. But with stock price indexes, the

changing composition of the index over the years means that the subsequent dividends

reported for the index at time t+k are not the dividends accruing on the stocks comprising

the index at time t. While one may argue that this changing composition of the index is

not a problem for index-based tests of market efficiency, it does introduce a layer of

complexity to the analysis. In this paper, we take the simpler approach of just looking at

how well individual stock prices relative to dividends predict the stock’s actual own

dividend changes far into the future.



                  The Efficient Markets Model in Dynamic Gordon Model Form

       One way of writing the simple efficient markets model expresses the dividend-

price ratio as a function of expected future dividend growth. Assuming a constant

discount rate but varying growth rate of real dividends, the dividend-price ratio Dt/Pt can




                                             4
be derived from the simple expected present value relation with discount rate r as;

                                                ∞
                                                    ∆Dt + k / Pt
        Dt / Pt = r − Et g tD , where g tD = ∑               k −1
                                                                  ,                             (1)
                                               k =1 (1 + r )



Pt is the real (inflation corrected) stock price at the end of year t, Dt is the real dividend

during the year t, ∆Dt = Dt − Dt −1 , r is the discount factor used in the present value

formula for stock prices, and Et denotes expectation conditional on information at time t.3

        Note that in the equation g tD , representing a dividend growth rate, is expressed as

the sum of discounted amounts of future dividend changes from a $1 investment at time

t.4 In other words, the growth rates are computed relative to price P rather than D, and

this is important since with individual firms there are in fact some zero dividends, and so

growth rates of dividends themselves could not be calculated.

        The equation can be viewed as a dynamic counterpart of the Gordon model,

D / P = r − g , where g is the constant expected dividend growth rate. The equation (1)

implies that at times when the dividend-price ratio is high, it portends relatively low

growth of dividends over future years, while when the dividend-price ratio is low, it

portends relatively rapid growth of dividends over future years. We take this model as

representing the essence of the simple efficient markets model. While there are other

versions of the efficient markets model, with additional complexities, this simple version




3. Note that efficient markets theory implies (1) even if firms repurchase shares in lieu of paying
as much dividends: the share repurchase has the effect of raising subsequent per-share dividends.
4. Campbell and Shiller [1988a, 1988b] used a log-approximation of the dividend-price model as
follows;
                                                                        ∞
        log( Dt / Pt ) = E t log( Dt / Pt )* , where log( Dt / Pt )* = − ∑ ρ j −1∆ log Dt + j + C
                                                                        j =1

The formula is closely analogous to (1) in this paper.


                                                    5
has sufficient currency in public thinking, at least as a first approximation, to warrant

learning whether it is at least approximately true.

        We could in theory evaluate this model, after turning the efficient markets

equation around to Et g tD = r − Dt / Pt , by regressing, with time series data, g tD onto a

constant and the dividend price ratio Dt/Pt , and testing the null hypothesis that the

coefficient of Dt /Pt is minus one. Such a test of the efficient markets hypothesis would

be recommended by its simplicity and immediacy. There is however the practical

difficulty that the summation extends to infinity and so the right hand side can never be

computed with finite data. Campbell and Shiller [1988b] showed a rigorous way of

testing a loglinearized version of this model under the assumption of a vector auto-

regressive model for the change in log dividends and the log dividend-price ratio.5 A

simpler, and more direct way, without adding the additional assumptions implicit in the

vector-autoregressive model, is to approximate the right hand side and run a regression of

the approximated right hand side onto the dividend price ratio. This was done in

Campbell and Shiller [1998], [2001] for aggregate stock market indexes. Campbell and

Shiller [2001] regressed ten-year log dividend growth rates ln(Dt+10 /Dt ) onto ln(Dt /Pt )

with annual Standard & Poor Composite stock price data using the long time-series data

of 1871 to 2000. The coefficient of ln(Dt /Pt ) turned out to be positive, to have the

wrong sign. The result was interpreted as indicating that in the entire history of the U. S.

stock market, the dividend-price ratio has never predicted dividend growth in accordance

with the simple efficient markets theory. More complex versions of the efficient markets



5. Campbell and Shiller rejected the efficient markets model using index data, while Vuolteenaho
[2002] found more encouraging results for efficient markets theory when he applied the vector-
autoregressive methods to individual firm data of 1954-96.


                                               6
model, involving time-varying interest rates, were also explored using a generalization of

this model, and also found wanting, Campbell and Shiller [1988a]. In this paper, which

concentrates on individual firm differences, we focus on the simpler version of the model,

with constant discount rates, since this version represents the most popular version of

efficient markets theory, asserting just that movements in the price of any stock relative

to its dividend reflect new information about the outlook for the future payoff of that

stock.



                    Running the Regression with Individual Stock Data

         A fundamental problem with testing this model with individual stock data is, as

we have noted, that while the model concerns growth rates of dividends from decade to

decade, there are not many firms that survive for many decades. In fact, when we did a

search on the Center for Research on Security Prices (CRSP) tape, we found that there

were only 49 firms that appear on the tape continuously without missing information

during the period of 1926 to 2001.6 Since the number of surviving firms is so small, there

is a risk that they are atypical, not representative of all firms. While this risk must be

borne in mind in evaluating our results, we believe that looking at this the universe of

surviving U. S. firms on the CRSP tape still offers some substantial insights, at least as a

case study. Note that the mere fact of survival would be expected if anything to put an

upward bias on the average return on the stocks. It would have no obvious implication for


6. When Poterba and Summers [1988] did a similar search of the CRSP tape, they found 82
survival firms during the 1926-1985 period. The smaller number here apparently reflects the
continuing disappearance of firms through time. While the number of firms is small, we observe
that they span a wide variety of industries. Among the 49 firms, there are 31 manufacturing firms,
5 utility companies, 5 wholesale & retails, 3 financial firms, 4 mines & oil companies and one
telecommunication company.


                                                7
either the time-series or cross-sectional ability of the dividend-price ratio to predict future

changes in dividends.

        Using monthly data from the CRSP tape, we create the series of annual dividends,

Dt , by summing up twelve monthly dividends from January to December of the year; the

price Pt is for the end of the year.7 We exclude from the series non-ordinary dividends

due to liquidation, acquisition, reorganization, rights offering, and stock splits. All the

dividends and stock prices are adjusted by the proper price adjustment factors obtained

from the CRSP tape and then are expressed in real terms using the Consumer Price index.

As a proxy for the future dividend growth g tD we use ĝ tD , the summation truncated after

K years:

               K
                    ∆Dt + k / Pt
        gˆ tD = ∑            k −1
                                                                                         (2)
               k =1 (1 + r )


and we set r equal to 0.064, which is the annual average return over all firms and dates in

the sample.8

        To confirm statistical significance, we regress ĝ tD onto a constant and Dt /Pt

with the 49 individual firms data in three different ways: A. separately for each of the 49

firms (49 regressions each with 76-K observations ), B. pooled over all firms with a

dummy for each firm (one stacked regression with 49×(76-K) observations) and C. for

the equally-weighted portfolio composed of the 49 firms (one regression with 76-K


7. The results are invariant to the starting month for the calculation of annual dividends. We also
work on the same estimation using the data of survival firms after World War II. There are 125
firms that have existed during the 1946-2001 period without any missing information on stock
prices and dividends. The results of the regressions on these samples are basically similar to
those reported in the paper.
8. We avoid the common practice of using the terminal price, Pt+K to infer dividend changes
beyond t+K since that would bring us back to using a sort of return variable as the dependent
variable in our regressions: we want our method to have a simple interpretation, here just whether


                                                 8
observations). Table 1 shows the three results for K=10, 15, 20, and 25, while for the

pooled regression, K=75 is also shown. When appropriate, t statistics were computed

using a Hansen-Hodrick [1980] procedure to correct these statistics for the effects of

serial correlation in the error term due to the overlapping 10-, 15-, 20- or 25-year

intervals with annual data. For the stacked regressions (B) for K=10, 15, 20 and 25, the

Hansen-Hodrick procedure was modified to take account as well of contemporaneous

correlation of errors across firms.9

        If there were no problem of survivorship bias and if the truncation of our infinite

sum for ĝ tD were not a problem, then we would expect that the slope in the regressions

should be minus one and the intercept be the average return on the market. In fact, the

truncation of the infinite sum means that the coefficient might be something other than

minus one. Hence, we merely test here for the negativity of the coefficient of the

dividend-price ratio, looking only to see if it is significant in predicting future dividend

changes in the right direction. Because of survivorship bias, the fact that we are looking

only at surviving firms would appear to put a possible upward bias on the intercept, and

hence we do not focus on the intercept here.

        Table 1 Panel A reports the summary result of the 49 individual regressions. For

K=10, the average coefficient and the average t-statistic on Dt /Pt are –0.440 and –2.11,

respectively. We find that for K=10, 42 out of the 49 firms had negative coefficients as

predicted by the theory, and 20 of them are statistically significant at 5% significance



the dividend-price ratio predicts future dividend growth.
9. The variance matrix Ω of the error term in the stacked regression, for computation of the
variance matrix of the coefficients (X΄X)-1(X΄ ΩX)(X΄X)-1 consists of 49×49 blocks, one for each
firm pair. Each block has the usual Hansen-Hodrick form, but we allow for cross-covariance in
the off-diagonal blocks.


                                               9
level.10 As K is increased, the average t-statistic and R squared decrease. The coefficient

of D/P always has the negative coefficient predicted by the Gordon model, though far

from –1.00. Thus, D/P does seem to forecast future dividend growth, although the

coefficient is shrunken from minus one towards zero, as one might expect if there is some

extraneous noise D/P (caused, say, by investor fads), causing an errors-in-variables bias

in the coefficient.

        Table 1 Panel B shows the results when the regressions were pooled, so that there

are (except where K=75) many more observations in the regression than in Panel A and

hence more power to the test. In the K=75 case, the limiting case with our 76 annual

observations, the regression reduces to a simple cross section regression of the 49 firms

for t=1926. Since there are only 49 observations in the K=75 case, the test is not powerful

here, and we report it only for completeness. For K=10, 15, 20, and 25 the t-statistic is

highly significant and negative. As K is increased, the coefficient of the dividend-price

ratio decreases, and at K=75, the coefficient is very close to its theoretical value of –1.00

(though poorly measured since only 1926 D/P are used). These results provide

impressive evidence for the Gordon model as applied to individual firm data in the sense

that the estimated coefficients are significantly negative, though usually above minus one.

        Table 1 Panel C shows the results when the regressions were put together into one

regression (by using an equally-weighted portfolio) so that we can test the Gordon model

as applied to an index of the 49 stock prices. The coefficient of the dividend-price ratio

has a positive sign, the wrong sign from the standpoint of the Gordon model, and no

longer is statistically significant except for K=25. The wrong sign mirrors the negative


10. Those results, not reported in the table to conserve the space, are available from the authors
on request.


                                                 10
result for the efficient markets model that Campbell and Shiller [1988a] found with a

much broader stock market index.

        The t-statistics reported for Panel C are for the null hypothesis that the coefficient

of D/P is zero; the statistics are much larger against the efficient markets hypothesis that

the coefficient equals minus one. However, there is an issue that the distribution of our t-

statistics may not approximate the normal distribution if D/P is nonstationary, or nearly

so. While our financial theory suggests that the dividend yield should be stationary, in

fact the dividend yield is at best slowly mean-reverting. Elliott and Stock [1994] show

that the size distortion in the t-statistic caused by near-unit root behavior may be

substantial. Campbell and Yogo [2002] show however that if we rule out explosive

processes for the dividend-price ratio in regressions like those of panel C, there is good

evidence against market efficiency.

        We interpret these results as confirming the Samuelson Dictum. In our results

there is substantial evidence that individual firm dividend-price ratios predict future

dividend growth in the right direction, but no evidence that aggregate dividend-price

ratios do.



                                         A Look at the Data

        Figure 1 shows a scatter diagram of ĝ tD for K =25 against Dt /Pt for all 2,499

observations, that is for all 49 firms and for t=1926 to 1976 (1976 being the last year for

which 25 subsequent years are available). The range of Dt /Pt is from 0.0 to 0.4—several

times as wide as the range of the dividend-price ratio for the aggregate stock market over

the sample period. Over this entire range, there is a distinct negative slope to the curve, as



                                              11
the efficient markets theory would predict: firms with lower dividend-price ratios did

indeed have higher subsequent dividend growth, offering some evidence for micro

efficiency. Plots for K=10, 15, and 20 look very similar to Figure 1.

            One should be cautious in interpreting this diagram, however. Note that by

construction all points lie on or above a line from (0,0) with a slope of minus one,

reflecting the simple fact that dividends cannot go below zero. The efficient markets

model and our assumption that dividends beyond K years into the future cannot be

forecasted instead says that the scatter should cluster around a line from (0,r-c) with a

slope of minus one, a line that lies above the other line and is parallel with it, where c is

the mean of the truncated portion of the present value formula, as well as any possible

survivorship bias. But our results are not guaranteed by construction. Indeed when the

scatter of points for the aggregated firms (corresponding to the third regressions, Panel C

in the table) is plotted, it lies above this line but does not have a negative slope.

          This line from (0,0) with a slope of minus one is easily spotted visually as the

lower envelope of the scatter of points. Any observation of Dt /Pt that is followed by a

dramatic drop in dividends (to approximately zero for K years) will lie approximately on

this line. Some of the most visible points on the scatter represent such firms. For example,

the extreme right outlier on the scatter, representing Schlumberger Ltd. in 1931,

represents nothing more than a situation in which the firm attempted to maintain its

dividend level in spite of rapidly declining fortunes. Its stock price fell precipitously after

the 1929 crash, converting a roughly 8% dividend into a 40% dividend, which was cut to

zero in 1932, and held there for many years. This extreme case may be regarded as a

victory for the efficient markets model, in that it does show that the dividend-price ratio




                                              12
predicts future dividend growth, though not the usual case we think of when we consider

market efficiency. It is plain from the fact that the points are so dense around the lower

envelope line, that much of the fit derives from firms whose dividends dropped sharply.

         Another simple story is that of firms that pay zero dividends. Note that all firm-

year pairs with zero dividends can be seen arrayed next to the vertical axis, and that the

dividend growth for these firms tends to be higher than for the firms with non-zero

dividends, as the dynamic Gordon model would predict. Firms with zero dividends

showed higher dividend growth as measured by ĝ tD : the mean ĝ tD for the zero-dividend

observations is 0.149, which, is greater than r=0.064, possibly reflecting the selection

bias for surviving firms noted above. The fact that these points along the vertical axis

cluster above 0.064 might also be considered a sort of approximate victory for market

efficiency. Also note that even if we deleted these firms, there still is a pronounced

negative slope to the scatter. The predictive ability of the dynamic Gordon model is not

just due to the phenomenon of zero dividends.

        Even if we delete all observations of zero dividends, and look at dividend price

ratios less than the discount rate r, that is, less than 0.064, then the slope of the regression

line for K=25 changes to –0.479, not much closer to zero. This means that there are also

observations of a low but non-zero dividend-price ratio successfully predicting above-

normal dividend growth.

        Regression diagnostics following Belsley, Kuh and Welsch [1980] revealed that

no particularly influential observations were responsible for the results in the pooled

regressions.




                                              13
                                               Summary

        With these data on the universe of U. S. individual firms on the CRSP tape with

continuous data since 1926 Samuelson’s dictum appears to have some validity. Over the

interval of U. S. history since 1926, individual-firm dividend-price ratios have had some

significant predictive power for subsequent growth rates in real dividends: this is

evidence of micro-efficiency. A look at a scatter plot of the data confirms that this result

is not exclusively due to zero dividends. Moreover, when the 49 firms are aggregated into

an index, the dividend-price ratio gets the wrong sign in the regressions, and is usually

insignificant. If anything, high aggregate dividend-price ratios predict high aggregate

dividend growth, and so there is no evidence of macro efficiency.11

        The very negative results on the efficiency of the stock market that were reported

by LeRoy and Porter [1981] and Shiller [1981] appear to apply much more to the

aggregate stock market than to individual stocks.




11. The results are consistent with those of Vuolteenaho (2002), who uses firm-level data in
conjunction with a vector autoregressive model and a variance decomposition along lines first
described in Campbell [1991] to conclude that firm level stock returns are predominantly driven
by fundamentals. Cohen, Polk and Vuolteenaho [2002] provide a similar variance decomposition
of firm-level price to book ratios, finding that fundamentals predominate. Jung [2002] finds
using variance and covariance ratio tests that individual stock returns show quite different mean
reversion characteristics from the portfolio of them.


                                               14
                     1.5




                       1
   dividend growth




                     0.5




                       0




                     -0.5
                            0   0.1   0.2               0.3       0.4           0.5

                                            D/P ratio




Figure 1. Scatter diagram showing dividend price ratio Dt/Pt , horizontal axis, and
subsequent 25-year dividend growth ( ĝ tD ) (equation 2, K=25), vertical axis, 2,499
observations shown, comprising 49 firms, t=1926 through 1976.




                                               15
Table 1. Results of Regressions of Future Dividend Growth on Current Dividend-Price
         Ratio: gˆ tD = α + β ( Dt / Pt ) + ε t



                                               Coefficient   T statistic   R squared
                                                of Dt/Pt
 A. Average of 49 Separate Regressions
       i) K=10, n=66 each regression             -0.440        -2.11        0.182
      ii) K=15, n=61 each regression             -0.498        -1.85        0.167
     iii) K=20, n=56 each regression             -0.490        -1.67        0.173
     iv) K=25, n=51 each regression              -0.499        -1.55        0.162
 B. Pooled over all firms
       i) K=10, n=3,234                          -0.589        -5.91        0.174
      ii) K=15, n=2,989                          -0.648        -5.69        0.217
     iii) K=20, n=2,744                          -0.666        -4.82        0.216
     iv) K=25, n=2,499                           -0.711        -4.84        0.149
      v) K=75, n=49                              -1.087        -1.41        0.041
 C. Using the portfolio of the 49 firms
       i) K=10, n=66                             0.336          1.79        0.084
      ii) K=15, n=61                             0.322          1.52        0.063
     iii) K=20, n=56                             0.463          1.84        0.101
     iv) K=25, n=51                              0.697          2.40        0.175




                                          16
                                      References


Belsley, David A., Edwin Kuh, and Roy E. Welsch, Regression Diagnostics: Identifying
       Influential Data and Sources of Collinearity, New York: Wiley, 1980.

Campbell, John Y. “A Variance Decomposition for Stock Returns,” Economic Journal,
     101:157-79, 1991.

Campbell, John Y. and Motohiro Yogo, “Efficient Tests of Stock Return Predictability,”
     unpublished paper, Harvard University, 2002.

Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, “The Dividend-Price Ratio and Expectations of
     Future Dividends and Discount Factors,” Review of Financial Studies, 1:195-228,
     1988(a).

Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, “Stock Prices, Earnings, and Expected
     Dividends,” Journal of Finance 43:661-76, 1988(b).

Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, “Valuation Ratios and the Long-Run Stock
     Market Outlook,” Journal of Portfolio Management, Winter 1998, pp. 11-26.

Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, “Valuation Ratios and the Long-Run Stock
     Market Outlook: An Update,” NBER Working Paper No. 8221, 2001,
     forthcoming in Richard Thaler, editor, Advances in Behavioral Finance II, New
     York: Sage Foundation: 2003.

Cohen, Randolph, Christopher Polk, and Tuomo Vuolteenaho. 2002. “The Value
       Spread.” unpublished paper, Harvard Business School, 2002, forthcoming,
       Journal of Finance.

Elliott, Graham, and James H. Stock, “Inference in Time Series Regression when the
         Order of Integration of a Regressor is Unknown,” Econometric Theory, 10:672-
         700, 1994.

Hansen, Lars P., and Robert J. Hodrick, “Forward Exchange Rates as Optimal Predictors
      of Future Spot Rates: An Econometric Analysis,” Journal of Political Economy,
      88:829-53, 1980.

Jung, Jeeman, “Efficiency and Volatility of Stock Markets: Mean Reversion Detected by
       Covariance Ratios,” unpublished manuscript, 2002.

LeRoy, Stephen, and Richard Porter, “The Present Value Relation: Tests Based on
      Variance Bounds,” Econometrica, 49:555-74, 1981.



                                           17
Poterba, James M., and Lawrence H. Summers, “Mean Reversion in Stock Prices:
       Evidence and Implications,” Journal of Financial Economics, 22:26-59, 1988.

Samuelson, Paul A., “Summing Up on Business Cycles: Opening Address,” in Jeffrey C.
      Fuhrer and Scott Schuh, Beyond Shocks: What Causes Business Cycles, Boston:
      Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 1998.

Shiller, Robert J., “Do Stock Prices Move Too Much to be Justified by Subsequent
        Changes in Dividends?” American Economic Review, 71:421-36, 1981.

Shiller, Robert J., Irrational Exuberance, 2nd Edition, New York: Broadway Books, 2000.

Vuolteenaho, Tuomo, “What Drives Firm-Level Stock Returns?” Journal of Finance,
       57:233-64, 2002




                                          18
