                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DETERMINANTS OF DRUG INJECTION BEHAVIOR:
                       ECONOMIC FACTORS, HIV INJECTION RISK
                         AND NEEDLE EXCHANGE PROGRAMS

                                             Jeff DeSimone

                                          Working Paper 9350
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w9350


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                             November 2002




I thank the National Archive of Criminal Justice Data for granting access to Drug Use Forecasting data, Bob
Janice of the Drug Enforcement Administration for helping me acquire and understand the drug price data,
Dave Purchase of the North American Syringe Exchange Network for finding and providing information on
start dates for needle exchange programs in several cities, Mark Holmes, Sara Markowitz and Nick Rupp for
suggestions that substantially improved the paper, participants in the 2002 NBER Health Economics Summer
Institute and an ECU economics seminar for helpful comments, and Mike MacKenzie for excellent research
assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2002 by Jeff DeSimone. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Determinants of Drug Injection Behavior:
Economic Factors, HIV Injection Risk and Needle Exchange Programs
Jeff DeSimone
NBER Working Paper No. 9350
November 2002
JEL No. D12, I12, K42

                                            ABSTRACT



   This study examines the effects of local cocaine and heroin prices, AIDS rates, and needle

exchange programs on drug injection and needle sharing by adult male arrestees in 24 large U.S. cities

during 1989–1995. Regressions that control for personal characteristics including income, fixed city

and year effects, and city-specific trends indicate that needle exchange programs decrease both

injection and sharing. Increases in previous year AIDS prevalence reduce injection by both sharers

and non-sharers, leaving the proportion of injectors who share unchanged. Higher cocaine prices lead

to less cocaine injection and more sharing, but heroin prices do not effect injection or sharing.




Jeff DeSimone
Department of Economics
East Carolina University
Brewster A-427, 10th Street
Greenville, NC 27858
and NBER
desimonej@mail.ecu.edu
                                          I. Introduction

       The injection of illegal drugs such as heroin and cocaine is associated with substantial

costs in terms of crime, criminal justice, and social services. Beyond these, drug injection is a

major public health problem. In particular, drug injectors risk infection with blood-borne

diseases such as HIV and hepatitis B and C through the sharing of infected needles, and can

transmit these diseases to needle-sharing or sexual partners and their own children. The Centers

for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) attributes 42 percent of U.S. cumulative non-pediatric

AIDS cases with known exposure category, and 45 percent of such cases reported in 2000, to

drug injection. Almost three-quarters of these cases stem from sharing needles, with the rest

resulting from unprotected sex with a drug injector. Moreover, 82 percent of cumulative

pediatric cases with identified exposure category, and 86 percent of such cases in 2000, involved

transmission from a mother infected through drug injection or having sex with a drug injector to

her fetus or newborn child (CDC 2001).

       The number of injection drug users in the U.S. is unclear. Estimates include 900,000 by

the CDC and 1.64 million by the National Association of State Alcohol and Drug Abuse

Directors, with an average of three injections daily (Lurie et al. 1998). The Treatment Episode

Data Set (TEDS) indicates that 192,000 entrants to publicly funded drug treatment facilities in

1999 injected the primary drug for which they sought treatment (SAMHSA 2001). According to

the 1999 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse (NHSDA), slightly over three million

individuals have previously injected drugs (SAMHSA 2002).

       A rich source of information on drug injectors is data collected on arrestees in 24 large

U.S. cities by the Drug Use Forecasting (DUF) program of the National Institute of Justice (U.S.

Department of Justice, 1998). During 1989–1997, 8.9 percent of arrestees reported injecting




                                                 1
drugs in the past six months. Prevalence declined steadily during the period, from 16.2 percent

to 8.3 percent for females and 12.0 percent to 6.7 percent for males, although rates among males,

who make up around 70 percent of AIDS cases attributable to drug injection, remained level

since 1994.1

         The drugs most often injected are cocaine and heroin. In DUF, 75 percent of arrestees

previously injecting drugs have injected cocaine and 69 percent have injected heroin, while 34

percent have injected amphetamines and 20 percent have injected other drugs. Similarly, the

1999 NHSDA estimates that 1.93 million individuals have injected cocaine while 1.44 million

have injected heroin and 1.08 million have injected stimulants (SAMHSA 2002). While cocaine

use greatly exceeds heroin use, heroin is far more likely to be injected than is cocaine. For

instance, rates of positive drug tests in DUF are 42 percent for cocaine and only 8 percent for

heroin, but rates of past six month injection among those testing positive for use are 46 percent

for heroin and only 12 percent for cocaine. Similarly, in the 1999 TEDS (SAMHSA 2001), rates

of injection among those seeking treatment were 66 percent for heroin users (down from 77

percent in 1992) but only 6 percent for cocaine users.

         This paper examines drug injection behavior among male DUF arrestees during 1989–

1995.2 In particular, it investigates how recent injection and needle sharing responds to three

factors: economic incentives, specifically income and prices of cocaine and heroin; perceived

HIV infection risk, represented by AIDS prevalence; and needle exchange program presence.

1
  Extrapolating from DUF to the general arrestee population, which Hunt and Rhodes (2001) argue is reasonable,
Federal Bureau of Investigation (1998) data on U.S. arrestee counts imply past six month drug injection by 1.08
million arrestees nationwide in 1997. If all drug injectors can be considered hardcore drug users, this translates to
2.16 million past six month drug injectors overall according to the Rhodes et al. (2000) estimate that roughly one-
half of hardcore drug users are arrested annually.
2
  Though data collection began in late 1987 and continues today, I use data from 1989–1995 because many sample
cities were not added until 1989, needle sharing questions were eliminated in mid-1995 when the survey instrument
was altered, and needle exchange program data are incomplete after 1995. The injection rates cited earlier include
data only through 1997 because the sampling frame was altered in 1998 when DUF expanded to 35 cities and
became the Arrestee Drug Abuse Monitoring program.


                                                          2
         Injected drugs are goods that are bought and sold in a market, albeit illegal, and thus

should adhere to microeconomic principles regarding the impact of prices and income. The

same is true for needles used to inject drugs, suggesting relationships between economic factors

and needle sharing that are the opposite directions to those for purchased goods. Syringes cost

about 25 cents each when legally obtained from a pharmacy. However, five states have laws

requiring a prescription to purchase syringes, and all but three states have drug paraphernalia

laws that penalize syringe possession and distribution (Ruiz-Sierra 2001, Sidwell et al. 2001).3

On the illegal market, in contrast, syringes sold as “new” cost several dollars and often are in fact

repackaged after being used by others who might be infected with HIV (Des Jarlais et al. 1996).

Many studies have examined the impact of prices and income on cocaine and heroin use, but few

have focused explicitly on injection, and none have investigated needle sharing.

         Similarly, several studies have examined the impact of AIDS prevalence on sexual

behaviors that expose individuals to HIV infection risk. These studies assume that increases in

local AIDS rates raise perceived probabilities of HIV infection and use AIDS data because they

are much more extensive than are HIV data. The CDC statistics cited earlier suggest that HIV

infection risk is as relevant for drug injection, which has not been studied, as for risky sex.

         Economic research has also yet to study needle exchange programs (NEPs). Since NEPs

provide sterile syringes in exchange for used ones in an effort to reduce blood-borne infection

transmission by drug injectors, they are expected to decrease needle sharing. NEPs also reduce

the cost of drug injection. Consequently, many lawmakers have assumed that NEPs encourage

drug use, leading to a 1989 ban on federal NEP funding that is still in place. But most NEPs also

refer clients to drug treatment and offer HIV testing and counseling. As NEP customers are

3
  The five states with prescription laws are California, Delaware, Illinois, Massachusetts, and New Jersey. The three
states without paraphernalia laws are Alaska, Iowa, and South Carolina, although some localities within the former
two have ordinances restricting syringe possession and sale.


                                                         3
placed into treatment programs and provided with information on injection-related HIV risks and

even their own HIV infection status, injection propensity and frequency should fall.

       As of July 2002, 211 NEPs existed in 37 states, Washington D.C. and Puerto Rico

(Purchase 2002) despite the federal funding ban and previously described laws that make NEPs

illegal in many areas. NEPs are funded either by permissive states and localities or privately,

with some NEPs operating secretly and others in tacit agreement with local law enforcement

agencies. Data are difficult to obtain. For instance, an October 1999 survey (Singh et al. 2001)

was completed by only 84 percent of known programs, some of which asked for their identity

not to be revealed. The 107 responding programs operate at health van stops, sidewalk tables,

cars, storefronts and health clinics, are open for an average of 20 hours per week, have a median

yearly budget of $38,000, and exchanged 19.4 million syringes. For DUF cities, time series of

NEP characteristics are unavailable, but information on the date of first NEP opening allows for

examination of how program presence impacts injection behavior.

       The DUF data analyzed here are useful for various reasons. Most importantly,

information is available on recent drug injection and needle sharing. In addition, arrestees

represent a sizable fraction of drug injectors in the population, the sample size is large, and the

sampling scheme allows for merging of several relevant variables that are measured at the city or

metropolitan area level. Results show that, controlling for arrestee characteristics, indicators for

arrest city and survey year, and city-specific behavioral trends, each of the main factors under

examination have a significant impact on drug injection behavior.

       The paper proceeds as follows: Section II reviews the pertinent literature from economics

and other disciplines, Section III discusses the data, Section IV outlines the estimation

methodology, Section V presents the results of the analysis, and Section VI concludes.




                                                  4
                                      II. Literature Review

       The previous literature germane to this analysis can be divided into three topics. Two of

these, the effects of drug prices (and income) on drug use and the impact of disease infection

risks on risky or protective behavior, have received attention from economists. The third, the

impact of NEPs on injection behavior, has been studied only by disciplines outside of economics.

       Economic Factors. The only study that explicitly examines the impact of prices and

income on drug injection is Bretteville-Jensen (1999), who analyzes heroin injection by 1,834

males in Oslo, Norway. She estimates heroin price elasticities of –0.36 for dealers and –1.51 for

non-dealers and income elasticites of 0.59 for dealers and 0.51 for non-dealers.

       Other studies have estimated price elasticities of cocaine and heroin use without regard to

mode of administration. In monthly 1970–73 data from 15 Detroit communities, Silverman and

Spruill (1977) estimate a long-run heroin own-price elasticity of –0.25. Using 1923–38 data on

the Indonesian opium market, Van Ours (1995) estimates short-run price elasticities of –0.7 for

consumption and –0.4 for the number of users. DiNardo (1993) finds that in state-level 1977–87

Monitoring the Future (MTF) data, past month cocaine participation by high school seniors is

unrelated to the cocaine price. From aggregate DUF data on positive tests for each drug,

Caulkins (1996) imputes population-wide participation price elasticities of –1.48 to –2.08 for

cocaine and –0.53 to –1.80 for heroin. Saffer and Chaloupka (1999) estimate participation price

elasticities of –0.28 for cocaine and –0.94 for heroin among 1988–91 NHSDA respondents.

Three additional studies estimate past year participation cocaine price elasticities. Chaloupka et

al. (1999) estimate elasticities for MTF high school seniors of –0.88 in pooled 1982 and 1989

data but only –0.24 in 1989. Using a rational addiction framework, Grossman and Chaloupka

(1998) estimate elasticities of –0.42 among 18 to 27 year-olds in the 1976–85 MTF panels and




                                                 5
follow-ups when individual-specific fixed effects are included and –0.72 when they are omitted.

Controlling for fixed state effects in pooled 1990–97 NHSDA data, DeSimone and Farrelly

(2003) estimate an elasticity of –0.36 for respondents aged 18–39.

       AIDS Rates. Among several studies that examine effects of perceived infection risks on

propensities to engage in risky behaviors or protect against disease transmission by regressing

behavioral indicators against local disease prevalence rates, three analyze the response of sexual

behaviors to AIDS rate changes. Ahituv et al. (1996) estimate a positive effect of state AIDS

rates on the likelihood that 1984–90 National Longitudinal Survey of Youth respondents use

condoms during intercourse. Levine (2001) finds little relationship between state AIDS rates and

lifetime or current sexual activity and birth control use among 1991–97 Youth Risk Behavior

Survey respondents. DeSimone (2002) shows that during 1989–95, promiscuous sexual

behavior by DUF arrestees decreases when metropolitan area AIDS rates rise.

       Needle Exchange Programs. The economics literature has yet to study NEPs. Many

health researchers have examined impacts of individual programs, but few have estimated

aggregate impacts across NEPs. Lurie and Reingold (1993) summarize the early results. They

report no evidence that NEPs increase drug use by clients or in communities, limited evidence

that NEPs reduce injection frequencies, and abundant evidence that NEPs reduce needle sharing.

       Subsequent studies have produced similar results. Seven government-funded reports

conclude that NEPs reduce rates of HIV infection but do not increase drug use (Lurie and

DeCarlo 1998, Ruiz-Sierra 2001). In New York City, NEPs decreased risky injection behavior

by up to 73 percent, and injectors using NEPs were two-thirds less likely to contract HIV than

other injectors (Des Jarlais et al. 1996). Injectors attending Oakland NEPs were 2.5 times more

likely than other injectors to stop sharing needles after six months (Blumenthal et al. 2000). In




                                                 6
combined data from four cities, NEPs decreased the number of injections per syringe by 44–85

percent and significantly raised the likelihood that syringes were used only once (Heimer et al.

1998). In San Francisco during 1986–92, daily injection frequency among injectors fell from 1.9

to 0.7 and the fraction of new injectors fell from 3 percent to 1 percent (Watters et al. 1994).

Washington D.C. NEP participants reported drops of 50 percent in crack cocaine use, 29 percent

in the number of drug injections, 18 percent in heroin use, and two-thirds in needle sharing (Drug

Strategies 1999, Klein et al. 1997), compared with the month prior to program entrance. A

worldwide survey of 81 (mostly U.S.) cities found that HIV infection rates among injectors

decreased by 5.8 percent annually in the 29 cities with NEPs and increased by 5.9 percent

annually in the 52 cities without NEPs (Hurley 1997). In Hawaii, which opened an NEP in 1990,

HIV infection rates fell from 5 percent in 1989 to 1.1 percent in 1996 (Vogt et al. 1998).

        In sum, previous economics studies suggest that injected drugs are normal goods with

respect to income and prices of cocaine and heroin, which implies the opposite relationship for

needle sharing if illegally-obtained syringes are sufficiently costly, and the possibility of a

negative effect of local AIDS prevalence on both drug injection and needle sharing. Meanwhile,

prior health research indicates that the opening of an NEP in a city could reduce proximate

needle sharing while also not increasing, and possibly reducing, drug injection.



                                                 III. Data

        This study examines annual DUF data from 1989–1995 on arrestees in 24 large U.S.

cities.4 Hunt and Rhodes (2001) describe the data in detail. DUF samples individuals arrested in


4
 These cities are Atlanta, Birmingham, Chicago, Cleveland, Dallas, Denver, Detroit, Fort Lauderdale, Houston,
Indianapolis, Kansas City, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, Omaha, Philadelphia, Phoenix, Portland
(OR), Saint Louis, San Antonio, San Diego, San Jose, and Washington D.C. All are sampled annually during the
period except Atlanta, Denver, and Omaha in 1989, Miami in 1990, and Kansas City after 1992.


                                                      7
the participating cities during one two-week period each quarter. Those booked within 48 hours

of arrest are asked at booking to provide information about their drug use along with a urine

specimen. Over 90 percent agree to an interview, and about 80 percent of those interviewed

provide urine samples that are screened for various drugs. The data available to researchers

includes only arrestees providing urine samples. I analyze males aged 18 and above.5

         The DUF data are uniquely suited to this study for many reasons, the most obvious being

that they contain information on recent drug injection and needle sharing. Beyond that, arrestees

are a natural group to study because their rates of drug injection are much higher than those of

the population at large: lifetime drug injection prevalence among males age 18 and above is 1.7

percent in the NHSDA (SAMHSA 1999) but is 14.1 percent in DUF. Another advantage is that

sampling is restricted to 24 large cities, meaning that estimates of prices and HIV risks faced by

respondents are more precise than when measured at the state level, and making it plausible that

a simple indicator of local NEP presence could influence reported injection behavior. Moreover,

the sample size of 122,623 provides sufficient power to detect relatively small effects.

         Dependent Variables. The dependent variables in the regression analyses are four binary

indicators of injection behavior based on self-reported drug injection and needle sharing and

results of urinalyses for cocaine and opiates that detect use within the previous 72 hours.6 The

first indicates any drug injection in the previous six months without regard to specific drugs.

5
  I drop respondents aged 17 and younger based on the typical legal distinction between adults and juveniles.
Separate adult and juvenile questionnaires are administered, but the adult sample includes some respondents aged 17
and younger, while the juvenile sample includes some respondents aged 18–21. I omit the entire juvenile sample
because past six month injection rates are low (around 0.5 percent) and personal income is not observed. Neither
inclusion of 17 year old adult sample respondents nor omission of respondents age 66 and above (the latter group
forming only 0.32 percent of the sample) changes the results. For the adult female sample, which is roughly one-
third the size of the male sample, personal income and AIDS effects are similar to, but slightly weaker than, those
for males, NEP program impacts are negative but smaller than for males and generally insignificant, and the effects
of price on injection are usually insignificant for cocaine but positive and significant for heroin.
6
  Although codeine, morphine and methadone are also opiates, I assume that all positive opiate tests represent heroin
use. In the 1999 TEDS, the number of individuals seeking heroin treatment was ten times the number seeking
treatment for all other opiates combined (SAMHSA 2001).


                                                         8
This likely underestimates true injection propensities, as respondents evidently underreport

cocaine and heroin consumption despite agreeing to submit to urine tests for these drugs. For

instance, 44 percent of sample respondents test positive for cocaine and 8 percent test positive

for opiates, but only 21 percent report using cocaine and 6 percent report using heroin in the past

72 hours. Rhodes et al. (2000) estimate that, taking into account false positive tests, the

percentage of respondents truthfully reporting use is 61 for cocaine and 73 for heroin.

           I also construct indicators for current cocaine and heroin injection. Since respondents do

not identify the drugs they currently inject, I consider current cocaine (heroin) injectors to be

those who report both past six month injection and any lifetime cocaine (heroin) injection, and

also test positive for cocaine (opiates). Beyond self-reporting and test errors, these measures

overestimate actual current injection of the corresponding drug, because some positive tests

likely reflect non-injection administration by arrestees who injected the drug in the past six

months but not in the previous 72 hours. As Table 1 indicates, just over a quarter of recent

injectors do not currently inject either drug, a similar fraction currently inject both drugs, and

injection of cocaine but not heroin is twice as prevalent as injection of heroin but not cocaine.

           The remaining dependent variable, an indicator of recent needle sharing, is examined

separately for samples of all respondents and only those reporting past six month injection.

Respondents are coded as sharing needles if they report past six month injection, ever sharing

needles, and sharing some or most of the time (as opposed to not sharing anymore).

           Explanatory Variables. DUF respondents separately report income obtained from legal

and illegal sources in the past month. I specify total past month income as the sum of these two

amounts, and include the percentage of income from illegal sources as an additional variable.7

           The remaining explanatory variables of interest are city or metropolitan level measures
7
    The income and price variables are converted to 1997 values using the CPI for all urban consumers.


                                                           9
that are matched with individual DUF responses. Data on cocaine and heroin prices are collected

by undercover drug agents, mostly from the Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), and

recorded in the DEA’s System to Retrieve Information from Drug Evidence (STRIDE). These

prices should be fairly accurate since an unreasonable price offer might tip off the seller and

endanger the agent.8 Transaction sizes are standardized to pure gram units because, as Caulkins

and Padman (1993) and Rhodes et al. (1994) show, quantity discounts exist for both drugs.9

         For each drug, I impute annual prices for DUF metropolitan areas from STRIDE

observations on individual purchases using the OLS regression

                        log p = α 0 + α 1 (log w + log rˆ) + mα 2 + yα 3 + (m × y )α 4 + η ,                      (1)

where p is the price, w is the total gram weight, r is the purity (pure weight divided by w),

log r̂ is the predicted value from a regression of log r on log w, m, y, and m × y, m and y are

vectors of indicators for metropolitan area and year, respectively, m × y is a complete set of

interactions between metropolitan area and year, and η is the error term.10 For a particular area

and year the predicted price is exp(α 0 + α 2m + α 3y + α 4m× y ) , the median price for one gram of 100

percent pure drug in the area and year with corresponding indicators set equal to one. I follow

Caulkins (1994) in excluding outliers before estimating equation (1).11 Although the DUF


8
  Horowitz (2001) argues that STRIDE cocaine and heroin price data are not representative of actual market prices,
but most previous drug price studies have used STRIDE, and Caulkins (2001) and Rhodes and Kling (2001) strongly
disagree with the implication that STRIDE data are not a useful source of information for drug policy.
9
  Amounts injected per session vary, but are typically between 0.1–1 pure grams for cocaine and 10–60 pure
milligrams for heroin (Rhodes et al. 1994).
10
   For metropolitan areas with insufficient STRIDE observations to construct annual price series, I combine data
from non-DUF metropolitan areas of similar population size that are in the same census division or region. These
areas are Indianapolis, Omaha, and San Jose (defined to include data from Oakland and San Francisco) for both
drugs and Birmingham, Kansas City, New Orleans, and Phoenix for heroin. In addition, heroin price data are
combined for four pairs of cities with the same price assigned to each: Fort Lauderdale and Miami, Houston and San
Antonio, Cleveland and Indianapolis, and Kansas City and Saint Louis.
11
   The number of STRIDE observations in the equation (1) samples is 21,196 for cocaine and 7,458 for heroin. I
omit 500 cocaine and 492 heroin prices with purity below 0.001 percent or above 100 percent, which signify data
errors or purchases of trivial drug amounts. Next, I regress log price on log weight and year indicators, and for each
year discard observations with predicted prices per bulk gram of less than one-eighth or greater than eight times the


                                                         10
sampling areas are cities (and occasionally counties), drug prices correspond to the metropolitan

area to include additional STRIDE observations that improve the precision of the price series.

         Annual AIDS rates per 1,000 residents are reported on the CDC Wonder web site (at

http://wonder.cdc.gov/). The data used here correspond to the 1987 CDC definition of AIDS.12

Rates are for the metropolitan area because city-level rates are not published. I specify the one-

year lagged rate, which eliminates the possibility of reverse causation and conceivably represents

the state of knowledge regarding infection risks at the time the injection decision is made.

         NEP-level time series on budgets, clients served and needles exchanged are not available.

Hence I simply control for local NEP presence with indicators of whether a program has existed

in the city of arrest for 0–5 months and 6 or more months as of the interview month. This allows

for a delayed effect, which might occur if injection behaviors take time to adjust or simply

because the injection variable spans the previous six months. Lurie and Reingold (1993) provide

origination dates for 37 programs known to exist by August 1993, including programs in eight

DUF cities. Information on whether and when NEPs opened in remaining DUF cities through

1995 was graciously provided by Dave Purchase, chair of the North American Syringe Exchange

Network (Purchase 2002). Table 2 lists the month and year in which the first NEP opened in

DUF cities with at least one program.13

         Figures 1–2 present time series of the dependent variables, while Figures 3–4 do the same

for the primary explanatory measures. In Figure 1, past six month injection rates declined

sharply from 1989 to 1991 and again from 1993 to 1994, and remained relatively constant during

yearly mean. Finally, I exclude observations with an observed price per pure gram of greater than $3,000 for
cocaine and $20,000 for heroin. The latter two steps eliminate only 171 cocaine and 284 heroin price observations.
12
   In 1993 the CDC expanded the definition to include many cases that previously would not have been counted.
13
   The first program in San Francisco, which is 41 miles from San Jose, opened in November 1988, while that in
Boulder, which is 28 miles from Denver, began in May 1989. Since many NEP programs are mobile units that
travel to many different locations within a city, it seems unlikely that drug injectors would travel such distances to
exchange needles, and thus I ignore the presence of these nearby programs. Results with the NEP variables recoded
to include programs in San Francisco and Boulder, though, are quite similar.


                                                         11
the remaining years. Current injection of both drugs moved similarly until 1992, after which

cocaine injection continued to decline while heroin injection held steady. The needle sharing

series mimics that of any injection. Part of the drop in needle sharing results from sharers

quitting injection, as falling injection rates were accompanied from 1990–95 by a 30 percent

decrease in the fraction of injectors who share (Figure 2). No explanatory variable series can

explain these results by itself. In Figure 3, prices spiked upward during the first couple years,

but sharing among injectors declined precipitously in the second year; prices then fell

substantially, but injection rates failed to climb in response. Lagged AIDS rate movements are

roughly the inverse of those for any injection (Figure 4), but not of those for sharing by injectors

in several years. Similarly, the steepest decline in injection and sharing occurred before the

opening of seven needle exchange programs between December 1990 and October 1992, which

triggered drastic increases in the proportion of respondents living in cities with NEPs.

       All regressions also control for various respondent characteristics. These include age and

age squared, years of completed education and its square, indicators of black, Hispanic, and other

race (mutually exclusive, with white omitted), indicators of being married, divorced, widowed,

and living with a boyfriend or girlfriend, and indicators of (legal) full and part-time employment.

       Table 3 provides summary statistics for all respondents (left panel) and past six month

injectors (right panel), among whom needle sharing is separately analyzed. Past six month

injection is reported by 8.5 percent of respondents, but only 60 (43) percent of these are

classified as current injectors of cocaine (heroin). Thirty percent of injectors, representing 2.6

percent of all respondents, share needles. Drug injectors have higher incomes, face lower drug

prices and AIDS rates, and are more likely to live in a city with an NEP. To some extent these

comparisons simply reflect heterogeneity between injectors and non-injectors, but they also




                                                 12
anticipate some of the regression results.14



                                                 IV. Methodology

         I estimate probit regression models of the form

                                           Pr( y = 1 | x) = Φ ( xβ )                                                 (2)

where y is a binary injection or sharing indicator, Φ(.) is the cumulative normal distribution, x is

the vector of explanatory variables, and β is the vector of parameters to be estimated. Tables 5–8

report marginal effects ∂Φ ∂x and their associated standard errors. Denoting x as the vector of

explanatory variable means and φ (.) as the normal density function, the marginal effect of

variable xk equals φ ( x β ) β k for continuous xk and Φ ( x β | x k = 1) − Φ ( x β | x k = 0) for binary xk.

The tables also report elasticities, x (∂Φ ∂x) Φ ( x β ) , for continuous variables and percentage

changes in outcomes induced by changes from 0 to 1, (∂Φ ∂x) Φ ( x β ) , in binary variables, and

list pseudo-R2 statistics (1 – Le/Lc), where Lc and Le are log likelihoods from the corresponding

constant-only and regression models, respectively.

         Because most explanatory variables of interest are measured at the city (or metropolitan

area) level, all regressions include vectors of city and year indicators. These control for both the

documented downward trend in injection propensity and unobserved city-specific, time-invariant

factors that are correlated with injection or needle sharing. Consider Table 4, which shows rates

of recent injection and sharing (among all respondents) by city and year, with rates in bold for

years in which NEPs were open for the entire year and, in the mean and trend columns, for cities

that gain NEPs during the period. Weighting each city and year equally, mean rates in cities

14
  For instance, the income difference is partially explained by the relative involvement among each group in illegal
activities that generate income, as reflected in the variable measuring the percent of income that is illegally obtained,
and, as discussed subsequently, NEPs are more likely to open in cities with above average injection rates.


                                                           13
with NEPs are 2 to 2.5 times larger than in other cities (11.7 percent v. 6.0 percent for injection,

3.9 percent v. 1.5 percent for sharing). This positive correlation between NEP presence and both

injection and sharing, however, does not necessarily imply that NEPs increase injection.15 The

relevant question is instead whether injection and sharing declined in cities with NEPs, relative

to other cities, upon NEP opening. The inclusion of city and year indicators allows the analysis

to address this question. Similarly, coefficients on AIDS prevalence and cocaine and heroin

prices are identified by temporal changes of these variables within cities.

         I compare results of regressions specified as indicated thus far to those that also control

for city-specific linear trends in the dependent variable. Table 4 indicates that although injection

and sharing rates are typically lower after an NEP opens, this might be merely a continuation of

pre-existing downward trends, which for both behaviors are significant at the 95 percent level in

seven of nine cities with NEPs and about two-thirds of cities overall. Since these trends vary

widely across cities, it is unlikely that the year indicators fully account for them, suggesting that

distinguishing between falling rates and NEP effects might require also controlling for city-

specific trends. If rates fall faster in NEP cities because they are higher to begin with, simple

trend effects might be incorrectly attributed to NEPs if city-specific trends are not included.



                                                     V. Results

         Table 5 contains the main results of the analysis, comparing models that omit city-

specific regressions to models that include them but are otherwise identically specified. The



15
  But it does imply that NEPs openings are endogenous, in that they are more likely to occur in cities in which the
behaviors they intend to affect are more prevalent, and thus the public health situation is more urgent. Further
emphasizing this, and thus the importance of including city and year indicators (and city-specific trends as described
below), is evidence from city-level univariate regressions (n = 24) of a significantly positive effect of injection (and
sharing) rates in 1989 (or 1990 for cities not sampled in 1989) on NEP presence, represented by either an indicator
of NEP opening during the period or a variable measuring the fraction of the period in which an NEP is open.


                                                          14
upper panel displays results for the three injection variables. Regardless of whether trends are

included, income positively affects injection of any drug and cocaine, albeit with an elasticity of

around .01. In contrast, the inclusion of trends lessens negative effects (and increases positive

effects) of cocaine prices. With trends, cocaine injection is own-price responsive whereas heroin

injection is unresponsive to prices. The own-price cocaine injection elasticity of –.31 is within

the –.24 to –.42 range encompassed by several previously cited estimates for cocaine

participation, though the lack of heroin price effects contradicts existing evidence for heroin use.

         The income and cocaine price results suggest that injectable cocaine is a distinct good

from powder and crack cocaine, in that the comparison group of non-injectors contains a large

group of respondents who administer heroin and (especially) cocaine by another method: past six

month injection is reported by only 13 percent of cocaine positive respondents and 47 percent of

opiate positive respondents. One consideration, particularly for heroin, is that drug dealers often

pass price declines onto consumers by raising purity without changing the nominal price, so that

as the price falls, purity rises and the drug becomes more convenient to snort or smoke.16 The

lack of heroin responsiveness relative to cocaine might therefore be attributable to a greater

choice of close substitutes for cocaine injection, given that powder and crack cocaine are more

readily available than heroin pure enough to snort or smoke. Another possible explanation for

the income and price effects is that injectors consume more frequently than non-injectors.

         AIDS prevalence has significant negative effects on all types of injection, supporting the

hypothesis that individuals become more likely to avoid risky behavior as the inherent risk


16
   Figure 3 shows that heroin prices fell by about 60 percent from 1991 to 1995, during which average purity
increased from 17.3 percent to 40.1 percent. It is thus possible that the insignificant heroin price could represent a
combination of a negative “true” price effect and a positive effect through purity changes (although the heroin
injection decline in Figure 2 took place entirely before prices began to fall). As an additional explanatory variable,
predicted heroin purity is indeed negatively related to injection of any drug and heroin, but its insertion does not
change heroin price results. Furthermore, results for cocaine purity suggest that price and purity changes are not
truly independent. Thus predicted purity, which is used to predict the city-level price, is omitted from the analysis.


                                                          15
increases. A 10 percent increase in the previous year AIDS rate decreases the probability of

injection by between two and four percent depending on the type of injection.17

         In the long term, NEPs significantly reduce all three types of injection by 21–25 percent.

NEPs also reduce injection of any drug and cocaine in the short term. This is somewhat

surprising given that NEPs lower the cost of injection by providing free needles. Some previous

analyses of NEP effects present similar findings, but none provide a convincing explanation.

Referrals to drug treatment must play a role. Lurie and Reingold (1993) find that even though

NEP clients are typically offered drug treatment only upon request and treatment slots are often

scarce, 30–40 percent of clients in several cities were referred to treatment, and placement occurs

more quickly than otherwise. Thus, many NEPs act as a bridge to drug treatment for injectors

who visit the NEP because they are seeking treatment. In addition, the provision of HIV

counseling and testing by NEPs might reduce injection rates. Presumably NEP clients are aware

of HIV infection risks, but this knowledge might be enhanced by information gained from

program personnel. Moreover, HIV testing eliminates uncertainty about HIV status. Watters et

al. (1994) find that receiving an HIV test result, regardless of the outcome, is a strong predictor

of not sharing needles. Such information could diminish injection if clients are concerned about

the sterility of exchanged needles or simply that continued injection will eventually expose them

to contaminated needles.


17
  An alternative interpretation is that the negative AIDS coefficients primarily reflect sample selection: when AIDS
rates rise, drug injectors die or become too ill to further inject drugs. Federal Bureau of Investigation (1996) arrest
data suggest that in 1995, for instance, 125 of 1,000 male residents of DUF cities were arrestees. Consider the
impact of a unit increase in the lagged AIDS rate (1 case per 1,000 residents), which implies an increase of about 1.8
cases per 1,000 male residents since about 90 percent of those with AIDS are men. The CDC reports that 35
percent of identifiable male AIDS cases involve injection on the part of the infected individual, meaning that the
above increase represents .63 injection-related cases per 1,000 residents. Under the unrealistically conservative
assumptions that all AIDS sufferers are rendered unable to inject drugs within a year, the resulting reduction in
injection probability is .63/125 = .005. Thus at most about 14 percent of the estimated effect on past six month
injection can be attributed to selection.



                                                          16
         The lower panel of Table 5 displays results for current needle sharing. Income and

cocaine price effects have switched signs, as predicted, and are significant except for income in

the sample of all respondents. This is consistent with price-inelastic injection demand: as prices

rise, injection drug expenditures occupy more of the budget, and funds to spend on clean needles

become scarcer. AIDS rates are negatively related to overall sharing, but have no effect on

sharing by injectors. This is intriguing, given that that the primary risk of HIV infection from

injecting drugs involves using contaminated needles. Again, some injectors conceivably worry

about the sterility of seemingly clean needles, and perhaps others simply recognize that injection

can lead to AIDS or want to further diminish the risk by avoiding injection altogether.

Meanwhile, NEPs reduce sharing among injectors by 21 percent in the long run, and diminish

overall sharing by 25 percent in the first six months and by 45 percent thereafter.18

         To appreciate these results, it is important to recognize that the effects of each variable on

past six month injection, sharing among all respondents, and sharing among injectors are related

because Pr(s) = Pr(i) × Pr(s | i), where i equals injection and s denotes sharing. If E represents

elasticity (or percentage change induced by a binary variable change), and z is an explanatory

variable, then

                                          E Pr(s), z = E Pr(i), z + E Pr(s | i), z,                                (3)

though empirically this relationship is only an approximation. Thus the negative (positive) effect

of income (cocaine price) on sharing by injectors is offset by an inverse effect on injection and

thus translates to a weaker effect on overall sharing. Put differently, the effects of income and

cocaine price on sharing among all respondents are less than the corresponding effects on sharing


18
  When selection of injectors is accounted for using a Heckman-type maximum likelihood procedure, identified by
the past year AIDS rate since it does not affect sharing, results are nearly identical and the selection coefficient is
insignificant regardless of whether trends are included. Results are also quite similar when samples are alternatively
restricted to those who have ever injected any drug and those who have ever injected cocaine or heroin.


                                                             17
among injectors because non-injectors are the majority of the full sample, and price hikes and

income declines decrease injection relative to non-injection. In contrast, AIDS prevalence and

NEPs exert downward pressure on both injection and sharing by injectors, and the sum of these

negative effects is the effect on sharing among all respondents. While the effect of AIDS on

injection is sufficiently strong to produce a significant effect on overall sharing despite an

insignificant effect on sharing by injectors, sizable impacts of NEPs on both injection and

injector sharing, particularly once programs are in place for six months, result in large impacts

on overall sharing.

       It is noteworthy that a simple indicator of NEP presence, without controls for program

size, has a substantial effect on injection behavior. However, Lurie and Reingold (1993) and

Watters et al. (1994) report that many NEPs reach large proportions of the local drug injecting

population. The earlier cited result from Hurley (1997) regarding the impact of program

presence on HIV infection rates implies large reductions in injection risk behavior.

       Appendix 1 displays results for the individual characteristics in the Table 5 regressions

that include city-specific trends. Likelihoods of both injection and sharing rise with age to the

mid-40s and fall thereafter, increase with education to grade nine (but only grade seven for

sharing by injectors) and decline thereafter, are lower for blacks and those of other races than for

whites, are lower for married men and higher for divorced men than for single men, are lower for

workers than non-workers, are positively related with the fraction of income earned illegally, and

decrease over time, though the trend is less pronounced for sharing by injectors.

       Tables 6–8 display the results of various sensitivity analyses. All remaining regressions

control for city-specific trends, with the exception that panel (a) of Table 8 also shows results for

comparable regressions without trends. The Table 6 samples omit drug offenders (upper panel)




                                                 18
and arrestees reporting drug dealing as their primary past month income source (lower panel).

About one-sixth of respondents are arrested for drug possession, sales, or use of a controlled

substance, while three percent report drug dealing. Past six month injection rates are 11.0

percent for drug offenders and 19.7 percent for dealers, as opposed to just over eight percent for

non-drug offenders and non-dealers, so the responses of drug offenders and dealers to

explanatory variable changes conceivably differ from those of other arrestees. In fact, though,

results for these samples are quite similar to those for all respondents. The only notable

differences for non-drug offenders compared to the full sample are that cocaine prices do not

affect cocaine injection, NEPs do not reduce heroin injection, AIDS prevalence has larger

impacts on heroin injection and overall sharing, and the sizes of NEP effects on any injection and

overall sharing are 20 percent larger. For non-dealers, increases in income and AIDS rates no

longer significantly reduce sharing among injectors and all respondents, respectively.

       Table 7 examines samples that exclude various cities. To address the possibility that

errors in measuring drug prices potentially explain why cocaine prices have no effect on overall

injection and heroin prices fail to impact any type of injection behavior, the panel (a) sample is

restricted to cities that do not use cocaine or heroin price data from metropolitan areas not

sampled by DUF, as previously described. Though the one-third reduction in sample size

reduces the significance of some results, the only substantive changes are that AIDS does not

significantly affect overall sharing, and the heroin price effect on cocaine injection implies that

the two drugs are substitutes (though the result is not symmetric). Thus earlier conclusions

regarding prices are not altered. Panel (b) restricts the sample to the nine cities in which NEPs

opened during the period. The sixty percent decrease in sample size renders income and the

cocaine price insignificant in the cocaine injection equation, but does not alter the magnitudes of




                                                 19
the effects. Other results are similar to those in Table 5, with AIDS prevalence and NEPs having

stronger impacts on many types of injection behavior.

       Finally, Table 8 shows results when self-reported information on past 72 hour cocaine

and heroin use are utilized. In panel (a) the cocaine and heroin injection variables are

constructed using reported drug use rather than drug test results, so that these variables are

constructed entirely from self-report information rather than a mixture of interview responses

and urinalysis outcomes. For cocaine injection the results are similar, though income and

cocaine price effects are one-third to one-half larger. For heroin injection, income effects are

four times larger and become significant, while short-term NEP effects also grow in size and

become significant. Panel (b) excludes respondents for whom self-reported and test information

does not match. Though some mismatches are produced by incorrect test results, it is likely that

most are the result of lying by respondents. Although this restriction excludes 28 percent of the

main sample, results are again similar. The primary difference is that the heroin price becomes

significantly positive in the equations for injection of any drug and cocaine and, consequently, in

the overall sharing equation.



                                          VI. Conclusion

       Controlling for individual characteristics, city and year indicators, and city-specific

behavioral trends, this study finds that personal income, cocaine prices, AIDS rates, and needle

exchange programs each have significant effects on arrestee drug injection behavior. Injected

cocaine and injected drugs in total, as well as needles used for injecting, are normal goods for

arrestees. Cocaine price increases reduce injection, but sufficiently increase needle sharing by

those who continue injecting so that overall sharing rates rise. Increases in AIDS prevalence




                                                 20
trigger reductions in injection that are large enough to lower overall sharing rates without

affecting the proportion of injectors who share. Moreover, the opening of a needle exchange

program reduces injection by 24 percent and sharing among remaining injectors by 21 percent,

for an overall decrease in sharing of 45 percent.

       These results, and their associated policy implications, parallel those of many previous

economics studies of drug use and risky sexual behavior, with the additional possibility that

some policies that reduce drug injection might have unintended counteracting consequences on

needle sharing. Drug policy that raises cocaine prices will reduce cocaine injection but

simultaneously increase needle sharing. Analogous to the findings of Ruhm (2000) that

economic expansions increase rates of unhealthy behaviors, policies that increase personal

income, particularly among low income individuals, will increase injection, but reciprocally

reduce needle sharing by injectors. The AIDS results provide further support for the hypothesis

that AIDS outbreaks are self-limiting to the extent that they will reduce behavior leading to

AIDS (Ahituv et al. 1996), which means policy makers must be aware that increases in drug

injection and needle sharing are potential inadvertent consequences of programs that reduce HIV

transmission.

       Perhaps most significantly, the needle exchange program results not only corroborate

earlier evidence that NEPs reduce needle sharing, but furthermore indicate that NEPs offer the

additional benefit of reducing drug injection. It must be emphasized that in this sample, injection

and sharing rates are much higher in cities that started NEPs, even after NEPs opened, than in

other cities. Impacts of NEPs in cities with low injection and sharing rates before NEP opening

might by definition be weaker. For instance, Table 4 indicates that in 1995, average rates in four

cities that opened NEPs in late 1995 and 1996 – Atlanta, Cleveland, Detroit, and Washington




                                                21
D.C. – were 5.0 percent for injection and 0.8 percent for sharing, compared with 8.8 percent and

2.7 percent, respectively, in other cities including those where NEPs have been operating for

years. Common sense dictates that NEPs will be more effective in cities where they have more

potential clients and thus can have a larger public health impact.

       NEPs already have overwhelming support in the scientific community (Ruiz-Sierra 2001)

and have been publicly endorsed by both former Secretary of Health and Human Services Donna

E. Shalala and former Surgeon General David Satcher. Although I neither study NEP costs nor

fully account for NEP benefits, other evidence on the costs of NEPs (Lurie and Reingold 1993,

Singh et al. 2001) coupled with the large effects of NEPs on drug injection and needle sharing

found here imply that NEPs might be a cost-effective way to reduce the transmission of HIV,

particularly in areas with above average injection and sharing rates. This concurs with

conclusions from Holtgrave et al. (1998), Lurie and DeCarlo (1998), and Lurie and Reingold

(1993) that NEP costs per HIV infection prevented are far below the expected lifetime cost of

treating an HIV-infected individual. The current federal government ban on NEP funding and

state drug paraphernalia laws limiting syringe possession and distribution might therefore be ill-

conceived. For instance, in October 1998, Congress barred the District of Columbia from

funding NEPs and prohibited all federal NEP funding in D.C. As a result, the original $220,000

D.C. NEP closed (though it was soon replaced by a privately-funded program) despite a fiscal

impact study estimating that failing to provide needle exchange would cost D.C. $8.3 million

annually. In contrast, alternatives such as pharmacy syringe sales, physician prescription of

syringes for drug injection, and automated needle exchange might reduce drug injection and

needle sharing and thus rates of HIV infection.




                                                  22
                                       REFERENCES

Ahituv, Avner, V. Joseph Hotz, and Tomas Philipson. “The Responsiveness of the Demand for

    Condoms to the Local Prevalence of AIDS.” Journal of Human Resources, Fall 1996, 869–

    897.

Blumenthal, R.N., A.H. Kral, L. Gee, E.A. Erringer, B. Edlin. “The Effect of Syringe Exchange

    Use on High-Risk Injection Drug Users: A Cohort Study.” AIDS, 2000, 14, 605–11.

Bretteville-Jensen, Anne Line. “Gender, Heroin Consumption and Economic Behaviour,” Health

    Economics, August 1999, 379–389.

Caulkins, Jonathan P. Developing Price Series for Cocaine. Santa Monica: RAND, 1994.

Caulkins, Jonathan P. “Estimating Elasticities of Demand for Cocaine and Heroin with DUF

    Data.” Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University, 1996.

______. “Comment.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, December 2001, 1263–

    64.

Caulkins, Jonathan P., and Rema Padman. “Quantity Discounts and Quality Premia for Illicit

  Drugs.” Journal of the American Statistical Association, September 1993, 748–57.

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report: Year-end

    2000 Edition. Division of HIV/AIDS Prevention: Atlanta, 2001.

______. “Publication of HIV-Prevention Bulletin for Health Care Providers Regarding Advice

    to Persons Who Inject Illegal Drugs.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 1997, 46,

    510.

Chaloupka, Frank. J., Michael Grossman, and John A. Tauras. “The Demand for Cocaine and

  Marijuana by Youth,” in The Econometric Analysis of Substance Use and Abuse: An

  Integration of Econometric and Behavioral Economics Approaches, edited by Frank J.




                                              23
  Chaloupka, Michael Grossman, Warren K. Bickel, and Henry Saffer. Chicago: University of

  Chicago Press, 1999, 133–55.

DeSimone, Jeff. “Sex in the City: the Response of Arrestee Sexual Behavior to AIDS Infection

    Risks, Peer Promiscuity, and Economic Conditions.” Unpublished manuscript, June 2002.

DeSimone, Jeff, and Matthew C. Farrelly. “Price and Enforcement Effects on Cocaine and

    Marijuana Demand.” Economic Inquiry, January 2003, 98–115.

Des Jarlais, D.C., M. Marmor, and D. Paone. HIV Incidence Among Injecting Drug Users in

    New York City Syringe Exchange Programmes.” Lancet, 1996, 348, 987–991.

DiNardo John. “Law Enforcement, the Price of Cocaine, and Cocaine Use.” Mathematical and

    Computer Modeling, 17(2), 1993, 53–64.

Drug Strategies. Facing Facts, Drugs and the Future of Washington, D.C. Drug Strategies:

    Washington, DC,1999.

Federal Bureau of Investigation. Uniform Crime Reports for the United States. U.S. Department

  of Justice: Washington, DC, 1996.

Grossman, Michael, and Frank J. Chaloupka. “The Demand for Cocaine by Young Adults: A

  Rational Addiction Approach.” Journal of Health Economics, August 1998, 427–74.

Heimer, R., et al. “Syringe Use and Reuse: Effects of Syringe Exchange Programs in Four

    Cities.” Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes and Human Retrovirology,

    1998, 18 (Supp. 1), S37–S44.

Holtgrave et al. “Cost and Cost-Effectiveness of Increasing Access to Sterile Syringes and

    Needles as an HIV Prevention Intervention in the United States.” Journal of Acquired

    Immune Deficiency Syndromes and Human Retrovirology, 1998, 18 (Supp. 1), S6–S10.

Horowitz, Joel L. “Should the DEA’s STRIDE Data Be Used for Economic Analyses of




                                               24
    Markets for Illegal Drugs?” Journal of the American Statistical Association, December

    2001, 1254–62.

Hunt, Dana, and William Rhodes. Methodology Guide for Adam. National Institute of Justice:

    Washington, DC, 2001.

Hurley, S.F. “Effectiveness of Needle Exchange Programmes for Prevention of HIV Infection.”

    Lancet, 1997, 349, 1797.

Klein, Hugh, Jeffrey A. Hoffman, and Dwight C. Clark. Risk Behavior Changes Demonstrated

    by NEP Clients. Project Neighborhoods in Action: Washington, DC, October 1997.

Levine, Phillip B. “The Sexual Activity and Birth Control Use of American Teenagers,” in

    Jonathan Gruber, ed., Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis. Chicago:

    University of Chicago Press, 2001.

Lurie, Peter, and Pamela DeCarlo. “Does Needle Exchange Work?” Center for AIDS Prevention

    Studies, University of California, San Francisco, December 1998.

Lurie, P., T.S. Jones, J. Foley. “A Sterile Syringe for Every Drug User Injection: How Many

    Injections Take Place Annually, and How Might Pharmacists Contribute to Syringe

    Distribution?” Journal of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndromes and Human

    Retrovirology, 1998, 18 (Supp. 1), S45–S51.

Lurie, Peter, and Arthur L. Reingold, The Public Health Impact of Needle Exchange Programs

    in the United States and Abroad, University of California: San Francisco, 1993

Purchase, David. Chair, North American Syringe Exchange Network. Personal Communication,

    July 2002.

Rhodes, William, R. Hyatt, and Paul Scheiman. “The Price of Cocaine, Heroin, and Marijuana,

  1981–1993.” Journal of Drug Issues, 24(3), 1994, 383–402.




                                              25
Rhodes, William, and Ryan Kling. “Comment.” Journal of the American Statistical

    Association, December 2001, 1264–66.

Rhodes, William, Mary Layne, Patrick Johnston, and Lynne Hozik. “What America’s Users

    Spend on Illegal Drugs, 1988–1998.” Office of National Drug Control Policy, June 2000.

Ruhm, Christopher J. “Are Recessions Good for Your Health?” Quarterly Journal of Economics,

    May 2000, 617–50.

Ruiz-Sierra, Julie. Research Brief: Syringe Access. The Lindesmith Center – Drug Policy

  Foundation: Sacramento, CA, 2001.

Saffer, Henry, and Frank J. Chaloupka. “The Demand for Illicit Drugs.” Economic Inquiry, July

  1999, 401–11.

Sidwell, Heather, Amanda Watson, and Julie Scales. “Needle Exchange and Access to Sterile

    Syringes.” National Conference of State Legislatures, April 2001.

Silverman, Lester P., and Nancy L. Spruill. “Urban Crime and the Price of Heroin.” Journal of

    Urban Economics, January 1977, 80–103.

Singh, M.P., C.A. McKnight, D. Paone, S. Titus, D.C. Des Jarlais, M. Krim, D. Purchase, J.

    Rustad, A. Solberg. “Update: Syringe Exchange Programs – United States, 1998.”

    Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, May 18, 2001, 384–87.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). 1999 National

    Household Survey on Drug Abuse Summary Findings. Office of Applied Studies:

    Rockville, MD, 2002.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). Treatment Episode

    Data Set (TEDS). Office of Applied Studies: Rockville, MD, 2001.

Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA). National Household




                                              26
    Survey on Drug Abuse: Main Findings 1997. Office of Applied Studies: Rockville, MD,

    1999.

U.S. Department of Justice. Drug Use Forecasting in 24 Cities in the United States, 1987–1997.

    Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research, Ann Arbor MI, 1998.

Van Ours, J.C. “The Price Elasticity of Hard Drugs: the Case of Opium in the Dutch East

    Indies, 1923-1938.” Journal of Political Economy 103, 1995, 261–79.

Vogt, R.L., M.C. Breda, and D.C. Des Jarlais. “Hawaii’s Statewide Syringe Exchange

    Program.” American Journal of Public Health. 1998, 88, 1403–04.

Watters, J.K., M.J. Estilo, and G.L. Clark. “Syringe and Needle Exchange as HIV/AIDS

    Prevention for Injection Drug Users.” Journal of the American Medical Association, 1994,

    271, 115–120.




                                              27
                                   Figure 1: Injection and Needle Sharing Rates


             0.14




             0.12




             0.10




             0.08
Percentage




             0.06




             0.04




             0.02




             0.00
                    89   90   91                              92                               93       94   95
                                                             Year

                              Any Injection   Cocaine Injection     Heroin Injection   Needle Sharing




                                    Figure 2: Needle Sharing Among Injectors


             0.36




             0.34




             0.32
Percentage




             0.30




             0.28




             0.26




             0.24
                    89   90   91                              92                               93       94   95
                                                             Year




                                                         28
                                        Figure 3: Cocaine and Heroin Prices


                  1.7




                  1.5




                  1.3
Price




                  1.1




                  0.9




                  0.7




                  0.5
                        89   90   91                         92                    93   94   95
                                                            Year

                                                  Cocaine Price    Heroin Price




                                       Figure 4: AIDS Rates and NEP Presence


                  0.6




                  0.5




                  0.4
Rate/Percentage




                  0.3




                  0.2




                  0.1




                  0.0
                        89   90   91                         92                    93   94   95
                                                            Year

                                                Lagged AIDS Rate     NEP in City




                                                        29
TABLE 1.—PAST SIX MONTH INJECTORS CLASSIFIED AS CURRENT COCAINE OR HEROIN INJECTORS
                                         Current cocaine injector
                                        No                    Yes           Total
Current heroin       No            2,778 (26.5%)        3,222 (30.7%)  6,000 (57.2%)
   injector          Yes           1,472 (14.0%)        3,016 (28.8%)  4,488 (42.8%)
                    Total          4,250 (40.5%)        6,238 (59.5%)      10,488




                       TABLE 2.—OPENING DATES OF FIRST NEEDLE
                           EXCHANGE PROGRAMS IN DUF CITIES
                   Year          Month                  City
                   1989          November               Portland
                   1990          February               New York
                   1991          December               Philadelphia
                   1992          January                Chicago, San Diego
                                 June                   Dallas, Los Angeles
                                 July                   San Jose
                                 October                Indianapolis
                  The remaining 15 DUF cities did not have NEPs during the sample period.




                                                 30
                                             TABLE 3.—SUMMARY STATISTICS
Sample:                                                  All Respondents                                 Drug injectors
                                                          (n = 122,623)                                   (n = 10,488)
                                                                   Standard                                       Standard
                                                         Mean     Deviation                             Mean      Deviation
Dependent variables
Injected drugs past 6 months                                     .0855           .2797
Currently injects cocaine                                        .0509           .2197
Currently injects heroin                                         .0366           .1878
Currently shares needles                                         .0257           .1582                  .3003           .4584

Main explanatory variables
Past month income (in $10,000s)                                  .1308           .3116                  .1976           .4823
Cocaine price (in $100s)                                         1.296           .3818                  1.238           .3678
Heroin price (in $1,000s)                                        1.046           .5535                  .9389           .5008
Past year AIDS rate (per 1,000 residents)                        .2541           .2009                  .2312           .1633
NEP in city for 0–5 months                                       .0405           .1972                  .0526           .2233
NEP in city for 6 or more months                                 .2084           .4062                  .2665           .4421

Other explanatory variables
Age                                                              29.75           9.159                  34.06           7.987
Age squared                                                      968.9           647.8                   1224           579.7
Education                                                        11.29           2.276                  11.28           2.230
Education squared                                                132.7           46.65                  132.1           45.91
Black                                                            .5611           .4963                  .3333           .4714
Hispanic                                                         .1818           .3857                  .2445           .4298
Other                                                            .0145           .1197                  .0071           .0837
Married                                                          .1538           .3608                  .1420           .3490
Cohabiting                                                       .1368           .3437                  .1333           .3399
Divorced                                                         .1489           .3560                  .2691           .4435
Widow                                                            .0061           .0776                  .0114           .1064
Works full time                                                  .3992           .4897                  .2397           .4269
Works part time                                                  .1432           .3502                  .1237           .3292
Percent of income that is illegally obtained                     .1032           .2748                  .2750           .4008
           Current cocaine (heroin) injectors are respondents who jointly tested positive for cocaine (opiates), injected drugs in the
past 6 months, and injected cocaine (heroin) previously. Income and prices are in 1997 dollars. The AIDS rate is the number of
cases in the metropolitan area per 1,000 residents.




                                                                 31
     TABLE 4.—PAST SIX MONTH INJECTION AND RECENT NEEDLE SHARING RATES, BY CITY AND YEAR
                                               (a) Past six month injection rates
City                      1989       1990        1991        1992      1993          1994        1995       Mean        Trend
San Diego                 .273       .221         .209       .171       .181         .147        .131       .191        -.021*
Birmingham                .117       .070         .046       .033       .034         .020        .020       .049        -.014*
Los Angeles               .177       .160         .137       .132       .117         .106        .103       .133        -.012*
Chicago                   .105       .063         .059       .032       .026         .031        .038       .051        -.011*
New Orleans               .105       .089         .061       .046       .045         .043        .035       .061        -.011*
New York                  .152       .141         .102       .121       .110         .087        .084       .114        -.011*
Detroit                   .104       .051         .055       .050       .038         .035        .025       .051        -.010*
Houston                   .059       .084         .074       .053       .040         .025        .021       .051        -.010*
Philadelphia              .153       .093         .099       .100       .083         .093        .069       .099        -.010*
San Antonio               .186       .161         .151       .147       .148         .146        .102       .149        -.010*
Atlanta                              .066         .040       .032       .030         .021        .016       .034        -.009*
Kansas City               .061       .044         .042       .032                                           .045        -.009*
Cleveland                 .069       .052         .042       .046       .039         .020        .023       .041        -.007*
Dallas                    .090       .100         .075       .076       .070         .070        .054       .076        -.006*
Wash. D.C.                .078       .087         .078       .086       .076         .057        .054       .074        -.005*
San Jose                  .087       .104         .107       .086       .084         .087        .066       .089        -.004*
Ft. Lauderdale            .033       .021         .014       .010       .007         .012        .011       .015        -.003*
Phoenix                   .147       .133         .112       .132       .123         .110        .135       .128        -.003
Portland                  .245       .177         .175       .208       .203         .172        .207       .198        -.003
St. Louis                 .073       .054         .057       .047       .047         .050        .056       .055        -.002
Miami                     .005                    .018       .023       .027         .009        .019       .017        -.001
Indianapolis              .100        .074        .108       .124       .111         .095        .088       .100         .000
Omaha                                 .065        .036       .039       .049         .044        .057       .048         .000
Denver                                .073        .079       .073       .067         .084        .123       .083         .007

                                         (b) Needle sharing rates (all respondents)
City                      1989       1990      1991       1992        1993      1994             1995       Mean        Trend
Los Angeles               .097       .099      .074       .067         .054     .044             .032       .067        -.012*
San Diego                 .133       .092      .078       .060         .083     .050             .051       .078        -.012*
San Antonio               .071       .075      .071       .058         .038     .045             .031       .056        -.008*
Chicago                   .041       .017      .011       .007         .005     .005             .007       .013        -.005*
New Orleans               .036       .029      .018       .008         .011     .007             .007       .017        -.005*
Philadelphia              .043       .029      .020       .017         .011     .018             .008       .021        -.005*
Portland                  .091       .069      .046       .068         .064     .049             .050       .062        -.005*
Cleveland                 .024       .024      .009       .010         .003     .003             .006       .011        -.004*
Houston                   .026       .030      .026       .017         .013     .008             .007       .018        -.004*
New York                  .049       .043      .021       .024         .021     .022             .021       .029        -.004*
Birmingham                .019       .014      .005       .006         .000     .003             .002       .007        -.003*
Kansas City               .017       .005      .007       .006                                              .009        -.003
Atlanta                              .012      .004       .005         .005     .003             .000       .005        -.002*
Dallas                    .031       .031      .022       .025         .029     .021             .018       .025        -.002*
Detroit                   .014       .013      .010       .012         .007     .000             .003       .008        -.002*
Ft. Lauderdale            .009       .009      .007       .002         .001     .001             .002       .005        -.002*
St. Louis                 .019       .013      .010       .007         .007     .007             .005       .010        -.002*
Denver                               .026      .022       .017         .013     .010             .021       .018        -.002
San Jose                  .026       .041      .043       .029         .030     .030             .021       .031        -.002
Indianapolis              .018       .011      .028       .037         .028     .018             .009       .021         .000
Miami                     .005                 .003       .007         .005     .001             .008       .005         .000
Omaha                                .009      .005       .002         .008     .005             .007       .006         .000
Phoenix                   .050       .034      .032       .049         .036     .032             .048       .040         .000
Wash. D.C.                .004       .007      .009       .007         .004     .004             .007       .006         .000
            Means weight each year equally. Trends are slope coefficients in a within-city univariate regression of rate on year. A
*
    denotes that the trend coefficient is significant at the 95 percent level. The trends for Miami omit 1989 data.


                                                                 32
               TABLE 5.—MAIN SAMPLE RESULTS WITH AND WITHOUT CITY-SPECIFIC TRENDS
 Dependent variable:                           Any injection                  Cocaine injection               Heroin injection
 City-specific trends:                        No           Yes                 No           Yes                No           Yes
 Past month income                         .0034b        .0030b             .0023b        .0020b            .0003         .0002
 (in $10,000s)                            (.0014)       (.0014)            (.0010)       (.0009)           (.0005)       (.0005)
                                            .0102         .0092              .0122         .0106            .0043         .0034
                                                  a                                a
 Cocaine price                            -.0090        -.0043             -.0083        -.0058b            .0014        -.0001
 (in $100s)                               (.0034)       (.0038)            (.0024)       (.0027)           (.0014)       (.0016)
                                          -.2672        -.1300             -.4341        -.3118            -.1846        -.0100
 Heroin price                               .0003         .0023              .0005         .0021            -.0013        -.0003
 (in $1,000s)                             (.0019)       (.0021)            (.0014)       (.0015)           (.0009)       (.0009)
                                            .0062         .0568              .0225         .0920            -.1382        -.0379
 Past year AIDS rate                      -.0284b       -.0354b            -.0197b       -.0251b           -.0175a       -.0153a
 (cases per 1,000 residents)              (.0120)       (.0142)            (.0083)       (.0099)           (.0048)       (.0055)
                                          -.1646        -.2086             -.2029        -.2644            -.4548        -.4096
 NEP in city for 0–5 months                -.0038       -.0053c            -.0053  a
                                                                                         -.0055a           -.0009        -.0013
                                          (.0028)       (.0030)            (.0018)       (.0019)           (.0010)       (.0011)
                                           -.0858       -.1225             -.2156        -.2277            -.0922        -.1354
                                                  a
 NEP in city for 6 or more                -.0058        -.0102a            -.0064  a
                                                                                         -.0060a           -.0019  b
                                                                                                                         -.0020c
 months                                   (.0021)       (.0031)            (.0014)       (.0021)           (.0008)       (.0011)
                                          -.1315        -.2358             -.2606        -.2501            -.1992        -.2141
 χ2 (Wald test for city trend sig.)                      183.7a                           189.1a                          183.7a
 Predicted injection rate at mean           .0439         .0432              .0247         .0241             .0098         .0095
 Pseudo R2                                  .2132         .2158              .1868         .1907             .2489         .2519

 Dependent variable:                           Sharing (all)                Sharing (injectors)
 City-specific trends:                        No           Yes                 No          Yes
 Past month income                        -.0005        -.0005             -.0285a      -.0295a
 (in $10,000s)                            (.0005)       (.0005)            (.0103)      (.0103)
                                          -.0077        -.0089             -.0197       -.0205
 Cocaine price                             .0012         .0030b             .0869a       .1073a
 (in $100s)                               (.0013)       (.0014)            (.0299)      (.0343)
                                           .1975          .4974              .3771        .4673
                                                 c                                b
 Heroin price                             .0014           .0011             .0402         .0275
 (in $1,000s)                             (.0007)       (.0008)            (.0174)      (.0194)
                                           .1751          .1496              .1325        .0907
                                                 b
 Past year AIDS rate                      -.0093        -.0096c            -.1034       -.1088
 (cases per 1,000 residents)              (.0046)       (.0052)            (.1164)      (.1310)
                                           -.2927       -.3146             -.0839       -.0885
 NEP in city for 0–6 months                -.0013       -.0019b             -.0244       -.0369
                                          (.0009)       (.0009)            (.0221)      (.0242)
                                           -.1651        -.2466             -.0855       -.1297
                                                  a
 NEP in city for 6 or more                -.0020        -.0035a            -.0337  c
                                                                                        -.0599b
 months                                   (.0007)       (.0009)            (.0183)      (.0258)
                                          -.2467        -.4486             -.1181       -.2105
 χ2 (Wald test for city trend sig.)                      88.65a                          38.67b
 Predicted sharing rate at mean             .0081         .0077              .2852        .2843
 Pseudo R2                                 .2256          .2287              .0711        .0741
          Sample sizes are 10,488 for sharing among injectors and 122,623 for remaining samples. Parentheses contain standard
errors. Coefficients and standard errors are in probit marginal effect terms. Italics represent elasticities for continuous variables
and the percentage effect of a 0 to 1 change in NEP indicators. Marginal and percentage effects and elasticities are evaluated at
the explanatory variable means. Superscripts c, b, and a denote significance at the 90, 95, and 99 percent levels, respectively. All
regressions include the variables listed in Appendix 1 as well as city indicators.



                                                                 33
                TABLE 6.—RESULTS FOR SAMPLES EXCLUDING DRUG OFFENDERS OR DEALERS
 Dependent variable:                            Any              Cocaine           Heroin         Sharing                 Sharing
                                              injection          injection        injection          (all)              (injectors)
 Specification:                                                          (a) Excludes drug offenders
 Past month income                              .0035b             .0022b           .0003          -.0002                -.0244c
 (in $10,000s)                                 (.0014)            (.0009)          (.0005)        (.0005)                (.0132)
                                                 .0113              .0132           .0047          -.0036                 -.0107
 Cocaine price                                 -.0028             -.0036            .0004          .0025c                 .0960b
 (in $100s)                                    (.0039)            (.0027)          (.0015)        (.0014)                (.0381)
                                               -.0926             -.2224            .0665           .4604                  .4231
 Heroin price                                    .0021              .0020           .0001           .0011                  .0283
 (in $1,000s)                                  (.0021)            (.0014)          (.0009)        (.0008)                (.0220)
                                                 .0556              .0995           .0109           .1596                  .1007
 Past year AIDS rate                           -.0329b            -.0235b          -.0153a        -.0126b                 -.2041
 (cases per 1,000 residents)                   (.0152)            (.0102)          (.0053)        (.0056)                (.1478)
                                                -.2112             -.2823          -.5169          -.4504                 -.1757
                                                                          b
 NEP in city for 0–5 months                     -.0043            -.0043            -.0005        -.0019c                -.0400
                                               (.0031)            (.0019)          (.0010)        (.0009)                (.0271)
                                                -.1087             -.2023           -.0634         -.2602                -.1353
 NEP in city for 6 or more months              -.0117a            -.0062  a
                                                                                    -.0014        -.0039a                -.0688b
                                               (.0031)            (.0021)          (.0010)        (.0009)                (.0287)
                                                -.2959             -.2915           -.1879         -.5477                -.2324
 Predicted dependent variable mean               .0396              .0213            .0076          .0072                  .2960
 Dependent variable mean                         .0808              .0476            .0329          .0251                  .3107
 Pseudo R2                                       .2201              .2011            .2672          .2350                  .0725

 Specification:                                    (b) Excludes those reporting drug dealing as primary income source
 Past month income                              .0050a            .0033a          .0007            .0001         -.0209
 (in $10,000s)                                 (.0016)           (.0011)         (.0006)         (.0005)        (.0134)
                                                 .0142             .0166          .0090            .0021        -.0089
 Cocaine price                                 -.0048            -.0051c         -.0002           .0030b         .1180a
 (in $100s)                                    (.0038)           (.0027)         (.0016)         (.0014)        (.0352)
                                               -.1474            -.2831          -.0253            .5183          .5476
 Heroin price                                    .0022             .0019          -.0004           .0009          .0247
 (in $1,000s)                                  (.0020)           (.0014)         (.0009)         (.0007)        (.0196)
                                                 .0551             .0871         -.0446            .1328          .0929
                                                        c                b               b
 Past year AIDS rate                           -.0288            -.0222          -.0136           -.0084         -.1286
 (cases per 1,000 residents)                   (.0148)           (.0101)         (.0057)         (.0055)        (.1356)
                                                -.1730           -.2415          -.3722           -.2860         -.1165
 NEP in city for 0–5 months                    -.0054c           -.0056a         -.0015          -.0022b        -.0484c
                                               (.0029)           (.0019)         (.0010)         (.0008)        (.0246)
                                                -.1292           -.2405          -.1585           -.2948         -.1730
                                                        a                a               b               a
 NEP in city for 6 or more months              -.0108            -.0067          -.0024          -.0033         -.0548b
                                               (.0030)           (.0021)         (.0011)         (.0009)        (.0266)
                                                -.2551           -.2880          -.2622           -.4450         -.1960
 Predicted dependent variable mean               .0421             .0233           .0092           .0074          .2797
 Dependent variable mean                         .0822             .0486           .0351           .0243          .2958
 Pseudo R2                                       .2084             .1870           .2485           .2231          .0738
           Regressions in (a) include 102,449 total respondents and 8,276 injectors; those in (b) include 119,010 total respondents
and 9,777 injectors. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are in probit marginal effect terms. Italics represent
elasticities for continuous variables and the percentage effect of a 0 to 1 change in NEP indicators. Marginal and percentage
effects and elasticities are evaluated at the explanatory variable means. Superscripts c, b, and a denote significance at the 90, 95,
and 99 percent levels, respectively. All regressions include the variables listed in Appendix 1, city indicators and city trends.



                                                                 34
    TABLE 7.—RESULTS FOR SAMPLES EXCLUDING CITIES WITHOUT MATCHING PRICE DATA OR NEP
 Dependent variable:                               Any          Cocaine            Heroin         Sharing          Sharing
                                               injection        injection         injection           (all)      (injectors)
 Specification:                                      (a) Excludes cities using price data from other metropolitan areas
 Past month income                               .0029c           .0023b            .0002           -.0005         -.0273c
 (in $10,000s)                                  (.0017)          (.0011)           (.0007)         (.0007)         (.0146)
                                                  .0085            .0113            .0023          -.0068          -.0119
                                                                         b                                  c
 Cocaine price                                  -.0062           -.0083             .0024           .0036           .1386a
 (in $100s)                                     (.0056)          (.0041)           (.0028)         (.0021)         (.0454)
                                                -.1581           -.3607             .1937            .4404           .5312
                                                                        b
 Heroin price                                     .0045           .0054             -.0001           .0017           .0318
 (in $1,000s)                                   (.0029)          (.0021)           (.0017)         (.0011)         (.0258)
                                                  .0856            .1775           -.0084            .1589           .0922
 Past year AIDS rate                            -.0315c          -.0220c           -.0279a          -.0066         -.0298
 (cases per 1,000 residents)                    (.0173)          (.0123)           (.0085)         (.0070)         (.1474)
                                                 -.2105          -.2517            -.5965           -.2149         -.0299
                                                        c                a
 NEP in city for 0–5 months                     -.0066           -.0076             -.0023          -.0019          -.0306
                                                (.0034)          (.0022)           (.0016)         (.0012)         (.0277)
                                                 -.1437          -.2810             -.1561          -.2040          -.0998
                                                        a                a                 c                 a
 NEP in city for 6 or more months               -.0101           -.0088            -.0029          -.0040          -.0626b
                                                (.0036)          (.0025)           (.0017)         (.0012)         (.0291)
                                                 -.2198          -.3268            -.2003           -.4175         -.2043
 Predicted dependent variable mean                .0461            .0269             .0144           .0095           .3063
 Dependent variable mean                          .0934            .0563             .0462           .0300           .3215
 Pseudo R2                                        .2271            .1946             .2395           .2278           .0730

 Specification:                                     (b) Excludes cities in which no NEPs opened during sample period
 Past month income                               .0058b           .0026            .0011         -.0015        -.0402a
 (in $10,000s)                                  (.0029)          (.0019)          (.0013)       (.0013)        (.0150)
                                                  .0111           .0089            .0065        -.0125          -.0169
 Cocaine price                                    .0018          -.0106            .0028         .0101b         .1619a
 (in $100s)                                     (.0097)          (.0069)          (.0050)       (.0040)        (.0520)
                                                  .0289          -.3061            .1406          .6986          .5719
 Heroin price                                     .0055           .0058            .0009          .0016          .0200
 (in $1,000s)                                   (.0050)          (.0035)          (.0029)       (.0022)        (.0312)
                                                  .0655           .1248            .0346          .0808          .0528
                                                        b                b                b             a
 Past year AIDS rate                            -.0843           -.0739           -.0361        -.0417          -.3152
 (cases per 1,000 residents)                    (.0357)          (.0257)          (.0173)       (.0162)        (.2032)
                                                 -.3050          -.4828            -.4075        -.6487         -.2518
 NEP in city for 0–5 months                     -.0075           -.0097a           -.0026       -.0048b        -.0564b
                                                (.0050)          (.0032)          (.0026)       (.0018)        (.0271)
                                                -.1027           -.2421            -.1098        -.2866         -.1713
                                                        a                a                b             a
 NEP in city for 6 or more months               -.0190           -.0112           -.0057        -.0110         -.0984a
                                                (.0056)          (.0039)          (.0028)       (.0025)        (.0301)
                                                -.2618           -.2781            -.2430        -.6525         -.2988
 Predicted dependent variable mean                .0727           .0403             .0233         .0169          .3292
 Dependent variable mean                          .1179           .0713             .0554         .0400          .3395
 Pseudo R2                                        .1995           .1779             .2166         .2008          .0631
           Regressions in (a) include 83,679 total respondents and 7,817 injectors; those in (b) include 51,103 total respondents
and 6,026 injectors. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are in probit marginal effect terms. Italics represent
elasticities for continuous variables and the percentage effect of a 0 to 1 change in NEP indicators. Marginal and percentage
effects and elasticities are evaluated at the explanatory variable means. Superscripts c, b, and a denote significance at the 90, 95,
and 99 percent levels, respectively. All regressions include the variables listed in Appendix 1, city indicators and city trends.



                                                                 35
            TABLE 8.—RESULTS USING SELF-REPORTED CURRENT USE OF COCAINE AND HEROIN
 Specification:                                         (a) Data on current cocaine and heroin use are self-reported
 Dependent variable:                                    Cocaine injection                         Heroin injection
 Past month income                                  .0029a             .0027a                 .0014b             .0013b
 (in $10,000s)                                     (.0008)            (.0008)                (.0005)            (.0005)
                                                     .0189              .0174                  .0156              .0149
                                                           a                  a
 Cocaine price                                     -.0090             -.0069                   .0005             -.0004
 (in $100s)                                        (.0022)            (.0024)                (.0016)            (.0019)
                                                   -.5747              -.4513                  .0562             -.0496
 Heroin price                                        .0008              .0018                 -.0001              .0004
 (in $1,000s)                                      (.0012)            (.0013)                (.0009)            (.0010)
                                                     .0401              .0973                 -.0060              .0364
 Past year AIDS rate                               -.0156b            -.0186b                -.0181a            -.0156a
 (cases per 1,000 residents)                       (.0075)            (.0088)                (.0051)            (.0059)
                                                   -.1950              -.2376                 -.4011             -.3518
                                                           b                  a                      c
 NEP in city for 0–5 months                        -.0038             -.0048                 -.0019             -.0022c
                                                   (.0016)            (.0017)                (.0011)            (.0011)
                                                   -.1856              -.2430                 -.1700             -.1918
                                                           a                  a                      a
 NEP in city for 6 or more months                  -.0047             -.0065                 -.0029             -.0027b
                                                   (.0013)            (.0018)                (.0008)            (.0012)
                                                   -.2314              -.3264                 -.2504             -.2427
 City-specific trends:                                 No                Yes                     No                Yes
 Predicted dependent variable mean                   .0204              .0199                  .0115              .0113
 Dependent variable mean                             .0428              .0428                  .0402              .0402

 Specification:                                    (b) Excludes respondents for whom self-reports and urine tests differ
 Dependent variable:                               Any           Cocaine         Heroin         Sharing           Sharing
                                               injection         injection      injection          (all)        (injectors)
 Past month income                               .0029b            .0022b         .0007c        -.0002             -.0218
 (in $10,000s)                                  (.0014)           (.0009)        (.0004)        (.0006)           (.0142)
                                                  .0100             .0147          .0149        -.0046             -.0097
 Cocaine price                                  -.0035            -.0066b        -.0001          .0029c            .1246a
 (in $100s)                                     (.0042)           (.0029)        (.0015)        (.0016)           (.0430)
                                                -.1170            -.4258         -.0192           .5274             .5415
                                                        b                b                               b
 Heroin price                                    .0055             .0035           .0007         .0017              .0297
 (in $1,000s)                                   (.0023)           (.0015)        (.0008)        (.0008)           (.0240)
                                                  .1487             .1803          .1173          .2531             .1037
                                                         c                b              a                c
 Past year AIDS rate                            -.0465            -.0248         -.0171         -.0104             -.0724
 (cases per 1,000 residents)                    (.0163)           (.0107)        (.0047)        (.0058)           (.1596)
                                                 -.3002           -.3067         -.6933         -.3614             -.0605
 NEP in city for 0–5 months                      -.0012           -.0044b        -.0006         -.0008             -.0308
                                                (.0034)           (.0020)        (.0009)        (.0011)           (.0303)
                                                 -.0300           -.2202         -.0993          -.1118            -.1032
                                                         a                a              c                a
 NEP in city for 6 or more months               -.0106            -.0069         -.0017         -.0032            -.0610c
                                                (.0033)           (.0021)        (.0009)        (.0010)           (.0326)
                                                 -.2740           -.3431         -.2787         -.4459            -.2040
 Predicted dependent variable mean                .0387             .0202          .0062          .0072             .2988
 Dependent variable mean                          .0781             .0458          .0324          .0245             .3140
           Regressions in (a) include all respondents and injectors; those in (b) include 87,932 total respondents and 6,864
injectors. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are in probit marginal effect terms. Italics represent elasticities for
continuous variables and the percentage effect of a 0 to 1 change in NEP indicators. Marginal and percentage effects and
elasticities are evaluated at the explanatory variable means. Superscripts c, b, and a denote significance at the 90, 95, and 99
percent levels, respectively. All regressions include the variables listed in Appendix 1, city indicators and city trends.



                                                                  36
                                     APPENDIX 1.—EFFECTS OF OTHER VARIABLES
 Dependent variable:                  Any        Cocaine        Heroin                            Sharing              Sharing
                                   injection     injection    injection                              (all)           (injectors)
 Age                                 .0188a        .0112a        .0053a                            .0038a               .0183a
                                    (.0004)       (.0003)      (.0002)                            (.0002)              (.0035)
 Age squared                        -.0216a       -.0129a      -.0058a                            -.0044a              -.0198a
 (x 100)                            (.0005)       (.0004)      (.0002)                            (.0002)              (.0048)
                                           a             a
 Education                           .0148         .0069         .0035a                            .0032a                .0135
                                    (.0010)       (.0007)      (.0004)                            (.0004)              (.0090)
 Education squared                  -.0783a       -.0366a      -.0170a                            -.0179a              -.1010b
 (x 100)                            (.0051)       (.0036)      (.0019)                            (.0019)              (.0443)
 Black                              -.0722a       -.0257a      -.0113a                            -.0159a              -.0808a
                                    (.0018)       (.0012)      (.0007)                            (.0008)              (.0120)
                                            a            b
 Hispanic                           -.0110         .0025         .0103a                           -.0009c                .0178
                                    (.0014)       (.0013)      (.0010)                            (.0005)              (.0130)
 Other                              -.0363a       -.0200a      -.0077a                            -.0063a              -.0313
                                    (.0015)       (.0013)      (.0007)                            (.0005)              (.0505)
 Married                            -.0123a       -.0079a      -.0018a                            -.0037a              -.0460a
                                    (.0014)       (.0010)      (.0005)                            (.0004)              (.0136)
                                                          b
 Cohabiting                         -.0008        -.0026          .0003                           -.0003               -.0048
                                    (.0017)       (.0011)      (.0007)                            (.0006)              (.0141)
 Divorced                           . 0085a        .0040a       . 0019a                            .0009c              -.0129
                                    (.0017)       (.0012)      (.0006)                            (.0005)              (.0116)
 Widowed                            . 0187a        .0112b        . 0040                             .0009              -.0416
                                    (.0077)       (.0054)      (.0027)                            (.0022)              (.0404)
 Works full-time                    -.0309a       -.0176a      -. 0079a                           -.0078a              -.0645a
                                    (.0012)       (.0009)      (.0005)                            (.0005)              (.0114)
 Works part-time                    -.0078a       -.0049a       -.0005                            -.0025a              -.0370a
                                    (.0015)       (.0011)      (.0006)                            (.0005)              (.0139)
 Percent of income                  . 0826a        .0485a        .0212a                            .0176a               .1065a
 from illegal sources               (.0019)       (.0014)      (.0009)                            (.0008)              (.0129)
                                            a             a
 1990                               -.0109        -.0076       -.0033a                            -.0032a              -.0487b
                                    (.0025)       (.0017)      (.0009)                            (.0008)              (.0226)
 1991                               -.0210a       -.0140a      -.0053a                            -.0047a              -.0524c
                                    (.0025)       (.0016)      (.0008)                            (.0008)              (.0268)
 1992                               -.0238a       -.0160a      -.0058a                            -.0046a              -.0232
                                    (.0032)       (.0021)      (.0010)                            (.0011)              (.0374)
                                            a             a
 1993                               -.0274        -.0207       -.0066a                            -.0053a              -.0343
                                    (.0038)       (.0022)      (.0012)                            (.0013)              (.0479)
 1994                               -.0303a       -.0241a      -.0064a                            -.0054a              -.0159
                                    (.0045)       (.0024)      (.0015)                            (.0016)              (.0638)
 1995                               -.0325a       -.0249a      -.0077a                            -.0062a              -.0373
                                    (.0039)       (.0016)      (.0011)                            (.0013)              (.0665)
           These regressions correspond to the models with city-specific trends in Table 5 and include the variables listed there as
well as city indicators. Coefficients and standard errors (in parentheses) are in probit marginal effect terms. Superscripts c, b, and
a
  denote significance at the 90, 95, and 99 percent levels, respectively.




                                                                 37
